
Wadena, MN Code of Ordinances


CITY OF WADENA, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2018 S-4 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 224, 3rd Series passed 12-11-2018










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  http://www.amlegal.com




ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE NO. 213, 3rd SERIES



CITY OF WADENA



COUNTY OF WADENA



STATE OF MINNESOTA



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCE FOR THE CITY OF WADENA MINNESOTA,
AMENDING, RESTATING, REVISING, UPDATING, CODIFYING AND  COMPILING CERTAIN
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH THE SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES.



WHEREAS Minnesota Statutes Sections 415.02 and 415.021 authorize the city to
cause its ordinances to be codified and printed in a book,



NOW THEREFORE the city Council of the City of Wadena, Minnesota, ordains:



Section 1. The general ordinances of the city as amended, restated, revised,
updated, codified and compiled in book form, including penalties for the
violations of various provisions thereof, are hereby adopted and shall
constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Wadena." This Code of
Ordinances also adopts by reference certain statutes and administrative rules
of the State of Minnesota as named in the Code of Ordinances.



Section 2. The Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following titles:



   TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



   TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



   TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



   TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



   TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



Section 3. All prior ordinances, pertaining to the subjects treated in the
Code of Ordinances, shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective
date of this ordinance, except as they are included and re-ordained in whole
or in part in the Code of Ordinances; provided, this repeal shall not affect
any offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to
the effective date of this ordinance, nor shall this repeal affect the
provisions of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or
detaching territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to
certain persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of
bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or
personal property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of
land to public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other
public places; nor shall this repeal affect any other ordinance of a
temporary or special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or
covered by the Code of Ordinances. All fees established in prior ordinances
codified in this Code shall remain in effect unless amended in this code or
until an ordinance adopting a fee schedule is adopted or amended.



Section 4. This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances shall be a
sufficient publication of any ordinance included in it and not previously
published in the City's official newspaper. The Clerk of the City shall cause
a substantial quantity of the Code of Ordinances to be printed for general
distribution to the public at actual cost and shall furnish a copy of the
Code of Ordinances to the County Law Library or its designated depository.
The official copy of this Code of Ordinances shall be marked and be kept in
the office of the City Clerk.



Section 5. The Code of Ordinances is declared to be prima facie evidence of
the law of the City and shall be received in evidence as provided by
Minnesota Statutes by the Courts of the State of Minnesota.



Section 6. This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances, and the Code of
Ordinances itself, shall take effect upon publication of this ordinance in
the City's official newspaper.



PASSED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WADENA, MINNESOTA THIS 15th DAY OF
NOVEMBER, 2016.



APPROVED:



/s/ George Deiss           



George Deiss, Mayor



ATTEST:



/s/ Bradley A. Swenson                     



Bradley A. Swenson, City Administrator



ORDINANCE NO. 220, 3rd SERIES



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF WADENA, MINNESOTA AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY



WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2018 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Political
Subdivision, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of this Political Subdivision; and



WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take
effect at an early date;



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE POLITICAL
SUBDIVISION OF THE CITY OF WADENA:



Section 1.  That the 2018 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Political Subdivision as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation
of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby
adopted by reference as if set out in its entirely.



Section 2. Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the City of Wadena City Council and the City
Administrator is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into
the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the
Administrator.



Section 3.  This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general
welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the
earliest date provided by law.



PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City of Wadena City Council on this 13th day of
February, 2018.



ATTEST:



/s/ Bradley A. Swenson                               /s/
George Deiss                           



Bradley A. Swenson                  George Deiss



City Administrator                  Mayor



TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Rules of interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Severability



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Reference to offices



   10.09   Errors and omissions



   10.10   Official time



   10.11   Reasonable time



   10.12   Ordinances repealed



   10.13   Ordinances unaffected



   10.14   Effective date of ordinances



   10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities



   10.18   Copies of code



   10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules and supplements by reference



   10.20   Enforcement



   10.21   Otherwise unlawful



   10.22   Payment into City Treasury of fines and penalties



   10.23   Penalties for each offense



   10.24   Reference to public officials



 



   10.99   General penalty and enforcement



   Appendix A:   Notice of code violation



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city,
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Wadena City Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”,
“codified ordinances”, or “code” may be substituted. Code title,
chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as
contained in the code.



   (B)   (1)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and
sections are to the components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any
component code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the
“Traffic Code”.



      (2)   Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation
“§” followed by the number, such as “§ 10.01”.



      (3)   Headings and captions used in this code other than the
title, chapter, and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only
and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.02  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or
implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and
application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing
the interpretation of state law.



   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all
ordinances of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that
construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of
the context of the same ordinance.



      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as
if written “and/or”, whenever the context requires.



      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions, or
ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as
well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the
performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.



      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



      (4)   General term. A general term following specific
enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless
expressly so limited.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
or ordinary and usual sense; however, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to
their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY. The City of Wadena, Minnesota.



      CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.



      CONVICTION. Either of the following accepted and recorded by the
court:



         (a)   A plea of guilty; or



         (b)   A verdict of guilty by a jury or a finding of
guilty by the court.



      COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of Wadena, Minnesota.



      COUNTY. Wadena and Ottertail, Minnesota.



      CRIME. Conduct which is prohibited by ordinance and for which the
actor may be sentenced to imprisonment or fine.



      EX OFFICIO MEMBER. A person who is not counted for the purpose of
determining a quorum, and has no right to vote, but shall have the right and
obligation (within his or her discretion) to speak to any question coming
before the board, commission, or other deliberative body of which he or she
is such member.



      INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation or
connection of the lateral curb line or, if no curb, then the lateral boundary
lines of the roadways or streets which join one another at, or approximately
at, right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
streets joining at any other angle may come in conflict.



      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.



      MISDEMEANOR. The crime for which a sentence of not more than 90
days or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both, may be imposed.



      MONTH. A calendar month.



      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All
terms shall mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an
individual authorized by state law.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE,COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer,
office, employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.



      ORDINANCE. An ordinance duly adopted by the City Council of
Wadena, Minnesota.



      PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons,
firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used
in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER
as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers, or agents thereof.



      PETTY MISDEMEANOR. An offense, which does not constitutes a
crime, and for which a sentence of a fine of not more than $300 may be
imposed.



      POLICE OFFICER and PEACE OFFICER. Every officer, including
special police, authorized to direct or regulate traffic, keep the peace, and
appointed or employed for the purpose of law enforcement.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.



      PREMISES. Any lot, piece, or parcel of land within a continuous
boundary whether publicly or privately owned, occupied or possessed.



      PRIVATE PROPERTY. All property not included within the definition
of public property or public place.



      PUBLIC PROPERTY and PUBLIC PLACE. Any place, property, or
premises dedicated to public use, owned by the city, occupied by the city as
a lessee, or occupied by the city as a street by reason of an easement,
including, but not limited to, streets, parks, or parking lots so owned or
occupied.



      ROADWAY. The portion of a street improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the event a street includes two or
more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY as used herein shall refer to any
such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively.



      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



      STATE. The State of Minnesota.



      STREET. The entire area dedicated to public use, or contained in
an easement or other conveyance or grant to the city, and shall include, but
not be limited to, roadways, boulevards, sidewalks, alleys, and other public
property between lateral property lines in which a roadway lies.



      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      VIOLATE. Includes failure to comply with.



      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



(2006 Code, § 1.02)  (Ord. 14, 3rd Series, passed 6-18-1981; Ord. 32, 3rd
Series, passed 5-30-1984; Ord. 87, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991; Ord. 161,
3rd Series, passed 9-20-2005)



§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
that reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.10  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.



§ 10.11  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE
TIMEOR NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a
prompt performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last. If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this
code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.14  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.15  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.16  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter
or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.17  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.



   (A)   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the
effective date of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as
provided by those laws.



   (B)   This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued,
penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this
code.



   (C)   The liabilities, proceedings, and rights are continued;
punishments, penalties, or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if
this code had not been enacted.



   (D)   In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize
highway right-of-ways, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the
acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of
corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had
not been enacted.



§ 10.18  COPIES OF CODE.



   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Administrator for public inspection. The Administrator shall provide a copy
for sale for a reasonable charge.



§ 10.19  ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES AND SUPPLEMENTS BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   It is the intention of the City Council that all future
amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes adopted by reference in
this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted by reference or
referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this code was
adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the
contrary.



   (B)   It is the intention of the City Council that all future
supplements are hereby adopted as if they had been in existence at the time
this Code was enacted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the Code
to the contrary.



§ 10.20  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any licensed peace officer of the city’s Police Department,
or the County Sheriff, or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to
enforce any provision of this code.



   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from
time to time, the City Administrator shall have the authority to administer
and enforce this code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain
individuals designated within the code or by the Administrator or City
Council shall have the authority to administer and enforce the provisions
specified. All and any person or persons designated may issue a citation in
lieu of arrest or continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.



   (C)   The City Administrator and any city official or employee
designated by this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under
this code may, with the permission of a licensee of a business or owner of
any property or resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any
premises, inspect or otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with
this code.



   (D)   If the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control
of a premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the
City Administrator, peace officer, or any employee or official charged with
the duty of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that
probable cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court
of competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before
conducting the inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant
shall be only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the people are being complied with
and to enforce these provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made
as a result of the warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be
probable cause to issue the warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is
reasonable. Probable cause does not depend on specific knowledge of the
condition of a particular property.



   (E)   Every licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of
property within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or
entrance to the property by the City Administrator or any other authorized
city officer or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this
code enacted to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the people are
being complied with and to enforce these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to
permit the inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for
termination of any and all permits, licenses, or city service to the
property. Mailed notice shall be given to the licensee, owner, resident, or
other person in control of the property, stating the grounds for the
termination, and the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of
the property shall be given an opportunity to appear before the City
Administrator to object to the termination before it occurs, subject to
appeal of the Administrator’s decision to the City Council at a regularly
scheduled or special meeting.



   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
authority of the city to enter private property in urgent emergency
situations where there is an imminent danger in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.



§ 10.21  OTHERWISE UNLAWFUL.



   This code of ordinances does not authorize an act or omission otherwise
prohibited by law.



(2006 Code, § 1.04)



§ 10.22  PAYMENT INTO CITY TREASURY OF FINES AND PENALTIES.



   All fines, forfeitures, and penalties recovered by the city for the
violation of any ordinance, rule, or regulation of the city shall be paid
into the City Treasury by the court or officer thereof receiving such monies.
Payment shall be made in the manner, at the time, and in the proportion
provided by law.



(2006 Code, § 1.05)



§ 10.23  PENALTIES FOR EACH OFFENSE.



   When a penalty or forfeiture is provided for the violation of a
chapter, section, division, paragraph, or provision of this city code, such
penalty or forfeiture shall be construed to be for each such violation.



(2006 Code, § 1.08)



§ 10.24  REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICIALS.



   Whenever an appointed public official is referred to in the city code,
the reference shall include such public official or his or her designee.



(2006 Code, § 1.08)  (Ord. 65, 3rd Series, passed 4-22-1987)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of
this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including state statutes
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90
days or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code, including state statutes specifically adopted by reference, which
is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of
a petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense
which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than
$300.



   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to
time, in either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs
of prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.



   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform
any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.



   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if
any person, firm, or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this
code, the Council or any city official designated by it, may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct, or abate
the violation.



APPENDIX A: NOTICE OF CODE VIOLATION



To:  (Name and address of person who is alleged to have violated the code)



From:  (Name and title of city official giving the notice)



Re:  Alleged violation of Section of the City Code, relating to (give title
of section)



Date:  (Date of notice)



   I  hereby allege that on (date of violation) you violated §      
          of the City Code relating to



_______________________________________________________________________________
_.



   The City Council has by resolution established an administrative
penalty in the amount of $        for this violation.



   Payment of this administrative penalty is voluntary, but if you do not
pay it, the city may initiate criminal proceedings for this alleged violation.



   Payment is due within 14 days of the date of this notice. Before the
due date, you may request an additional 14-day extension of the time to pay
the administrative penalty.



   As an alternative to the payment of this administrative penalty, if the
situation that gave rise to this alleged violation is corrected by      
                (establish date), then the payment of the
administrative penalty will be waived.



   Even if the administrative penalty is paid, the city reserves the right
to institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain,
correct, or abate the violation.



   Before the due date, you may request to appear before the City Council
to contest the request for payment of the penalty. After a hearing before the
Council, the Council may determine to withdraw the request for payment or to
renew the request for payment. Because the payment of the administrative
penalty is voluntary, there shall be no appeal from the decision of the
Council.



   If you pay the administrative penalty, the city will not initiate
criminal proceedings for this alleged violation; however, the Council, or any
city official designated by it, may institute appropriate proceedings at law
or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation.



   Payment of the administrative penalty may be made by check, cash, or
money order to the City Administrator.



Signed:                                              
               



      (Name and Title of Person Giving Notice)



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   GENERAL GOVERNMENT



      31.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS



      32.   CITY POLICIES



      33.   FINANCE AND REVENUE



      34.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



      35.   CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECKS FOR EMPLOYMENT AND LICENSE
APPLICATIONS



CHAPTER 30:  GENERAL GOVERNMENT



Section



   30.01   Authority and purpose



   30.02   Council meetings



   30.03   Special meetings



   30.04   Organizational meeting



   30.05   Council procedure at regular meetings



   30.06   Rules of procedure



   30.07   City Administrator



   30.08   Execution of contracts and city seal



   30.09   Right to administrative appeal



   30.10   Procedure for appeals and other hearings



   30.11   Enforcing administrative offenses



   30.12   Facsimile signatures



   30.13   Interim emergency succession



   30.14   Emergency management



   30.15   Salaries of Mayor and Council members



   30.16   Funds



   30.17   Worker’s compensation



   30.18   Finance Officer



   30.19   City election date and terms of Council members



   30.20   Disposal of unclaimed property, and excess property



 



   30.99   Penalty



§ 30.01  AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.



   Pursuant to the authority granted by statute, this title is enacted so
as to set down for enforcement the government and good order of the city by
and through the Council.



(2006 Code, § 2.01)



§ 30.02  COUNCIL MEETINGS.



   Regular meetings of the Council shall be held in the Council Chambers
in the City Administrative Center on the days and at the hours set by
resolution of the Council at the first regular meeting in January each year;
provided, that if any regular meeting shall fall on a legal holiday, such
meeting shall be held on the next following business day.



(2006 Code, § 2.02)



§ 30.03  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor or
by any two other members of the Council, by writing, filed with the City
Administrator stating the time, place, and purpose of the meeting. Notice of
a special meeting shall be given by the City Administrator to each member of
the Council by mailing a copy of such filing to all members who did not sign
or issue the call at least three days prior to the time stated therein, or by
personal service at least 72 hours prior to the projected time of meeting.



   (B)   In addition to mailing, the City Administrator shall post a
notice of special meeting in the City Hall where other notices are generally
posted, and shall advise local news media of the special meeting. Special
meetings may be held without prior written notice to the Council when all
Council members are present at the meeting or consent thereto in writing. Any
such consent shall be filed with the City Administrator prior to the
beginning of the meeting. Any special meeting attended by all Council members
shall be a valid meeting for the transaction of any business that may come
before the meeting.



   (C)   Meetings of the Council, which are adjourned from time to
time, shall not be subject to the foregoing notice requirements; nor shall
special meetings which, in the judgment of the Council, require immediate
consideration to meet an emergency require such notice, but may be called by
telephone communication or any other expeditious means. Notice of special
meeting may be dispensed with in a situation which requires immediate
emergency action. In determining what constitutes such an emergency, the
Council shall be guided by considerations of whether the situation calls for
immediate action involving the protection of the public peace, health, or
safety, and in all such cases, the members of the Council in attendance shall
sign a waiver of notice which shall be made a part of the minutes of such
meeting.



(2006 Code, § 2.03)  (Ord. 86, 2nd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 30.04  ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING.



   At the first regular Council meeting in January of each year, the
Council shall:



   (A)   Designate the depository or depositories of city funds;



   (B)   Designate the official newspaper;



   (C)   Elect an acting Mayor from the Council membership, who shall
perform the duties of the Mayor during any disability or absence of the Mayor
from the city or, in case of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, until a
successor has been appointed and qualifies; and



   (D)   Appoint such officers and employees and such members of
boards, commissions, and committees as may be necessary.



(2006 Code, § 2.04)



§ 30.05  COUNCIL PROCEDURE AT REGULAR MEETINGS.



   (A)   Items to be prepared by the City Administrator. Items to be
prepared by the City Administrator are as follows:



      (1)   An agenda for the forthcoming meeting;



      (2)   A report from the City Administrator on administrative
activities of the preceding month and the condition of funds at the end of
the preceding month;



      (3)   A compiled list of all claimants who have filed verified
accounts claiming payment for goods or services rendered the city during the
preceding month, such list to be called the “claim report” and bearing
headings “claimant”, “purpose”, and “amount”;



      (4)   A copy of all minutes to be considered. The City
Administrator shall forthwith cause to be mailed to the Mayor, each member of
the Council, and the City Attorney copies of all said documents; and



      (5)   (a)   Robert’s Rules of Order (Newly Revised) shall
govern all Council meetings as to procedural matters not otherwise set forth
in this code of ordinances or duly adopted rules of procedure.



         (b)   The order of business at regular meetings shall be
as follows:



            1.   Call to order;



            2.   Roll call;



            3.   Determination of quorum;



            4.   Approval of minutes (actual reading may be
waived if each member of the Council was furnished with a copy thereof as
hereinbefore set forth);




            5.   Payment of claims;




            6.   Meeting opened in the order stated in the
agenda to persons requesting to appear before the Council. The presiding
officer may advise any person appearing as to the amount of time allowed
prior to his or her speaking, or later limit such time. Persons speaking
shall give their name, address, and state their business;



            7.   Old business;



            8.   New business;



            9.   Communications;



            10.   Reports of staff members;



            11.   Reports from boards and commissions;



            12.   Reports of Council members;



            13.   Report from Mayor;



            14.   Meeting opened to the public. The presiding
officer shall limit the time allowed. Persons speaking shall give their name,
address, and state their business; and



            15.   Adjournment.



   (B)   Matters inappropriate for consideration at a meeting. Matters
inappropriate for consideration at the meeting, or not in the order
specified, shall not be considered, except:



      (1)   With the consent of the members of the Council; or



      (2)   Scheduled public hearings or bid lettings at the time
stated in the notice. All claims for payment and requests to appear before
the Council must be made and filed with the City Administrator at or before
12:00 p.m. on the Monday preceding a regular Wednesday meeting of the
Council, at which the appearance is to be made or the claim to be considered.



(2006 Code, § 2.05)



§ 30.06  RULES OF PROCEDURE.



   The Council may adopt by resolution certain written rules of procedure
to be followed in all regular and special Council meetings. Such rules shall
be effective 30 days after adoption and shall be for the purpose of
establishing and maintaining order and decorum in the meetings. Such rules
may be amended from time to time by majority vote of the entire Council after
being considered at two consecutive regular meetings.



(2006 Code, § 2.06)



§ 30.07  CITY ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   Office established. The office of Clerk-Treasurer shall be
combined with a new office entitled City Administrator. The duties of the
City Administrator shall include the duties of the Clerk-Treasurer as
delineated in M.S. §§ 412.141 and 412.151, as they may be amended from time
to time, and such other appropriate duties as may be imposed upon the City
Administrator by the Council.



   (B)   Appointment. The City Administrator shall be appointed by a
majority vote of the Council and shall serve at the pleasure of the Council.
Removal from the position shall be by affirmative vote of the majority of the
members of the Council. The selection of the City Administrator shall be
based on education and administrative experience, and shall have experience
and knowledge in the area of government or business administration.



   (C)   Contract. The Council may enter into such employment agreement
with the City Administrator as it shall deem necessary or desirable in order
to further implement the appointment of the City Administrator.



   (D)   Duties. The City Administrator shall be the chief
administrative officer for the city and he or she shall be responsible to the
Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city, which
duties shall include the following:



      (1)   Direct and perform the actual day to day supervision and
control of the administrative affairs of the city;



      (2)   Compile and prepare all necessary data and information
to aid the Council in making decision; assist the Council in coordinating,
administering, and implementing decisions in regard to requests and problems
of municipal concerns; research and assist the Council in developing and
recommending solutions thereto; and coordinating efforts through directives
to other departments, other agencies, and the general public;



      (3)   Coordinate enforcement of all laws of the state,
provisions of this code of ordinances, and resolutions in cooperation with
the Chief of Police and other appropriate department heads of the city;



      (4)   Advise and report to the Council when requested on
matters of governmental and public policy and to that end keep informed of
the latest administrative practices;



      (5)   Prepare and recommend to the Council a single
consolidated budget including statements relating to projected revenue,
proposed sources of revenue, and all proposed expenditures to be made and
obligations incurred by the city in the forthcoming fiscal year. The city
department heads will work with the City Administrator in the preparation of
the proposed budgets;



      (6)   Administer all capital improvement projects and service
programs as approved by the Council in conjunction with the appropriate
department heads. The Council may, in its sole discretion, delegate the
administrative authority to other department heads as it deems appropriate;



      (7)   In conjunction with the Council and the appropriate
department heads, establish such administrative policies and procedures as
may be necessary to ensure the proper and efficient operation of all
departments and divisions of the city. The City Administrator shall, upon
prior Council direction or approval, issue administrative orders to carry out
such policies and procedures consistent with state law, provisions of this
code of ordinances, and Council policy;



      (8)   Recommend to the Council the approval or disapproval of
all applications for licenses or permits, in conjunction with the appropriate
department heads, after an appropriate investigation of the application;



      (9)   Stay abreast of development in the public administrative
field and cooperate with governmental units and municipalities on matters of
mutual interest;



      (10)   Supervise/manage the conduct of local elections in
accordance with the prescribed laws and regulations; and



      (11)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the
Council personnel.



   (E)   City Administrator acting on behalf of personnel officer for
the city.



      (1)   The City Administrator, together with the appropriate
department head, shall interview all probationary permanent full-time
employees, and shall make recommendations to the Council for their hiring,
promotion, or demotion or suspension.



      (2)   Should a department head suspend an employee upon an
emergency basis, he or she shall notify the City Administrator within 12
hours of the suspension and the City Administrator shall then notify the
Council and shall make recommendations to the Council as set forth above.



      (3)   All final determinations with regard to personnel
policies shall be made by the Council.



      (4)   The City Administrator shall be responsible for keeping
the Council informed of personnel matters occurring within the city. The
department heads and supervisors shall keep the City Administrator informed
of current issues and problems within their respective departments so that he
or she may adequately advise the Council.



   (F)   Purchasing. The City Administrator shall exercise control over
the fiscal expenditures of all departments and divisions of the city and such
appropriations as appear in the annual city budget.



   (G)   City Clerk-Treasurer. The City Administrator shall perform all
duties of the City Clerk and the City Treasurer as required by law where the
signature of the City Clerk or City Treasurer is required by law on any
document, the execution thereof by the City Administrator shall be deemed
required execution thereof by the City Clerk or City Treasurer.



   (H)   Meetings. The City Administrator shall attend and participate
in discussions at all meetings of the Council and other official bodies as
directed by the Council. He or she shall be responsible for the preparation
of the Council agenda and all related items. The City Administrator shall
represent the city at official functions as directed by the Council and
maintain good public relations with the citizens of the community.



(2006 Code, § 2.07)  (Ord. 85, 3rd Series, passed 11-23-1990)



§ 30.08  EXECUTION OF CONTRACTS AND CITY SEAL.



   (A)   All contracts to which the city is a party, in addition to
being signed by the Mayor and City Administrator, shall be sealed with the
city seal.



   (B)   Said seal shall be kept in the custody of the City
Administrator and affixed by him or her.



   (C)   The official city seal shall be a circular disc having
engraved thereupon “City of Wadena” and such other words, figures, or
emblems as the Council may, by resolution, designate.



(2006 Code, § 2.08)



§ 30.09  RIGHT TO ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL.



   (A)   (1)   If any person shall be aggrieved by any
administrative decision of the City Administrator or any other city official,
or any board or commission not having within its structure an appellate
procedure, such aggrieved person is entitled to a full hearing before the
Council upon serving a written request therefor upon the Mayor and City
Administrator at least five days prior to any regular Council meeting.



      (2)   Such request shall contain a general statement setting
forth the administrative decision to be challenged by the appellant.



   (B)   (1)   At such hearing, the appellant may present any
evidence he or she deems pertinent to the appeal, but the city shall not be
required to keep a verbatim record of the proceedings.



      (2)   The Mayor, or other officer presiding at the hearing,
may, in the interest of justice or to comply with time requirements and on
his or her own motion or the motion of the appellant, the City Administrator,
or a member of the Council, adjourn the hearing to a more convenient time or
place, but such time or place shall be fixed and determined before
adjournment so as to avoid the necessity for formal notice of reconvening.



(2006 Code, § 2.09)



§ 30.10  PROCEDURE FOR APPEALS AND OTHER HEARINGS.



   (A)   The Council may adopt by resolution certain written rules of
procedure to be followed in all administrative appeals and other hearings to
be held before the Council or other bodies authorized to hold hearings and
determine questions therein presented.



   (B)   Such rules of procedure shall be effective 30 days after
adoption and shall be for the purpose of establishing and maintaining order
and decorum in the proceedings.



(2006 Code, § 2.10)



§ 30.11  ENFORCING ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES.



   (A)   Purpose. Administrative offense procedures established
pursuant to this section are intended to provide the public and the city with
an informal, cost effective and expeditious alternative to traditional
criminal charges for violations of certain provisions of this code of
ordinances.



      (1)   The city does not intend through the enactment of this
section to infringe on the prosecution or enforcement of those matters
governed by state statute, but rather to provide an additional method for its
law enforcement officers to use in maintaining the peace and well being of
the city.



      (2)   The procedures are intended to be voluntary on the part
of those who have been charged with administrative offenses. At any time
prior to the payment of the administrative penalty as is provided for
thereafter, the individual may withdraw from participation in the procedures,
in which event the city may bring criminal charges in accordance with law.
Likewise, the city, in its discretion, may choose not to initiate an
administrative offense and may bring criminal charges in the first instance.



      (3)   In the event a party participates in the administrative
offense procedures, but does not pay the monetary penalty before the
seven-day deadline, the administrative offense agreement becomes null and
void and the citation will be forwarded to the Wadena County Court
Administrator to be processed through the traditional methods.



   (B)   Administrative offense defined. An administrative offense is a
violation of a provision of this code of ordinances and is subject to the
administrative penalties set forth in the schedule of offenses and penalties
referred to in the resolution entitled “Resolution Adopting Administrative
Offense Penalties” and any further resolutions which add to this list.



   (C)   Notice. Any officer of the Police Department or any other
person employed by the city, authorized in writing by the Mayor, and having
authority to enforce this code of ordinances, shall upon determining that
there has been a violation, notify the violator, or in the case of a
vehicular violation, attach to the vehicle a notice of violation. Said notice
shall set forth the nature, date, and time of the violation; the name of the
official issuing the notice; and the amount of the scheduled penalty.



   (D)   Payment. Once such notice, is given the alleged violator may,
within seven days of the time of issuance of the notice, pay the amount set
forth in the schedule of penalties for the violation. The penalty may be paid
in person or by mail, and payment shall be deemed to be an admission of the
violation.



   (E)   Failure to pay. In the event a party charged with an
administrative offense fails to pay the penalty, a misdemeanor or petty
misdemeanor charge may be brought against the alleged violator in accordance
with the applicable statutes. If the penalty is paid before the seven-day
deadline expires, no such charge may be brought by the city for the same
violation.



   (F)   Disposition of funds. All penalties collected pursuant to this
section shall be paid to the city and deposited in the General Fund.



   (G)   Offenses. Offenses which may be charged as administrative
offenses and the penalties for such offenses shall be established by
resolution of the Council from time to time. Copies of such resolution shall
be maintained in the office of the City Administrator and at the Police
Department.



(2006 Code, § 2.10)  (Ord. 152, 3rd Series, passed 1-23-2004)



§ 30.12  FACSIMILE SIGNATURES.



   The Mayor and City Administrator are hereby authorized to request a
depository of city funds to honor an order for payment when such instrument
bears a facsimile of his or her signature, and to charge the same to the
account designated thereon or upon which it is drawn, as effectively as
though it were his or her manually written signature. Such authority is
granted only for the purpose of permitting such officers an economy of time
and effort.



(2006 Code, § 2.12)



§ 30.13  INTERIM EMERGENCY SUCCESSION.



   (A)   Purpose. Due to the existing possibility of a nuclear attack
or a natural disaster requiring a declaration of a state of emergency, it is
found urgent and necessary to ensure the continuity of duly elected and
lawful leadership of the city to provide for the continuity of the government
and the emergency interim succession of key governmental officials by
providing a method for temporary emergency appointments to their offices.



   (B)   Succession to local offices.



      (1)   In the event of a nuclear attack upon the United States
or a natural disaster affecting the vicinity of the city, the Mayor, Council,
and City Administrator shall be forthwith notified by any one of said persons
and by any means available to gather at the City Hall. In the event that
safety or convenience dictate, an alternative place of meeting may be
designated.



      (2)   Those gathered shall proceed as follows:



         (a)   By majority vote of those persons present,
regardless of number, they shall elect a Chairperson and Secretary to preside
and keep minutes, respectively;



         (b)   They shall review and record the specific facts
relating to the nuclear attack or natural disaster and injuries to persons or
damage to property already done, or the imminence thereof;



         (c)   They may, based on such facts, declare a state of
emergency;



         (d)   By majority vote of those persons present,
regardless of number, they shall fill all positions on the Council,
(including the office of Mayor) of those persons upon whom notice could not
be served or who are unable to be present; and



         (e)   Such interim successors shall serve until such
time as the duly elected official is again available and returns to his or
her position, or the state of emergency has passed and a successor is
designated and qualifies as required by law, whichever shall occur first.



   (C)   Duties of the interim emergency Council. The interim emergency
Council shall exercise the powers and duties of their offices, and appoint
other key government officials to serve during the emergency.



(2006 Code, § 2.13)



Cross-reference:



   Additional provisions for emergency management, see Ch. 34



§ 30.14  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   Statute adopted. The State Emergency Management Act of 1996,
M.S. Ch. 12, as it may be amended from time to time, insofar as it relates to
cities, is hereby adopted by reference as part of this section, as fully as
if set forth explicitly herein.



   (B)   Establishment of an Emergency Management Agency. There is
hereby created within the city government an Emergency Management Agency,
which shall be under the supervision of a Director to be appointed forthwith
by the Mayor. The Director shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration, and operation of said Emergency Management
Agency, subject to the overall direction and control of the Council.



   (C)   Emergency preparedness plan. The Council may, by resolution,
adopt, from time to time amend, or repeal an emergency preparedness plan for
the city.



(2006 Code, § 2.14)  (Ord. 120, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)



Cross-reference:



   Additional provisions for emergency management, see Ch. 34



§ 30.15  SALARIES OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   Salaries of the Mayor and other members of the Council are hereby fixed
as follows, which amounts are deemed reasonable.



   (A)   The annual salary of the Mayor shall be $6,200.



   (B)   The annual salary of each member of the Council shall be
$5,400.



   (C)   The salaries provided for herein shall be effective January 1,
2015.



(2006 Code, § 2.15)  (Ord. 192, 3rd Series, passed 9-10-2013)



§ 30.16  FUNDS.



   The Council shall establish such funds as it deems necessary for the
accurate and efficient accounting of city funds.



(2006 Code, § 2.16)



§ 30.17  WORKER’S COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Contractors. The city shall not enter into any contract for
doing public work before receiving from all other contracting parties
acceptable evidence of compliance with the worker’s compensation insurance
coverage requirement of state statutes.



   (B)   City officers. All officers of the city elected or appointed
for a regular term of office or to complete the unexpired portion of any such
regular term shall be included in the definition of “employee” as defined
in state statutes relating to coverage for purposes of worker’s
compensation entitlement.



(2006 Code, § 2.17)  (Ord. 86, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 30.18  FINANCE OFFICER.



   (A)   Position created. The position of Finance Officer is hereby
created.



   (B)   Delegation of duties. All of the bookkeeping duties of the
City Administrator are hereby delegated to the Finance Officer.



   (C)   Bond. The Finance Officer shall furnish a fidelity bond
conditioned on the faithful exercise of his or her duties. In lieu of such
individual bond, the Council may provide for a blanket bond, furnished by a
surety company authorized to transact business in the state, and covering the
position and duties of the Finance Officer. Premiums on either of such bonds
shall be paid from city funds.



(2006 Code, § 2.18)  (Ord. 44, 3rd Series, passed 10-3-1984)



§ 30.19  CITY ELECTION DATE AND TERMS OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   (A)   Date. Pursuant to M.S. § 205.07, as it may be amended from
time to time, commencing with the 1994 city election, the regular city
election of the Council shall be held annually on the first Tuesday after the
first Monday in November of each even-numbered year. There shall be an
odd-year election in 1991, and the next election would be in 1994.



   (B)   Terms. Two Council members shall be elected for four-year
terms at each biennial city election commencing in 1991. The Mayor shall be
elected for a two-year term at each such election.



(2006 Code, § 2.19)  (Ord. 83, 3rd Series, passed 8-31-1990)



§ 30.20  DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY, AND EXCESS PROPERTY.



   (A)   Disposal of unclaimed property.



      (1)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the
following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         ABANDONED PROPERTY. Tangible or intangible property that
has lawfully come into the possession of the city in the course of municipal
operations, remains unclaimed by the owner, and has been in the possession of
the city for at least 60 days and has been declared such by a resolution of
the Council.



      (2)   Preliminary notice. If the City Administrator knows the
identity and whereabouts of the owner, he or she shall serve written notice
upon him or her at least 30 days prior to a declaration of abandonment by the
Council. If the city acquired possession from a prior holder, the identity
and whereabouts of whom are known by the City Administrator, notice shall
also be served upon him or her. Such notice shall describe the property and
state that unless it is claimed and proof of ownership, or entitlement to
possession established, the matter of declaring it abandoned property will be
brought to the attention of the Council after the expiration of 30 days from
the date of such notice.



      (3)   Notice and sale. Upon adoption of a resolution declaring
certain property to be abandoned property, the City Administrator shall
publish a notice thereof describing the same, together with the names (if
known) and addresses (if known) of prior owners and holders thereof, and
including a brief description of such property. The text of such notice shall
also state the time, place, and manner of sale of all such property, except
cash and negotiables. Such notice shall be published once in a legal
newspaper at least ten days prior to the sale. Sale shall be made to the
highest bidder at public auction or sale or by a nonprofit organization with
a significant mission of community service in a private sale in the manner
authorized by statute.



      (4)   Funds and claims thereon. Expenses shall be paid from
the proceeds of the sale; the balance of the proceeds shall be paid into the
General Fund of the city if the property was disposed of by a public auction
or sale; or in the case of a private sale, to the nonprofit organization
authorized to conduct said sale. The former owner, if he or she makes claim
within six months from the date of publication of the notice herein provided,
and upon application and satisfactory proof of ownership, may be paid the
amount of cash or negotiables or, in the case of property sold, the amount
received therefor, less a pro rata share of the expenses of storage,
publication of notice, and sale expenses, but without interest.



   (B)   Disposal of excess property.



      (1)   Declaration of surplus and authorizing sale of property.
The City Administrator may, from time to time, recommend to the Council that
certain personal property (chattels) owned by the city is no longer needed
for a municipal purpose and should be sold. By action of the Council, said
property shall be declared surplus, the value estimated, and the City
Administrator authorized to dispose of said property in the manner stated
herein.



      (2)   Surplus property with a total estimated value of less
than $500. The City Administrator may sell surplus property with a total
value of less than $500 through negotiated sale.



      (3)   Surplus property with a total estimated value between
$500 and $1,000.



         (a)   The City Administrator shall offer for public
sale, to the highest bidder, surplus property with a total estimated value of
from $500 to $1,000.



         (b)   Notice of such public sale shall be given stating
time and place of sale and generally describing the property to be sold at
least ten days prior to the date of sale either by publication once in the
official newspaper, or by posting in a conspicuous place in the City Hall at
the City Administrator’s option.



         (c)   Such sale shall be by auction.



      (4)   Surplus Property with a total estimated value over
$1,000.



         (a)   The City  Administrator shall offer for public
sale, to the highest bidder, surplus property with a total estimated value
over $1,000.



         (b)   Notice of such public sale shall be given stating
time and place of sale and generally describing property to be sold at least
ten days prior to the date of sale by publication once in the official
newspaper.



         (c)   Such sale shall be to the person submitting the
highest bid.



      (5)   Receipts from sales of surplus property. All receipts
from sales of surplus property under this section shall be placed in the
General Fund.



   (C)   Persons who may not purchase; exception.



      (1)   No employee of the city, spouse, or member of the
immediate family of the employee, who is a member of the administrative
staff, department head, a member of the Council, or an advisor serving the
city in a professional capacity, may be a purchaser of property under this
section.



      (2)   Other city employees may be purchasers if they are not
directly involved in the sale, if they are the highest responsible bidder,
and if at least one-week’s published or posted notice of sale is given.



      (3)   It is unlawful for any person to be a purchaser of
property under this section if such purchase is prohibited by the terms of
this section.



(2006 Code, § 2.70)  (Ord. 120, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)  Penalty, see
§ 30.99



Cross-reference:



   Abandoned motor vehicles, see Ch. 92



§ 30.99  PENALTY.



   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph, or provision of
this title when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.



(2006 Code, § 2.99)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY ORGANIZATIONS



Section




Departments




   31.01   Departments generally



   31.02   Police Department



   31.03   Fire Department



   31.04   Planning Department



   31.05   Public Works Department



   31.06   Utilities Department



   31.07   Legal Department




Boards, Commissions, and Authorities




   31.20   Boards and commissions generally



   31.21   Library Board



   31.22   Planning Commission



   31.23   Park Advisory Board



   31.24   Wadena Development Authority



   31.25   Housing and Redevelopment Authority




DEPARTMENTS




§ 31.01  DEPARTMENTS GENERALLY.



   (A)   Control. All departments of the city are under the overall
control of the Council. Heads of all departments are responsible to the
Council and subject to its supervision and direction, except as otherwise
provided herein.



   (B)   Appointment. All department heads and employees shall be
appointed by the Council. All appointments shall be for an indeterminate term
and subject to any applicable civil service regulations in effect in the city.



   (C)   Compensation. All wages and salaries shall be fixed and
determined by the Council.



   (D)   Table of organization and lines of responsibility. The Council
may by resolution adopt, amend, and from time to time revise, a table of
organization and define lines of responsibility and authority for the
efficient governmental organization of the city.



   (E)   Budgetary information. The heads of all departments shall,
prior to August 1 in each year, file with the City Administrator, the
projected financial needs of his or her department for the ensuing year. Such
projections shall include information as to maintenance and operation of
equipment, new equipment, personnel, and such other information as may be
requested by the City Administrator.



(2006 Code, § 2.30)



§ 31.02  POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   A Police Department is hereby established. The head of this
Department shall be known as the Chief of Police, and the number of
additional members and employees of the Police Department shall be determined
by the Council which may be changed from time to time. The Mayor shall have,
without the approval of the Council, authority to appoint additional members
of the Police Department for temporary duty when, in his or her judgment, an
emergency exists for the preservation of life or property.



   (B)   The Chief of Police and all members of the Police Department
shall have the powers and authority of police officers generally and shall
perform such duties as are required of them by the Council or by law. The
Chief of Police shall have general superintendence of the Police Department
and custody of all property used and maintained for the purposes of said
Department. It is the duty of the Chief of Police, on or before the fifth
business day in each month, to file with the City Administrator a report as
to all arrests made by, and other activities of, his or her Department during
the previous month. The Chief of Police shall also make and file such other
reports as may be required by the Council.



(2006 Code, § 2.31)



§ 31.03  FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   A Fire Department is hereby established. The size and
composition (including, but not limited to, a determination as to permanent
and volunteer members) shall be established by resolution of the Council,
which may be changed from time to time by a subsequent resolution. The
Council shall also establish, and from time to time revise and amend, written
rules, and regulations of the Department including, but not limited to, its
internal structural organization and compensation, a copy of which shall be
distributed to each of its members whenever established, revised, or amended.



   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have general
supervision of the Fire Department and custody of all property used and
maintained for the purposes of said Department. He or she shall see that the
same are kept in proper order and that all rules and regulations and all
provisions of the laws of the state and ordinances of the city relative to a
Fire Department and to prevention and extinguishment of fires are duly
observed. He or she shall supervise the preservation of all property
endangered by fire and shall control and direct all persons engaged in
preserving such property.



   (C)   In case of the absence or disability of the Chief for any
cause, the Assistant Chief shall exercise all powers, perform all the duties,
and be subject to all the responsibilities of the Chief. It is the duty of
the Chief of the Fire Department within five days after the end of each
calendar quarter, to file with the City Administrator a report as to all
fires occurring during the previous month stating the probable cause thereof
and estimated damages; such reports shall also state the other activities of
the Department. The Chief of the Fire Department shall also make and file
such other reports as may be requested by the Council.



(2006 Code, § 2.32)



§ 31.04  PLANNING DEPARTMENT.



   A Planning Department is hereby established. The head of this
Department shall be the Planning and Zoning Director. All planning, building,
and zoning activities shall be under his or her direct supervision and
control. This Department shall include any legal reference to a “Building
Department”. The Building Inspector (referred to in the State Building Code
as the “Administrative Authority”) shall be under the supervision of the
Planning and Zoning Director.



(2006 Code, § 2.33)  (Ord. 86, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 31.05  PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.



   A Public Works Department is hereby established. The head of this
Department shall be the Public Works Director. The city landfill, streets,
parks, and sewerage utility shall be under his or her direct supervision and
control.



(2006 Code, § 2.34)  (Ord. 33, 3rd Series, passed 5-30-1984)



§ 31.06  UTILITIES DEPARTMENT.



   A Utilities Department is hereby established. The head of this
Department shall be the Utilities Superintendent. The city electric and water
utilities shall be under his or her direct supervision and control.



(2006 Code, § 2.35)



§ 31.07  LEGAL DEPARTMENT.



   A Legal Department is hereby established. The Council shall appoint a
City Attorney, or firm of attorneys, who shall be head of the Legal
Department, together with such assistants as may be necessary who shall serve
at the pleasure of the Council. The City Attorney shall perform such duties
as are required of him or her by law or referred to him or her by the
Council. It shall be the official duty of the City Attorney to act as
“revisor of ordinances”.



(2006 Code, § 2.36)




BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND AUTHORITIES




§ 31.20  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY.



   (A)   Appointments. All board and commission appointments authorized
by ordinance or resolution shall be made by the Mayor, and such appointment
confirmed by the Council at the first regular meeting in January of each
year. The term of each appointee shall be established and stated at the time
of his or her appointment, and terms of present board and commission members
may be reestablished and changed so as to give effect to this section.



   (B)   Terms. New appointees shall assume office on February 1,
January 31 being the date of expiration of terms; provided, however, that all
appointees to boards and commissions shall hold office until their successor
is appointed and qualified. All vacancies shall be filled in the same manner
as for a full term appointment, but the appointment shall be only for the
unexpired term.



   (C)   Absence. Unexcused absence from three consecutive board or
commission meetings (whether regular or special) held at least 20 days apart
shall cause a vacancy in the position held by a member, and the Council shall
forthwith appoint a replacement to fill such vacancy. Excuse can only be
granted by the Council for serious illness of the member, or a member of his
or her family, or some equally valid reason.



   (D)   Removal. Any board or commission member may be removed by the
Council for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office and his or her
position filled as any other vacancy.



   (E)   Remuneration and reimbursement. No appointed board or
commission member shall be an employee of the city except those who are
members by virtue of their office. Except as herein otherwise provided, all
appointed board and commission members shall serve without remuneration, but
may be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses incurred in the performance of
their duties when such expenses have been authorized by the Council before
they were inclined.



   (F)   Chairperson and Secretary. The Chairperson and Secretary shall
be chosen from and by the Board or Commission membership annually to serve
for one year; provided, that no Chairperson shall be elected who has not
completed at least one year as a member of the board or commission.



   (G)   Meetings and terms. Each Board and Commission shall hold its
regular meetings at a time established and approved by the Council. Except as
otherwise provided herein, one of the members may be a member of the Council
appointed for a term established by the Council at the time of the
appointment, but not to extend beyond the end of the then-current term being
served by such Council member or the Mayor.



   (H)   Application. Except as otherwise provided by statute or
another section of this code of ordinances, the provisions of this section
shall apply to all boards and commissions.



(2006 Code, § 2.50)  (Ord. 162, 3rd Series, passed 9-20-2005)



§ 31.21  LIBRARY BOARD.



   (A)   Establishment and composition. A Library Board composed of
nine members is hereby established. Board members shall serve staggered
three-year terms.



   (B)   Duties. The duties of the Library Board are to advise the
Council as to management and operation of the City Library and the
maintenance and improvement of Library facilities.



(2006 Code, § 2.52)



§ 31.22  PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Establishment and composition. The Commission shall be
composed of seven members; one of those members may be a member of the
Council. Commission members shall serve staggered three-year terms. In
addition to the appointed members, one Council member (if not a member of the
Board), the Public Works Director, the Utility Superintendent, and the
Planning and Zoning Director shall be ex officio, non-voting, members.



   (B)   Powers and duties. The Planning Commission shall have all the
powers and duties defined or granted by statute and this code of ordinances
relating to planning, zoning, and subdivision regulation, and shall act in an
advisory capacity to the Council in all such areas. When conducting hearings,
it shall keep a true and accurate account thereof, of its findings, and of
its decision.



(2006 Code, § 2.53)  (Ord. 116, 3rd Series, passed 4-3-1998)



§ 31.23  PARK ADVISORY BOARD.



   (A)   Establishment and composition. A Park Advisory Board composed
of seven members is hereby established.



   (B)   Duties. The duties of the Park Advisory Board are to advise
the Council as to the maintenance and improvement of the public parks and
recreational facilities.



(2006 Code, § 2.55)  (Ord. 33, 3rd Series, passed 5-30-1984)



§ 31.24  WADENA DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Establishment and composition. A Port Development Commission,
to be known as the Wadena Development Authority, composed of seven members is
hereby established.



   (B)   Administration. The Wadena Development Authority shall be
governed through by-laws and rules of procedures as approved by the Council.



   (C)   Powers and duties. The duties of the Wadena Development
Authority are to:



      (1)   Promote the general welfare of the port district, and of
the port as a whole;



      (2)   Strive to increase the volume of the port’s commerce;



      (3)   Promote the efficient, safe, and economical handling of
the commerce; and



      (4)   Provide or promote adequate docks, railroad, and
terminal facilities open to all on reasonable and equal terms for the
handling, storage, care, and shipment of freight and passengers to, from, and
through the port. The Wadena Development Authority shall carry out its powers
and duties as set forth in M.S. §§ 469.048 to 469.068, as they may be
amended from time to time.



(2006 Code, § 2.57)



§ 31.25  HOUSING AND REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Establishment and composition. The City Housing and
Redevelopment Authority, composed of five members, is hereby established.
This Authority shall be the successor-in-interest to the City Housing and
Redevelopment Authority previously established by resolution under the
Municipal Housing and Redevelopment Act (M.S. § 383B.77, as it may be
amended from time to time).



   (B)   Administration. The Housing and Redevelopment Authority shall
be governed through by-laws and rules of procedures as approved by the
Council.



   (C)   Powers and duties.



      (1)   The powers and duties of the Housing and Redevelopment
Authority are to promote the general welfare of the community by:



         (a)   Providing government assistance to redevelop
substandard, slum, or blighted areas of the city where private enterprise
would not act without government participation or subsidies;



         (b)   Providing decent, safe, and sanitary housing;



         (c)   Providing affordable housing for low-income
persons and their families; and



         (d)   Renewing economic vitality through redevelopment.



      (2)   The Housing and Redevelopment Authority shall carry out
its powers and duties as set forth in M.S. §§ 469.001 to 469.047, as they
may be amended from time to time.



(2006 Code, § 2.58)  (Ord. 162, 3rd Series, passed 9-21-2005)



CHAPTER 32:  CITY POLICIES



Section



   32.01   Local improvement and assessment policy



   32.02   Personnel rules and regulations



   32.03   Employee residency



§ 32.01  LOCAL IMPROVEMENT AND ASSESSMENT POLICY.



   The Council may, by resolution, establish a local improvement and
assessment policy, which may provide for waiver of specific provisions in
instances of extreme hardship. Such policy may from time to time be amended
by resolution.



(2006 Code, § 2.72)



§ 32.02  PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Council may, by resolution, establish personnel rules setting forth
the rights, duties, and responsibilities of employees. Such rules may from
time to time be amended, but such amendments shall not be effective until 30
days after adoption thereof.



(2006 Code, § 2.73)



§ 32.03  EMPLOYEE RESIDENCY.



   (A)   Purpose. The Council recognizes its duty to, insofar as
possible, protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the
city, and their property. In order to fulfill this responsibility, it may be
necessary, in times of individual need or widespread disaster giving rise to
an emergency, to recall city employees. Thus, this section is adopted to
require employee residency within a reasonable area or response time to meet
such needs.



   (B)   Employees affected. The Chief and all other members of the
Police and Fire Departments, and all electric and water utilities employees,
shall, for the purpose of this section, be “affected employees”.



   (C)   Residency. The following areas or response times are hereby
determined to be reasonable, and required within six months after assuming
city employment:



      (1)   The area in which affected employees shall reside is
within five miles of the city limits;



      (2)   All affected employees shall be able to reach the city
administrative offices within ten minutes by motor vehicle; and



      (3)   Any present city employee, now residing outside the area
or response time specified in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) above who moves his
or her residence in the future will be bound by this division (C).



(2006 Code, § 2.74)  (Ord. 48, 3rd Series, passed 3-1-1985)



CHAPTER 33:  FINANCE AND REVENUE



Section




General Provisions




   33.01   Accounts for fire or explosion losses




Fees




   33.15   Franchise fee



   33.16   City fees generally




Taxes




   33.30   Local lodging tax




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 33.01  ACCOUNTS FOR FIRE OR EXPLOSION LOSSES.



   (A)   The city may establish a trust or escrow account to hold
proceeds from losses arising from fire or explosion of insured real property
located within the city.



   (B)   The city may utilize these funds to secure, repair, or
demolish damaged or destroyed structures and clear the property in question,
so that the structure and property are in compliance with local code
requirements and applicable provisions of this code of ordinances.



   (C)   Any unused portion of the retained proceeds shall be returned
to the insured.



   (D)   In addition, the regulatory and procedural provisions of M.S.
§ 65A.50, as it may be amended from time, pertaining to trust or escrow
accounts; insured real property fire or explosion loss proceeds, are hereby
incorporated herein and adopted by reference, including the penalty provision
thereof.



(2006 Code, § 2.75)  (Ord. 121, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)




FEES




§ 33.15  FRANCHISE FEE.



   (A)   Fee schedule.



      (1)   In exchange for the franchise granted herein, the
grantee shall collect from its customers located within the corporate limits
of the city, and pay to the grantor an amount as set by city resolution
annually, after adjustment for the net write-off of uncollectible accounts
and corrections of bills theretofore rendered.



      (2)   Plus percentage CPI adjustment which sums shall be
increased each year on January 1 by the greater of:



         (a)   Three percent of the previous year’s annualized
franchise fee; or



         (b)   By an amount equal to the increase in the Consumer
Price Index (“CPI”).



   (B)   Fee increase determination; CPI.



      (1)   The CPI shall mean the Consumer Price Index - for all
Urban Consumers, all Cities, all Items (1967 = 100), as published by the U.S.
Department of Labor Statistics, or if such index shall be discontinued, the
successor index, or if there be no successor index, such comparable index as
mutually agreed upon by the parties.



      (2)   (a)   To determine the annual franchise fee increase
to be paid by the tenant under a CPI adjuster, the annualized franchise fee
for the previous year shall be multiplied by a percentage figure, computed
from a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the CPI for the third
quarter of the preceding year and the denominator of which shall be the CPI
for the corresponding quarter of one year earlier.



         (b)   Such fraction shall be converted to a percentage
equivalent. The resulting percentage fixture shall be multiplied by the
previous year’s rent.



   (C)   Notice to franchisee. The city shall communicate all franchise
fee increases to the company in writing the preceding December 1 of each year.



(2006 Code, § 2.76)  (Ord. 169, 3rd Series, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 33.16  CITY FEES GENERALLY.



   The fees administered by the city shall be as set by city resolution
annually.



TAXES



§ 33.30  LOCAL LODGING TAX.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      LODGING. The furnishing for consideration of lodging at a hotel,
motel, rooming house, tourist court, or resort, other than the renting or
leasing of it for a continuous period of 30 days or more.



      OPERATOR. A person who provides lodging to others, or any
officer, agent, or employee of such person.



   (B)   Imposition of tax. There is hereby imposed a tax of 3% on the
gross receipts from the furnishing for consideration of lodging.



   (C)   Collection. Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by
this section at the time the rent is paid. The tax collections shall be held
in trust by the operator for the city. The amount of tax shall be separately
stated from the rent charged for the lodging.



   (D)   Payment and returns.



      (1)   Time and form of payment.



         (a)   The taxes imposed by this section shall be paid by
the operator to the city no later than 15 days after the end of the month in
which the taxes were collected. At the time of payment, the operator shall
submit a return upon such forms and containing such information as the city
may require.



         (b)   The return shall contain the following minimum
information:



            1.   The total amount of rent collected for
lodging during the period covered by the return;



            2.   The amount of tax required to be collected
and due for the period;



            3.   The signature of the person filing the return
or that of his or her agent duly authorized in writing;



            4.   The period covered by the return; and



            5.   The amount of uncollectible rental charges
subject to the lodging tax.



      (2)   Offset of taxes. The operator may offset against the
taxes payable with respect to any reporting period, the amount of taxes
imposed by this section previously paid as a result of any transaction the
consideration for which became uncollectible during such reporting period,
but only in proportion to the portion of such consideration which became
uncollectible.



   (E)   Examination of return, adjustments, notices, and demands.



      (1)   After a return is filed, the city shall examine it and
make any investigation or examination of the records and accounts of the
person making the return deemed necessary for determining its correctness.
The tax computed on the basis of such examination shall be the tax to be
paid. If the tax due is found to be greater than that paid, such excess shall
be paid to the city within ten days after receipt of a notice thereof given
either personally or sent by registered mail to the address shown on the
return.



      (2)   If the tax paid is greater than the tax found to be due,
the excess shall be refunded to the person who paid the tax to the city
within ten days after determination of such refund.



   (F)   Refunds.



      (1)   Any person may apply to the city for a refund of taxes
paid for a prescribed period in excess of the amount legally due for that
period; provided, that no application for refund shall be considered unless
filed within one year after such tax was paid, or within one year from the
filing of the return, whichever period is the longer.



      (2)   The city shall examine the claim and make and file
written findings thereon denying such person at the address stated upon the
return. If such claim is allowed in whole or in part, the city shall credit
the amount of the allowance against any taxes due under this section from the
claimant and the balance of said allowance, if any, shall be paid by the city
to the claimant.



   (G)   Failure to file a return.



      (1)   (a)   If any operator required by this section to
file a return shall fail to do so within the time prescribed, or shall make,
willfully or otherwise, an incorrect, false, or fraudulent return within five
days of receipt of such written notice and shall at the same time pay the tax
due on the basis thereof.



         (b)   If such person shall fail to file such return or
corrected return, the city shall make a return or corrected return for such
person from such knowledge and information as the city can obtain, and assess
a tax on the basis thereof, which tax (less any payments theretofore made on
account of the tax for the taxable period covered by such return) shall be
paid within five days of the receipt of written notice and demand for such
payment.



      (2)   (a)   Any such return or assessment made by the city
shall be prima facie correct and valid, and such person shall have the burden
of establishing its incorrectness or invalidity in any action or proceeding
in respect thereto.



         (b)   If any portion of a tax imposed by this section,
including penalties thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required
to be paid, the City Attorney may institute such legal action as may be
necessary to recover the amount due, plus interest, penalties, the costs, and
disbursements of any action. Upon a showing of good cause, the city may grant
an operator one 30-day extension of time within which to file a return and
make payment of taxes as required by this section; provided, that interest
during such period of extension shall be added to the taxes due at the rate
of 10% per annum.



   (H)   Penalties assessed. If any tax imposed by this section is not
paid within the time therein specified for the payment, or any extension
thereof, there shall be added thereto a specific penalty equal to 10% of the
amount remaining unpaid. The amount of tax not timely paid, together with any
penalty provided by this section, shall bear interest at the rate of 10% per
annum from the time such tax should have been paid until paid. Any interest
and penalty shall be added to the tax and be collected as a part thereof.



   (I)   Violations. It is unlawful for any person to willfully fail to
make a return required by this section, or to fail to pay the tax after
written demand for payment, or to fail to remit the taxes collected or any
penalty or interest imposed by this section after written demand for such
payment, or to refuse to permit the city to examine books, records, and
papers under his or her control, or to willfully make any incomplete, false,
or fraudulent return.



   (J)   Use of proceeds. Ninety-five percent of the proceeds obtained
from the collection of taxes pursuant to this section shall be used in
accordance with M.S. § 469.190, as it may be amended from time to time, to
fund a local convention or tourism bureau for the purpose of marketing and
promoting the city as a tourist or convention center.



   (K)   Appeals.



      (1)   (a)   Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order, or
determination made by the city under this section may file a petition for
review of such notice, order, or determination detailing the operator’s
reasons for contesting the notice, order or determination. The petition shall
contain the name of the petitioner, the petitioner’s address and the
location of the lodging subject to the order, notice, or determination.



         (b)   The petition for review shall be filed with the
City Administrator within ten days after the notice, order, or determination
for which review is sought has been mailed or served upon the person
requesting review. Upon receipt of the petition the City Administrator, or
the Administrator’s designee, shall set a date for a hearing and give the
petitioner at least five days’ prior written notice of the date, time, and
place of the hearing.



      (2)   (a)   At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given
an opportunity to show cause why the notice, order, or determination should
be modified or withdrawn. The petitioner may be represented by counsel of
petitioner’s choosing at petitioner’s own expense.



         (b)   The hearing shall be conducted by the City
Administrator or the Administrator’s designee, provided, only that the
person conducting the hearing shall not have participated in the drafting of
the order, notice, or determination for which review is sought. The person
conducting the hearing shall make written findings of fact and conclusions
based upon the applicable provisions of this section and the evidence
presented.



      (3)   (a)   The person conducting the hearing may affirm,
reverse, or modify the notice, order, or determination made by the city. Any
decision rendered by the City Administrator pursuant to this division (K) may
be appealed to the Council.



         (b)   A petitioner seeking to appeal a decision must
file a written notice of appeal with the City Administrator within ten days
after the decision has been mailed to the petitioner. The matter will
thereupon be placed on the Council agenda as soon as is practical. The
Council shall then review the findings of fact and conclusions to determine
whether they were correct.



         (c)   Upon a determination by the Council that the
findings and conclusions were incorrect, the Council may modify, reverse, or
affirm the decision of the City Administrator or his or her designee upon the
same standards as set forth in this section.



(2006 Code, Ch. 13)  (Ord. 113, 3rd Series, passed 11-6-1997; Ord. 145, 3rd
Series, passed 6-21-2002)



CHAPTER 34:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



Section



   34.01   Policy and purpose



   34.02   Definitions



   34.03   Establishment of emergency management organization



   34.04   Powers and duties of Director



   34.05   Local emergencies



   34.06   Emergency regulations



   34.07   Emergency management a government function



   34.08   Participation in labor disputes or politics



 



   34.99   Penalty



§ 34.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.



   Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado,
blizzard, destructive winds, or other natural causes, or from sabotage,
hostile action, or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure;
and in order to ensure that preparations of this city will be adequate to
deal with those disasters, and generally, to provide for the common defense
and to protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the
lives and property of the people of this city, it is hereby found and
declared to be necessary:



   (A)   To establish a city emergency management organization
responsible for city planning and preparation for emergency government
operations in time of disasters.



   (B)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during
emergencies and disasters.



   (C)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city
and other political subdivisions of this state and of other states with
respect to the carrying out of emergency-preparedness functions.



   (D)   To comply with the provisions of M.S. § 12.25, as it may be
amended from time to time, which requires that each political subdivision of
the state shall establish a local organization for emergency management.



§ 34.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISASTER. A situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment
to the health and safety of any person, or a situation which has resulted in
or is likely to result in catastrophic loss to property, and for which
traditional sources of relief and assistance within the affected area are
unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss.



   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for
immediate action to prevent from developing or occurring.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado, and other acts of
nature, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from industrial hazardous
material mishaps. These functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting
services, police services, emergency medical services, engineering, warning
services, communications, radiological, and chemical, evacuation, congregate
care, emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of
plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other
functions related to civil protection, together with all other activities
necessary or incidental for carrying out the foregoing functions. EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT includes those activities sometimes referred to as “civil
defense” functions.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES. The total personnel resources engaged in
city-level emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter or any rule or order thereunder. This includes personnel from
city departments, authorized volunteers, and private organizations and
agencies.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION. The staff responsible for
coordinating city- level planning and preparation for disaster response. This
organization provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state, and
local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and assures
implementation of federal and state program requirements.



§ 34.03  ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.



   There is hereby created within the city government an emergency
management organization which shall be under the supervision and control of
the City Emergency Management Director, called the Director. The Director
shall be appointed by the City Council for an indefinite term and may be
removed by the Council at any time. The Director shall serve with a salary as
established by the City Council and shall be paid his or her necessary
expenses. The Director shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration and operation of the emergency preparedness organization,
subject to the direction and control of the Council. The emergency management
organization shall conform to and be consistent with, where applicable, all
state and federal requirements, including the National Incident Management
System framework found at 44 C.F.R. pt. 201, as it may be amended from time
to time.



§ 34.04  POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Director shall represent the city on any regional or state
conference for emergency management. The Director shall develop proposed
mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions of the state for
reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in an emergency too great
to be dealt with unassisted, and shall present these agreements to the
Council for its action. These arrangements shall be consistent with the State
Emergency Plan.



   (B)   The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human
resources, industries, resources, and facilities of the city as deemed
necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan
for their most efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster. The
Director shall establish the economic stabilization systems and measures,
service staffs, boards, and sub-boards required, in accordance with state and
federal plans and directions subject to the approval of the Mayor.



   (C)   The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for
the emergency preparedness of the city and shall present the plan to the
Council for its approval. When the Council has approved the plan, it shall be
the duty of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the
city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved.
The plan may be modified in like manner from time to time. The Director shall
coordinate the emergency management activities of the city to the end that
they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plans of the
federal government and the state and correlated with emergency plans of the
county and other political subdivisions within the state.



   (D)   In accordance with the State and City Emergency Plan, the
Director shall institute training programs, public information programs, and
conduct practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as may be necessary
to assure prompt and effective operation of the City Emergency Plan when a
disaster occurs.



   (E)   The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment,
supplies, and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to
the maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all city
departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate
with and extend services and facilities to the city’s emergency management
organization and to the Governor upon request. The head of each department or
agency in cooperation with the Director shall be responsible for the planning
and programming of those emergency activities as will involve the utilization
of the facilities of the department or agency.



   (F)   The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments
and agencies affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting, and training of
emergency management personnel, which may be required on a volunteer basis to
carry out the emergency plans of the city and state. To the extent that
emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or
agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies
and shall be under the administration and control of the department or agency.



   (G)   Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director
shall coordinate the activity of municipal emergency management organizations
within the city and assist in establishing and conducting training programs
as required to assure emergency operational capability in the several
services as provided by M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (H)   The Director shall carry out all orders, rules, and
regulations issued by the Governor with reference to emergency management.



   (I)   The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency
preparedness activities when requested by the Mayor.



§ 34.05  LOCAL EMERGENCIES.



   (A)   A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his or
her legal successor. It shall not be continued for a period in excess of
three days except by or with the consent of the Council. Any order, or
proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be
given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the
City Administrator.



   (B)   A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary
portions of the response and recovery aspects of applicable local or
inter-jurisdictional disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance
thereunder.



   (C)   No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local
emergency unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency
functions; however, an inter-jurisdictional disaster agency shall provide aid
and services in accordance with the agreement under which it functions.



Penalty, see § 34.99



§ 34.06  EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Whenever necessary, to meet a declared emergency or to prepare
for an emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the
Governor or the Council, the Council may by resolution promulgate
regulations, consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation,
respecting: the conduct of persons and the use of property during
emergencies; the repair, maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public
services, emergency health, fire, and safety regulations, drills or practice
periods required for preliminary training; and all other matters which are
required to protect public safety, health, and welfare in declared
emergencies.



   (B)   Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing;
shall be dated; shall refer to the particular emergency to which it pertains,
if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City Administrator. A
copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business
hours. Notice of the existence of these regulations and their availability
for inspection at the City Administrator’s Office shall be conspicuously
posted at the front of the City Hall or other headquarters of the city or at
other places in the affected area as the Council shall designate in the
resolution. By resolution, the Council may modify or rescind a regulation.



   (C)   The Council may rescind any regulation by resolution at any
time. If not sooner rescinded, every regulation shall expire at the end of 30
days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which it
relates, whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule, or regulation
inconsistent with an emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be
suspended during the period of time and to the extent conflict exists.



   (D)   During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions
of M.S. § 12.37, as it may be amended from time to time and notwithstanding
any statutory provision to the contrary, empowered, through its Council,
acting within or without the corporate limits of the city, to enter into
contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat the disaster by
protecting the health and safety of persons and property and providing
emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster. The city may exercise
these powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster without
compliance with the time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by
law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering rental equipment
agreements, purchase of supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies,
and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds, including, but not
limited to, publication of resolutions, publication of calls for bids,
provisions of personnel laws and rules, provisions relating to low bids, and
requirement for bids.



Penalty, see § 34.99



§ 34.07  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.



   All functions and activities relating to emergency management are
hereby declared to be governmental functions. The provisions of this section
shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he or
she otherwise be entitled under this resolution or under the worker’s
compensation law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any person to
receive any benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.



§ 34.08  PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS.



   The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form
of political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute.



§ 34.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation
adopted thereunder relating to acts, omissions, or conduct other than
official acts of city employees or officers is guilty of a misdemeanor.



CHAPTER 35:  CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECKS FOR
EMPLOYMENT AND LICENSE APPLICATIONS



Section



   35.01   Purpose



   35.02   Applicants for employment



   35.03   Applicants for city licenses



§ 35.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide guidance to the city's police
department when accessing Minnesota's criminal history information database
for purposes of employment and licensing background checks under M.S. §
299C.72.



(Ord. 222, 3rd Series, passed 5-8-2018)



§ 35.02  APPLICANTS FOR EMPLOYMENT.



   (A)   Consistent with the provisions of M.S. § 299C.72, the Wadena
Police Department will conduct a criminal history background investigation on
the applicants for the following positions within the city, unless the city's
hiring authority concludes that a background investigation is not needed:



      (1)   Employment positions: all regular part-time or full-time
employees of the City of Wadena and other volunteer positions that work with
children or vulnerable adults.



   (B)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in
order to screen employment applicants, the Police Department is authorized to
access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension's
criminal history information data base in accordance with M.S. § 299C.72.
Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police
Department under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official
or his or her designee. A summary of the results of the criminal history data
may be released by the Police Department to the hiring authority, including
the City Council, the City Administrator or other city staff involved in the
hiring process.



   (C)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the Police Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
M.S. Ch. 13 regarding the collection, maintenance, and use of the
information. Except for the positions set forth in M.S. § 364.09, the city
will not reject an applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant's
prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the position of
employment sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or
misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the city rejects the applicant's request
on this basis, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the
following:



      (1)   The grounds and reasons for the denial.



      (2)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set
forth in M.S. § 364.06.



      (3)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for
employment.



      (4)   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be
considered upon reapplication.



(Ord. 222, 3rd Series, passed 5-8-2018)



§ 35.03  APPLICANTS FOR CITY LICENSES.



   (A)   Consistent with the authority provided in M.S. § 299C.72, the
Wadena Police Department will conduct a criminal history background
investigation on the applicants for the following licenses within the city.
City licenses:



      (1)   Hawkers, peddlers, transient merchants, and solicitors.



      (2)   Junk dealers.



      (3)   Sales of certain types.



      (4)   Sauna and massage parlors.



      (5)   Sexually-oriented businesses.



      (6)   Tobacco.



      (7)   Pawnbrokers.



      (8)   Kennels.



      (9)   Garbage and refuse haulers taxicabs.



      (10)   Alcoholic beverages.



      (11)   Tattooing, body piercing, and the like.



      (12)   Franchises.



   (B)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in
order to screen license applicants, the Police Department is authorized to
access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension's
criminal history information systems data base in accordance with M.S. §
299C.72. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the
Police Department under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement
official or his or her designee. A summary of the results of the criminal
history data may be released by the Police Department to the licensing
authority, including the City Council, the City Administrator or other city
staff involved in the license approval process.



   (C)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the Police Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
M.S. Ch. 13 regarding the collection, maintenance, and use of the
information. Except for the positions set forth in M.S. § 364.09, the city
will not reject an applicant for a license on the basis of the applicant's
prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the license sought
and the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a
jail sentence.



   (D)   If the city rejects the applicant's request on this basis, the
city shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:



      (1)   The grounds and reasons for the denial.



      (2)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set
forth in M.S. § 364.06.



      (3)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for the
license.



      (4)   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be
considered upon reapplication.



(Ord. 222, 3rd Series, passed 5-8-2018)



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   UTILITIES GENERALLY



      51.   SEWER SERVICE



      52.   WATER SERVICE



      53.   ELECTRICAL SERVICE



      54.   REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL



CHAPTER 50:  UTILITIES GENERALLY



Section



   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Fixing rates and charges for municipal utilities



   50.03   Fix rates and charges for public utilities



   50.04   Contractual contents



   50.05   Rules and regulations of municipal utilities



   50.06   Connection or tapping prohibited; delinquent assessments or
charges



 



   50.99   Penalty



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose this title, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPANY, GRANTEE, and FRANCHISEE. Any public utility system to which a
franchise has been granted by the city.



   CONSUMER and CUSTOMER. Any user of a utility.



   MUNICIPAL. Any city-owned utility system, including, but not by way of
limitation, water, sewerage, electric, landfill, and refuse service.



   SERVICE. Providing a particular utility to a customer or consumer.



   UTILITY. All utility services, whether the same be public city-owned
facilities or furnished by public utility companies.



(2006 Code, § 3.01)



§ 50.02  FIXING RATES AND CHARGES FOR MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.



   All rates and charges for municipal utilities, including, but not by
way of limitation, rates for service, connection and meter reading fees,
removal of any unlawful device, disconnection fees, reconnection fees
including penalties for nonpayment if any, shall be fixed, determined and
amended by the Council and adopted by resolution. Such resolution, containing
the effective date thereof, shall be kept on file and open to inspection in
the office of the City Administrator and shall be uniformly enforced.



(2006 Code, § 3.02)



§ 50.03  FIX RATES AND CHARGES FOR PUBLIC UTILITIES.



   (A)   All rates and charges for public utility franchisees, not
regulated by an agency of the state, shall be fixed and determined by the
Council and adopted by ordinance. Upon adoption, such rates and charges shall
become provisions of this title.



   (B)   Public utility company rates and charges may be fixed and
determined by the respective franchisees in compliance with this section, as
follows.



      (1)   Rates approved by Council. No rate or charge involving
an increase thereof shall become effective until approved by the Council. To
request such increase the franchisee shall prepare its written petition
setting forth the then current and proposed rates and charges, the effective
date of the proposed increases (which may not be within 90 days of filing the
petition), and the reason or reasons necessitating the proposed increase or
increases. Such petition shall be filed with the Council by serving the same
on the City Administrator in person or by certified mail, return receipt
requested.



      (2)   Approval, hearing, petition. Within 30 days of such
filing, the Council shall adopt a resolution and serve the same upon the
resident superintendent of the franchisee in like manner as the petition may
be served either approving the proposed increases or ordering a hearing
thereon to be held within 60 days thereof. If no such action is taken by the
Council, such increase or increases shall take effect on the date stated in
the franchisee’s petition as though approved by the Council.



      (3)   Examination of hooks and records. Prior to the hearing
date, the franchisee shall, without delay, comply with the city’s
reasonable requests for examination and copying of all books, records,
documents, and other information, relating to the subject matter of the
petition. Should the franchisee unreasonably delay, fail, or refuse such
requests, the same shall be grounds for a continuance of the hearing date.



      (4)   Notice. Notice of hearing shall be in the form and
manner stated in the resolution. At the hearing, all persons wishing to be
heard thereon shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity. Findings and a
decision shall be made by the Council within 15 days after the hearing and
served upon the franchisee.



(2006 Code, § 3.03)



§ 50.04  CONTRACTUAL CONTENTS.



   Provisions of this title relating to municipal utilities shall
constitute portions of the contract between the city and all consumers of
municipal utility services, and every such consumer shall be deemed to assent
to the same. All contracts between franchisees and consumers of utility
services other than municipal shall be in strict accord with the provisions
of this title.



(2006 Code, § 3.04)



§ 50.05  RULES AND REGULATIONS OF MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.



   (A)   Billing, payment, and delinquency. All municipal utilities
shall be billed monthly and a utilities statement or statements shall be
mailed to each consumer each month. All utilities charges shall be delinquent
if they are unpaid at the close of business on the tenth day following such
billing, provided, that if the tenth day shall fall on a Saturday, Sunday, or
legal holiday, the time shall be extended to the close of business on the
next succeeding day on which business is normally transacted. A penalty of 5%
thereof, or $1, whichever is greater, shall be added to, and become part of,
all delinquent utility bills. If service is suspended due to delinquency, it
shall not be restored at that location until a reconnection charge has been
paid for each utility reconnected in addition to amounts owed for service and
penalties.



   (B)   Application, connection, and sale of service. Application for
municipal utility services shall be made upon forms supplied by the city, and
strictly in accordance therewith. No connection shall be made until consent
has been received from the city to make the same. All municipal utilities
shall be sold and delivered to consumers under the then applicable rate
applied to the amount of such utilities taken as metered or ascertained in
connection with such rates.



   (C)   Discontinuance of service. All municipal utilities may be shut
off or discontinued whenever it is found that:



      (1)   The owner or occupant of the premises served, or any
person working on any connection with the municipal utility systems, has
violated any requirement of this code of ordinances relative thereto, or any
connection therewith;



      (2)   Any charge for a municipal utility service, or any other
financial obligation imposed on the present owner or occupant of the premises
served, is unpaid after due notice thereof; or



      (3)   There is fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or
occupant in connection with any application for service or delivery or
charges therefor.



   (D)   Ownership of municipal utilities. Ownership of all municipal
utilities, plants, lines, mains, extensions, and appurtenances thereto, shall
be and remain in the city and no person shall own any part or portion
thereof; provided, however, that private facilities and appurtenances
constructed on private property are not intended to be included in municipal
ownership.



   (E)   Right of entry. The city has the right to enter in and upon
private property, including buildings and dwellings houses, in or upon which
there is installed a municipal utility, or connection therewith, at all times
reasonable under the circumstances, for the purpose of reading utility
meters, for the purpose of inspection and repair of meters or a utility
system, or any part thereof, and for the purpose of connecting and
disconnecting service.



   (F)   Accuracy.



      (1)   All water and electric utilities service shall be
supplied through a meter which shall accurately measure the amount thereof
supplied to any consumer. The consumer shall provide for a metering area that
is properly located, safe, and readily accessible at all times for the
installation of such meters. Meters shall be tested for accuracy by the city
upon the request of any consumer who believes his or her meter to be
inaccurate. If, upon testing, it appears that such meter overruns to the
extent of 3% or more, the city shall pay the cost of such tests and shall
make a refund for overcharges collected since the last known date of accuracy
but for not longer than six months, on the basis of the extent of the
inaccuracy found to exist at the time of the tests.



      (2)   If, upon testing, it appears that such meter is slow to
the extent of 3% or more, the consumer shall pay for undercharges since the
last known date of accuracy but for not longer than six months on the basis
of the extent of the inaccuracy found to exist at the time of the test. If,
when any meter is tested upon the demand of a consumer, it is found to be
accurate or slow or less than 3% fast, the consumer may be billed the
reasonable cost of such testing. Any error in reading or computation of a
utility account may be corrected for a period not to exceed one year prior to
discovery of the error.



   (G)   Unlawful acts.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly
break, injure, mar, deface, disturb, or in any way interfere with any
buildings, attachments, machinery, apparatus, equipment, fixture, or
appurtenance of any municipal utility or municipal utility system, or commit
any act tending to obstruct or impair the use of any municipal utility.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to make any connection
with, opening into, use, or alter in any way any municipal utility system
without first having applied for and received written permission to do so
from the city.



      (3)   It is unlawful for any person to turn on or connect a
utility when the same has been turned off or disconnected by the city for
nonpayment of a bill, or for any other reason, without first having obtained
a permit to do so from the city.



      (4)   It is unlawful for any person to “jumper” or by any
means or device fully or partially circumvent a municipal utility meter, or
to knowingly use or consume unmetered utilities or use the services of any
utility system, the use of which the proper billing authorities have no
knowledge.



   (H)   Municipal utility service outside the city. Premises located
outside the established service area boundaries of the city shall not be
connected to or served by any municipal utility, except such premises as are
publicly owned or presently served. Persons needing municipal utility service
whose property is located outside the established service area boundaries of
the city must initiate and complete annexation proceedings in advance prior
to being provided with such service or services.



   (I)   Water meters. All water meters shall be owned by the city and
installed in accordance with city policy as well as provisions of this code
of ordinances. Any meter damage by reason of abuse, neglect, or freezing
shall be billed to the customer or owner of the premises on which it occurs.
This division (I) shall apply to any meter required or installed under the
provisions of this code of ordinances.



   (J)   Municipal utility services and charges a lien.



      (1)   (a)   Payment for all municipal utility services and
charges (as that term is defined in § 50.01) shall be the primary
responsibility of the fee owner of the premises served and shall be billed to
such owner unless otherwise contracted for and authorized in writing by the
fee owner and any other person (such as a tenant, contract purchaser,
manager, and the like), as agent for the fee owner, and consented to by the
city.



         (b)   If the utility service and charges are for a
single-metered, multi-unit rental residential building, the owner of said
building shall be the customer of record and this responsibility shall not be
waived by contract or otherwise. The city may collect the same in a civil
action or, in the alternative and at the option of the city, as otherwise
provided in this division (J).



      (2)   (a)   Except as to the furnishing of retail natural,
manufactured, or mixed gas or electric service to or for the public, and to
the extent otherwise authorized by state law, as set forth in division (J)(3)
below, each such account is hereby made a lien upon the premises served.



         (b)   All such accounts which are more than 45 days
delinquent may, when authorized by resolution of the Council, be certified by
the City Administrator, to the County Auditor, and the City Administrator in
so certifying shall specify the amount thereof, the description of the
premises served, and the name of the owner thereof. The amount so certified
shall be extended by the Auditor on the tax rolls against such premises in
the same manner as other taxes, and collected by the County Treasurer, and
paid to the city along with other taxes.



      (3)   As to the furnishing of retail natural, manufactured, or
mixed gas or electric service to or for the public, and to the extent
otherwise authorized by state law, the city shall not:



         (a)   Recover or attempt to recover payment for a
tenant’s outstanding bill or charge from a landlord, property owner, or
manager, or manufactured home park owner, or manufactured home dealer who has
not contracted for the service;



         (b)   Condition service on payment of an outstanding
bill or other charge for utility service due upon the outstanding account of
a previous customer or customers when all of the previous customers have
vacated the property; or



         (c)   Place a lien on the landlord’s or owner’s
property for a tenant’s outstanding bill or charge. The city may recover or
attempt to recover payment and place a lien on the property for a tenant’s
outstanding bill or charge from a property owner where the manager, acting as
the owner’s agent, contracted for the utility service.



(2006 Code, § 3.05)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991; Ord. 163, 3rd
Series, passed 9-20-2005)



Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.06  CONNECTION OR TAPPING PROHIBITED; DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS OR
CHARGES.



   No permit shall be granted to tap or connect with sewer or water mains
when any assessment or connection charge for such sewer or water main against
the property to be connected is in default or delinquent. If such assessment
or connection charges are payable in installments, no permit shall be granted
unless all installments then due and payable have been paid.



(2006 Code, § 3.06)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph, or provision of
this title when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.



(2006 Code, § 3.99)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



CHAPTER 51:  SEWER SERVICE



Section



   51.01   Definitions



   51.02   Connection requirements; prohibitions



   51.03   Building sewers and connections



   51.04   Use of public sewer



   51.05   Sewer service charges



   51.06   Metering



   51.07   Billing



   51.08   Revenues and accounts



 



   51.99   Penalty



§ 51.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT. The Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., as amended).



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD).



      (1)   The quality of oxygen, expressed in mg/l, utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures in five days at 20°C; and



      (2)   The standard test used in assessing wastewater strength.



   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal (also called a house connection or service
connection).



   CAPITAL COSTS. All costs and expenses incurred in planning, designing,
financing, and constructing wastewater collection, conveyance, and treatment
facilities.



   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to serve as both a sanitary sewer and
a storm sewer or as an industrial sewer and a storm sewer.



   COMMERCIAL USER. Any transient lodging, retail or wholesale
establishments, or places engaged in selling merchandise for personal,
household, or industrial consumption and/or rendering service to others.



   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.



      (1)   Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH, and
fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES
permit if the treatment facilities are designed to treat such pollutants and,
in fact, do remove such pollutants to a degree which complies with effluent
concentration limits imposed by the permit.



      (2)   Examples of additional pollutants which may be
considered compatible are:



         (a)   Chemical oxygen demand;



         (b)   Total organic carbon;



         (c)   Phosphorus and phosphorus compounds;



         (d)   Nitrogen and nitrogen compounds; and



         (e)   Fats, oils, and greases of animal and vegetable
origin (except as prohibited where these materials would interfere with the
operation of the facilities).



   CONSTRUCTION. Any one or more of the following: preliminary planning;
engineering, architectural, legal, fiscal, or economic investigations,
studies, surveys, designs, plans, working drawings, specifications, or
procedures; erection, building, acquisition, alteration, remodeling,
improvement, or extension of facilities; or the inspection or supervision of
any of the foregoing.



   DEBT RETIREMENT COSTS. The combined principal and interest payments
necessary to pay bonded indebtedness.



   DOMESTIC USER. Dwelling units such as detached or semi-detached, and
row houses, mobile homes, apartments, and permanent multi-family dwellings
(transient lodging facilities excluded).



   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER.



      (1)   Wastewater generated principally by domestic activities,
and shall, by definition, have the following characteristics.



 


BOD-5

 

245 mg/l or less




Suspended solids

 

230 mg/l or less




 



      (2)   It may or may not contain groundwater, surface water, or
stormwater.



   FLOW. The quality of wastewater, expressed in gallons or cubic feet,
per period of time.



   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the commercial handling, storage,
and sale of produce.



   GENERAL MUNICIPAL USER. Any user discharging wastewater to the
municipal system other than industrial users. This term includes DOMESTIC,
COMMERCIAL, GOVERNMENTAL, and INSTITUTIONAL USERS.



   GOVERNMENTAL USER. Those establishments whose function is the
administration and/or execution of governmental programs as well as the
offices of executives, legislative bodies, and agencies which provide general
support services for government.



   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant that is not defined as a
compatible pollutant, including non-biodegradable solids.



   INDUSTRIAL USER. Manufacturing establishments whose activity involve
the chemical or mechanical transformation of materials or substances into
other products. These activities occur in installations usually described as
plants, mills, and factories.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Wastewater generated by an industry that includes
solids, liquid, or gaseous waste resulting from an industrial or
manufacturing process, trade, or business or from the development, recovery,
or processing of any natural resources.



   INFILTRATION. The water entering the sewerage system, including
building drains, from the ground through such means as defective pipe,
joints, connections, and manhole walls.



   INFILTRATION/INFLOW. The total quality of water from infiltration and
inflow sources, without distinguishing the source.



   INFLOW. The water discharged into the sewage system, including building
drains, from such sources as roof leaders; cellar, yard, and area drains;
foundation drains; unpolluted cooling water discharges; drains from springs
and swampy areas; manhole covers; cross-connections from storm sewers; catch
basins, surface runoff; street wash water; or drainage.



   INSTITUTIONAL USER. Establishments such as social, charitable,
religious, and educational facilities, including schools, churches,
hospitals, nursing homes, and penal institutions.



   LOAD. Quantities of wastewater characteristics, such as BOD, suspended
solids and other constituents, expressed as milligrams per liter (mg/l) or
pounds per 24 hours (pounds/24 hours).



   MONITORING. The measurement, sometimes continuous, of water or
wastewater quality.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT or NPDES PERMIT.
The instrument issued for the discharge of pollutants from point sources into
manageable waters pursuant to §§ 402 and 405 of the Act, being 33 U.S.C.
§§ 1342 and 1345.



   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface or ground water.



   OPERATION, MAINTENANCE, AND REPLACEMENT COSTS or OM&R COSTS. All costs,
direct or indirect, (except debt retirement costs) necessary to insure the
continued operation, maintenance, replacement, and management of the total
sewage system.



   PH. The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogenation concentration.
The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of
solution.



   PRETREATMENT. The application of physical, chemical, and biological
processes to reduce the amount of pollutants in, or alter the nature of the
pollutant properties in, the wastewater prior to discharging the wastewater
into the sewage system.



   PUBLIC SEWER. Any sewer, pumping station, or forcemain owned or
operated by a unit or agency of government.



      (1)   COLLECTOR SEWER or LATERAL SEWER. A sewer whose primary
purpose is the collection of wastewater from individual users.



      (2)   FORCEMAIN. A pipe in which wastewater is conveyed under
pressure.



      (3)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is the
conveyance of the collected wastewater to the treatment facility.



      (4)   PUMPING STATION or LIFT STATION. A facility provided in
the public sewer system to pump wastewater to a higher elevation.



   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of
the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such
works were designed and constructed.



   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to convey only sanitary or sanitary
and industrial wastewater, and to which the introduction of infiltration and
inflow is intentionally limited.



   SANITARY WASTEWATER or SANITARY SEWAGE. A combination of liquid- and
water-carried wastes discharged from toilets and other sanitary plumbing
facilities.



   SEWAGE or WASTEWATER. The water-carried waste products from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial establishments, and institutions, including
the excrementitious or other discharges from the bodies of humans or animals,
together with such infiltration and inflow as may be present.



   SEWAGE SYSTEM. The overall system of public sewers and the wastewater
treatment facility, provided for the means of collecting, conveying,
treating, and disposing of wastewater and the system of pipelines, conduits,
pumping stations, forcemains, and all other devices and appliances
appurtenant thereto for the purpose of collecting or conveying sewage,
industrial wastes, or other wastes to a point of treatment and disposal.



   SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The method of cost recovery whereby the city
derives the funds to meet debt retirement costs and operation, maintenance,
and replacement costs for the sewerage system and treatment facility.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user of the wastewater
treatment facility whose flow:



      (1)   Exceeds 25,000 gallons per average work day;



      (2)   Has exceeded 5% of the total flow received at the
treatment plant during any day in the previous year;



      (3)   Whose waste contains a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts,
as defined by § 307(a) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317; or



      (4)   Whose discharge has a significant effect, either
individually or in combination with other contributing industries, on the
city’s sewage system or the quality of the effluent.



   SLUG. Any discharge of wastewater which, in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any period longer than 15
minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration, quantity, or
flows during normal concentration.



   STORM SEWER. A sewer which carries stormwater or surface water but from
which sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water, is
excluded.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS or SS. Solids that float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtration conducted in accordance with standard procedures.



   TREATMENT FACILITY or TREATMENT PLANT. The structures, equipment,
devices, and processes required for the reduction, storage, treatment,
separation, and disposal of sewage and industrial wastes and the handling and
disposal of accumulated residual solids.



   USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which a treatment facility, or
portions thereof, will be operated.



   USER. Any person, whether municipal or otherwise, discharging into the
sewage system.



   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of a treatment facility to
recover the user’s proportionate share of the costs of operation,
maintenance, and replacement of such facility.



   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water,
either continuously or intermittently.



(2006 Code, § 3.30)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 51.02  CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS; PROHIBITIONS.



   It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste; nor shall sewage or other
polluted water be discharged to any natural outlet or watercourse, except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the subsequent
provisions in this section and the NPDES permit. Except as hereinafter
provided, no privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage shall be constructed or
maintained within the city or its jurisdiction; sewer connections shall be
required to all premises in accordance with § 130.03.



(2006 Code, § 3.30)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)  Penalty,
see § 50.99



Cross-reference:



   Water and sewer connection required, see, § 130.03



§ 51.03  BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to uncover, make
any connections with, or open into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer,
or appurtenance thereof, without first obtaining a written permit from the
city. Building sewer connection permits shall be issued only after approval
of an application for permit filed with the City Administrator and
accompanied by any plans, specifications, or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the Council. Industrial users seeking connection
to the sewer system, as a condition of permit issuance, shall provide
information describing the characteristics, constituents, and quantity of the
discharge. Permits will be issued only if it can be demonstrated that
downstream sewage system facilities have sufficient reserve capacity to
accept the additional, anticipated flow and load.



   (B)   All costs and expense incident to the installation and
connection of a building sewer shall be borne by the owner, who shall also
indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation.



      (1)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be
provided for each and every building, except where installation circumstances
preclude the implementation of this requirement; in which case the Council
may allow an alternate installation. Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are determined, by examination
and test by the city, to meet all requirements of this section.



      (2)   The size, kind, depth, slope, alignment, and methods to
be used for building sewer installation, and the connection of the building
sewer into the public sewer, shall comply with the requirements of the State
Building and Plumbing Codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the
city. The minimum size pipe, when placed underground, shall be four inches in
diameter. Building sewer connections to public sewer shall be demonstrated by
testing to be gas-tight and water-tight. All excavations for building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to
protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, boulevards, and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a
manner satisfactory to the city.



      (3)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought
to the building at an elevation below the lowest floor. In existing
buildings, in which the lowest, served floor of the building is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage may be lifted by an
approved means for discharge into the building sewer. It is unlawful for any
person to make a connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains,
areaway drains, or other sources of groundwater or surface runoff to a
building sewer, or to any interior plumbing system connected directly or
indirectly to the building sewer or the public sewer.



(2006 Code, § 3.30)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)  Penalty,
see § 50.99



§ 51.04  USE OF PUBLIC SEWER.



   All uses of the public sewer shall comply with the following.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge, or cause to be
discharged, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff,
sub-surface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial
process water to a sanitary sewer. Stormwater and all other non-polluted
drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as
storm sewers, or to natural outlets and watercourses. Industrial cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the
city, to a storm sewer, natural outlet, or watercourse.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described water or wastes to any public sewer:



      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas;



      (2)   Any water containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injury or interfere with any treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or do harm to the
water receiving the wastewater treatment plant effluent, consistent with §
307(A) of the Act;



      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or
higher than 9.5, or having corrosive properties capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel involved with the sewage system;



      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such
size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or interference
to, ashes, cinders, shavings, sand, mud, straw, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails
and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and the like, either whole or ground
by garbage grinders;



      (5)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature in excess of
150°F (65°C);



      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing fats, oils, or grease,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F
(0°C and 65°C); or



      (7)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded so that
all particles are carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than three-eights-inch
in any direction.



   (C)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause
to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or
wastes, if it appears likely in the opinion of the city that such wastes can
harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb,
public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming the opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the city will give consideration to such
factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of
the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, the
city’s NPDES permit, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies.



      (2)   The substances prohibited are:



         (a)   Any waters or wastes containing strong, acid, iron
pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;



         (b)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium,
copper, zinc, or similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes
exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works
exceeds the limits as may be established by the city for such materials;



         (c)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other
taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits
which may be established by the city as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other
public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;



         (d)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such
half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



         (e)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of
0.0005 mg/l as Hg at any time except as permitted by the city in compliance
with applicable state and federal regulations;



         (f)   Any cyanide in excess of 0.0025 mg/l at any time
except as permitted by the city in compliance with applicable state and
federal regulations;



         (g)   Materials which exert or cause:



            1.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended
solids (such as, but not limited to, fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime
residues) or dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride
and sodium sulfate);



            2.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not
limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);



            3.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or
chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load
on the sewage treatment works; or



            4.   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of
wastes constituting “slugs” as defined in § 51.01.



         (h)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are
not amenable to treatment to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.



   (D)   (1)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are
proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters or wastes
contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in divisions
(B) and (C) above, and/or which are in violation of the standards for
pretreatment provided in 40 C.F.R. pt. 403, as amended, and which in the
judgment of the city may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard
to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may:



         (a)   Reject the wastes;



         (b)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition
for discharge to the public sewers;



         (c)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or



         (d)   Require payment to cover the added costs of
handling and treating the wastes or the sludge therefrom, not covered by
existing sewer charges under the provisions of division (E) below.



      (2)   If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of such plants and equipment shall
be subject to review and approval of the city and subject to the requirements
of all applicable codes, provisions of this code of ordinances, and laws.



   (E)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand,
or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be located as
to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.



   (F)   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided,
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation
by the owner at his or her expense.



   (G)   If, and when required by the city, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly
and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with the plans
approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or
her expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and
accessible. Access to the control manhole shall be provided at all reasonable
times for the purpose of inspection, sampling, or other performance of duty
by city or regulatory agency personnel.



   (H)    (1)   Duly authorized employees or agents of the city,
bearing proper identification and credentials, shall be permitted to enter
all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing pertinent to discharges to the sewer system.



      (2)   City employees and agents are authorized to obtain
information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on
the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater system; except that, if
the industry establishes that the revelation to the public of the information
in question might result in an advantage to competition, the industry may
withhold such information.



      (3)   City employees and agents shall similarly be permitted
to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly
negotiated agreement, for the purpose of inspection, testing, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage
system lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on
said easement shall be undertaken in full accordance with the terms of the
duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.



   (I)   (1)   The owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements,
tests, and analysis of waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this
section and any special conditions for discharge established by the city or
regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge.



      (2)   The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analysis
to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city, but no less
than once per year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the
constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the
federal, state, and local standards are being met.



      (3)   The owner shall report the results of measurements and
laboratory analysis to the city at such times and in such manner as
prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements,
analysis, and reporting required by the city. At such times as deemed
necessary, the city reserves the right to take measurements and samples for
analysis by an outside laboratory service.



   (J)   All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics
of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this section shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole, provided, or
upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to
be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which
the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property.



   (K)   No statement contained in this division (K) shall be construed
as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment
therefor, in accordance with division (E) above, and the pretreatment
requirements outlined in 40 C.F.R. pt. 403, as amended.



   (L)   It is unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully, or
negligently break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.



   (M)   Any person found violating any provision of this division (M)
shall be served written notice by the city stating the nature of said
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof.



   (N)   Each residential household, commercial establishment,
industry, or other person shall pay to the city the amounts established for
sewer service, as determined in accordance with division (E) above. Any
building which is privately owned, whether occupied or not, shall be subject
to this payment unless the water service is discontinued.



(2006 Code, § 3.30)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)  Penalty,
see § 51.99



§ 51.05  SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.



   The sewer service charge for the use of, and for the service supplied
by, the sewage of the city shall consist of the sum of a user charge for
operation, maintenance, and replacement; a debt retirement charge; and a
surcharge, if applicable.



   (A)   The user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by
water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having concentrations equal to,
or less than, the following:



      (1)   A five-day, 20°C biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of 245
mg/l; and



      (2)   A suspended solids (SS) content of 230 mg/l.



 

The charge shall be computed as follows: Unit costs for flow, BOD, and SS
shall be calculated by allocating the total annual OM&R costs to the three
parameters in proportion to that share of the cost attributable to each. The
user charge shall be the sum of the products obtained by multiplying the unit
costs by the flow, BOD, and SS constituents in 100 cubic feet of domestic
waste, as follows.


UC = FC + BC    (BA)  + SC (SA)
   F      B        S


Where:
UC  =  User charge per 100 cubic feet of wastewater
FC  =  The portion of the annual OM&R cost attributable to flow
F    =  Total flow to be received at the treatment plant in a given year,
in 100 C.F.
BC  =  The portion of the annual OM&R cost attributable to BOD
BA  =  The number of pounds of BOD in 100 C.F. of domestic flow (153
pounds/100 C.F.)
B    =  Total BOD to be received at the treatment plant in given year, in
pounds
SC  =  The portion of the annual OM&R cost attributable to SS
SA  = The number of pounds of BOD in 100 C.F. of domestic flow (144
pounds/100 C.F.)
S    =  Total SS to be received at the treatment plant in a given year, in
pounds



 



   (B)   Debt retirement charges shall be based on water usage for
wastes having concentrations equal to or less than those listed in division
(A) above. Debt retirement unit costs for flow, BOD, and suspended solids
shall be calculated by allocating the total annual debt retirement costs to
the three parameters in proportion to that share of the cost attributable to
each.



 

The debt retirement charge shall be the sum of the products obtained by
multiplying the unit costs by the flow, BOD, and SS constituents in 100 C.F.
of domestic waste, as follows:

DC = FD + BD          (BA) + SD (SA)
   F      B         S


Where:
DC   =   Debt retirement charge per 100 C.F. of wastewater
FD   =   The portion of the annual debt retirement costs attributable
to flow
F   =   Total flow to be received at the treatment plant in a given
year, in 100 C.F.
BD   =   The portion of the annual debt retirement costs attributable
to BOD
BA   =   The number of pounds of BOD in 100 C.F. of domestic flow


Where:
B   =   Total BOD to be received at the treatment plant in a given
year, in pounds
SD   =   The portion of the annual debt retirement costs attributable
to SS
SA   =   The number of pounds of SS in 100 C.F. of domestic flow
S   =   Total SS to be received at the treatment plant in a given year,
in pounds



 



   (C)   A surcharge shall be levied to all users whose waste
discharges exceed the maximum wasteload contributions for BOD (1.53
pounds/100 C.F.) and SS (1.44 pounds/100 C.F.) listed in division (A) above.
The surcharge shall be based on applying the user charge unit charges for BOD
and SS to the amount of each of these constituents discharged by the user in
excess of 1.53 pounds/100 C.F. and 1.44 pounds/100 C.F., respectively, as
follows.



 

XC =BC (BX -1.53) + SC (SX -1.44)
          B              S

Where:
XC   =   Amount of surcharge per 100 cubic feet of wastewater
BX   =   The BOD wasteload contribution in excess of 1.53 pounds/100
C.F.
SX   =   The suspended solids wasteload contribution in excess of 1.44
pounds/100 C.F.
All other notations as in divisions (A) and (B) above



 



   (D)   Sewer service charges shall be computed by summing the
component charges and multiplying by the recorded wastewater discharge, as
follows.



 


SSC = V (UC + DC + XC)


Where:
SSC   =   The sewer service charge per billing
V   =    Volume of wastewater recorded during the billing period
All other notations as in divisions (A) through (C) above



 



(2006 Code, § 3.30)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 51.06  METERING.



   Charges shall be computed on the basis of the quantity of water used by
user, as measured by the city water meter on the premises; provided, however,
that in determining the charge to be paid for premises occupied by
residential users, the water meter readings for the first quarter of each
year may be used for the computation of sewer service charges for each
billing period of that year.



   (A)   If a portion of the water furnished to any premises is not
directly or indirectly discharged into the city’s sewage system, the
quantity of such water shall be deducted in computing the sewer service
charge; provided, that a separate meter may be required to be installed and
operated to register the quantity so not discharged to the sewage system.
Such adjustment may be made as shall be fair and equitable in order to
determine the sewer service charge, but until such adjustment shall be
effected, that water consumption basis hereinbefore prescribed shall remain
in full force and effect.



   (B)   If any premises discharges wastewater into the city’s sewage
system, either directly or indirectly, and obtains part or all of the water
used thereon from sources other than the city, and the water so obtained is
not measured by a meter of equivalent specifications to the meters used by
the city, then in such case, the city shall permit the discharge of
wastewater into its sewage system only when the owner of such premises, or
some other interested party shall, at his or her own expense, install and
maintain, for the purpose of metering such water supply, a water meter of
equivalent specifications to those installed by the city in connection with
the city water system. Each water meter shall be installed to measure all
water received on such, and the sewer service charges shall be computed from
the quantity of water received, as measured by such meter.



(2006 Code, § 3.30)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 51.07  BILLING.



   (A)   sewer service charges shall be computed and billed monthly;
except that the city may, if it so chooses, render bills to residential users
on a quarterly basis. The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the
user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the
service to such premises, and service is furnished by the city only upon this
condition.



   (B)   Users of the city’s sewer system shall annually be advised,
in conjunction with a regular billing, regarding the portion of the sewer
service charge which is attributable to the operation, maintenance, and
replacement costs associated with the treatment facility.



(2006 Code, § 3.30)



§ 51.08  REVENUES AND ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the
sewage system shall be deposited in a sewage fund. All such revenues and
monies shall be held by the City Administrator separate and apart from their
private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the city. The
City Administrator shall receive all such revenues from the sewage system,
and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system, as
the same may be delivered to him or her and deposit the same in the amount of
the fund designated as the City Sewage Fund. Said City Administrator shall
administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by statute.



   (B)   (1)   The City Administrator shall establish a proper
system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in
which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative
to the sewage system, and at regular annual intervals he or she shall cause
to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show
the receipts and disbursements of the sewage system. In addition to the
customary operating statements, the annual report shall also reflect the
revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater facilities, including a
replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service charges under the cost
recovery system do in fact meet the requirements of this section.



      (2)   In this regard, the financial information to be shown in
the audit report shall include the following:



         (a)   Flow data showing total gallons received at the
wastewater plant for the current fiscal year;



         (b)   Billing data to show total number of gallons
billed;



         (c)   Debt retirement cost for the succeeding fiscal
year;



         (d)   Operation, maintenance, and replacement funding
requirements for the succeeding fiscal year; and



         (e)   Number of users discharging non-domestic wastes
(including users) and volume of waste discharged.



      (3)   The City Administrator shall annually review the user
charge system to accomplish the following:



         (a)   Maintain the proportionate distribution of
operation, maintenance, and replacement costs among users and user classes;



         (b)   Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total
operation, maintenance, and replacement costs necessary for the treatment
facility; and



         (c)   If necessary, apply excess revenues from a class
of users to the costs of operation and maintenance attributable to that class
for the next year and adjust the class rates accordingly.



      (4)   The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or its
authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers,
and records of the city which are applicable to the city system of user
charges for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts, and
transactions thereof to insure compliance with the terms of the special and
general conditions to any federal grant.



(2006 Code, § 3.30)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Pursuant to § 51.04(M), the offender who, within the period
of time stated in such notice, does not permanently cease all violations
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be fined
in an amount not to exceed $100 for each violation. Each day in which the
violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition, any person
violating any provision of this division (M) shall become liable to the city
for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of said
violation.



(2006 Code, § 3.30)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



CHAPTER 52:  WATER SERVICE



Section



   52.01   Deficiency of water and shutting off water



   52.02   Repair of leaks



   52.03   Abandoned service penalties



   52.04   Service pipes



   52.05   Private water supplies



   52.06   Restricted hours for sprinkling



   52.07   Private fire hose connections



   52.08   Opening hydrants



   52.09   Unmetered service



   52.10   Code requirement



   52.11   Connection fees



§ 52.01  DEFICIENCY OF WATER AND SHUTTING OFF WATER.



   The city is not liable for any deficiency or failure in the supply of
water to customers whether occasioned by shutting the water off for the
purpose of making repairs or connections or by any other cause whatever. In
case of fire, or alarm of fire, water may be shut off to ensure a supply for
fire fighting. In making repairs or construction of new works, water may be
shut off at any time and kept off so long as may be necessary.



(2006 Code, § 3.40)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 52.02  REPAIR OF LEAKS.



   (A)   It is the responsibility of the consumer or owner to maintain
the water service from the main into the house or other building. In case of
failure upon the part of any consumer or owner to repair any leak occurring
in his or her service pipe within 24 hours after written notice has been
given the owner or occupant of the premises, the water may be shut off and
will not be turned on until a reconnection charge has been paid and the water
service has been repaired.



   (B)   When the waste of water is great or when damage is likely to
result from the leak, the water will be turned off or disconnected if the
repair is not proceeded with immediately. In the event of noncompliance with
this section necessitating disconnection by the city, the consumer or owner
of the premises shall be billed therefor and the amount thereof shall become
a part of the utility charges.



(2006 Code, § 3.40)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 52.03  ABANDONED SERVICE PENALTIES.



   All service installations connected to the water system that have been
abandoned or, for any reason, have become useless for further service shall
be disconnected at the main. The owner of the premises, served by this
service, shall pay the cost of the excavation. The city shall inspect and
approve the actual disconnection. When new buildings are erected on the site
of old ones, and it is desired to increase the old water service, a new
permit shall be taken out. It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow
any service pipe to be hammered or squeezed together at the ends to stop the
flow of water, or to save expense in improperly removing such pipe from the
main. Also, such improper disposition shall be borne by the person causing or
allowing such work to be performed.



(2006 Code, § 3.40)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)  Penalty,
see § 50.99



§ 52.04  SERVICE PIPES.



   (A)   Every service pipe shall be of a material and rating which is
in accordance with city regulations and all other applicable codes and must
be laid in such a manner as to prevent rupture by settlement. The service
pipe shall be placed not less than eight feet below the surface in all cases
so arranged as to prevent rupture and stoppage by freezing. Frozen service
pipes between the main and the building shall be the responsibility of the
owner.



   (B)   Service pipes shall extend from the curb stops to the inside
of the building; or if not taken into a building then to the hydrant or other
fixtures which they are intended to supply. Valves, the same size as the
service pipe, shall be placed close to the inside wall of the building, on
both sides of the meter and well-protected from freezing.



   (C)   Joints on copper tubing shall be kept to a minimum. Not more
than one joint shall be used for a service up to seventy feet in length. All
joints shall be left uncovered until water pressure is applied and inspected.
Minimum size connection with the water mains shall be three-fourths inch in
diameter.



(2006 Code, § 3.40)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 52.05  PRIVATE WATER SUPPLIES.



   No water pipe of the city water system shall be connected with any
pump, well, pipe, tank, or any device that is connected with any other source
of water supply and when such are found, the city shall notify the owner or
occupant to disconnect the same and, if not immediately done, the city water
shall be turned off. Before any new connections to the city system are
permitted, the city shall ascertain that no cross-connections will exist when
the new connection is made. When a building is connected to city water, the
private water supply may be used only for such purposes as the city may allow.



(2006 Code, § 3.40)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)  Penalty,
see § 50.99



§ 52.06  RESTRICTED HOURS FOR SPRINKLING.



   Whenever the city shall determine that a shortage of water threatens
the city, it may limit the times and hours during which water may be used
from the city water system for lawn and garden sprinkling, irrigation, car
washing, air conditioning, and other uses, or either or any of them. It is
unlawful for any water consumer to cause or permit water to be used in
violation of such determination after public announcement thereof has been
made through the news media specifically indicating the restrictions thereof.



(2006 Code, § 3.40)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)  Penalty,
see § 50.99



§ 52.07  PRIVATE FIRE HOSE CONNECTIONS.



   Owners of structures with self-contained fire protection systems may
apply for and obtain permission to connect the street mains with hydrants,
large pipes, and hose couplings, for use in case of fire only, at their own
installation expense and at such rates as the Council may adopt by resolution
as herein provided.



(2006 Code, § 3.40)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 52.08  OPENING HYDRANTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, other than members of the Fire
Department or other person duly authorized by the city, in pursuance of
lawful purpose, to open any fire hydrant or attempt to draw water from the
same or in any manner interfere therewith.



   (B)   It is also unlawful for any person so authorized to deliver or
suffer to be delivered to any other person any hydrant key or wrench, except
for the purposes strictly pertaining to their lawful use.



(2006 Code, § 3.40)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)  Penalty,
see § 50.99



§ 52.09  UNMETERED SERVICE.



   (A)   Unmetered service may be provided for construction, flooding
skating rinks, and any other purpose. Such service shall be at a duly adopted
rate.



   (B)   Where it is difficult or impossible to accurately measure the
amount of water taken, unmetered service may be provided and the unmetered
rate applied; provided, however, that by acceptance thereof the consumer
agrees to have the city estimate the water used.



   (C)   In so estimating, the city shall consider the use to which the
water is put and the length of time of unmetered service.



(2006 Code, § 3.40)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 52.10  CODE REQUIREMENT.



   All piping, connections, and appurtenances shall be installed and
performed strictly in accordance with the State Plumbing Code. Failure to
install or maintain the same in accordance therewith, or failure to have or
permit required inspections shall, upon discovery by the city, be an
additional ground for termination of water service to any consumer.



(2006 Code, § 3.40)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 52.11  CONNECTION FEES.



   Service shall be furnished only after proper application has been made
and connection fees paid in full.



(2006 Code, § 3.40)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



CHAPTER 53:  ELECTRICAL SERVICE



Section



   53.01   Code requirement



   53.02   Services



   53.03   Electrical installations



   53.04   Ancillary services provided by demand response resources



§ 53.01  CODE REQUIREMENT.



   All wiring, connections, and appurtenances shall be installed and
performed strictly in accordance with the National Electrical Code. Failure
to install or maintain the same in accordance therewith, or failure to have
or permit required inspections shall, upon discovery by the city, be an
additional ground for termination of electrical service to any consumer.



(2006 Code, § 3.50)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 53.02  SERVICES.



   In new or changed service installations, the decision as to whether it
shall be placed underground, overhead, or, the financial responsibility of
the city or the consumer, shall be guided by the written policy of the city.



(2006 Code, § 3.50)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 53.03  ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS.



   All electrical installations shall comply with the following, where
applicable.



   (A)   Motors of 20 HP or more must have line compensators on same;
provided, however, that the city may, at its option, make an exception if the
total connected motor load required is smaller than the consumer connected
load, and the motor starting current is less than the current corresponding
to the consumer’s total connected load.



   (B)   All motor installations of over one-half HP shall be served by
a minimum of 240 volts and all motors in excess of five HP shall be
three-phase.



   (C)   The city shall make an installation charge for extraordinary
expenses required by a consumer.



(2006 Code, § 3.50)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 53.04  ANCILLARY SERVICES PROVIDED BY DEMAND RESPONSE RESOURCES.



   (A)   The city/electric utility or its authorized designee is the
sole entity permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail customers
served by the public power system directly into any Commission-approved
(Federal Energy Regulatory Commission) independent system operator’s or
regional transmission organization’s organized electric markets.



   (B)   Retail customers served by the city/electric utility wishing
to bid their demand response into a Commission-approved independent system
operator’s or regional transmission organization’s organized electric
markets may do so by participating in the program established by the public
power system or its authorized designee. Retail customers are not permitted
to participate in the demand response program of any other entity without the
express prior authorization of the public power system.



   (C)   (1)   The city/electric utility or its authorized designee
is the sole entity permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail
customers served by city/electric utility directly into any
Commission-approved independent system operator’s or regional transmission
organization’s organized markets for energy imbalance, spinning reserves,
supplemental reserves, reactive power, and voltage control, or regulation and
frequency response ancillary services (or its functional equivalent in the
Commission-approved independent system operator’s or regional transmission
organization’s tariff).



      (2)   Retail customers served by the city/electric utility
wishing to bid their demand response into a Commission-approved independent
system operator’s or regional transmission organization’s organized
markets for energy imbalance, spinning reserves, supplemental reserves,
reactive power, and voltage control, or regulation and frequency response
ancillary services (or its functional equivalent in the Commission-approved
independent system operator’s or regional transmission organization’s
tariff) may do so by participating in the authorized designee. Retail
customers are not permitted to participate in the demand response program of
any other entity without the express prior authorization of the city/electric
utility.



   (D)   This section shall take effect in accord with law.



(Ord. 177, 3rd Series, passed 6-9-2009)



CHAPTER 54:  REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL



Section



   54.01   Definition



   54.02   Storage and transporting refuse



   54.03   Containers



   54.04   Collection and disposal of refuse



   54.05   Property of the city



   54.06   Disposal site



§ 54.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   REFUSE. Includes all drained organic material resulting from the
preparation of food and spoiled or decayed food from any source, bottles,
cans, glassware, paper or paper products, crockery, ashes, rags, and
discarded clothing, and tree or lawn clippings.



(2006 Code, § 3.60)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 54.02  STORAGE AND TRANSPORTING REFUSE.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to store refuse except as herein
provided.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to transport refuse over any
street, for hire, except by special permit from the Council, or acting within
the course and scope of a written contract with the city, or his or her
employment with the city.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to transport refuse on any
street unless it is carried in a vehicle equipped with a leak-proof body or
container and completely covered with a heavy canvas or top to prevent loss
of contents.



(2006 Code, § 3.60)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)  Penalty,
see § 50.99



§ 54.03  CONTAINERS.



   All refuse shall be stored in clean, rust-resistant, water-tight,
non-absorbent, and washable closed containers, approved for the purpose by
the city; provided, however, that tree clippings may be stored in tied
bundles no longer than four feet and lawn clippings and paper may be stored
in containers protected from wind and other elements.



(2006 Code, § 3.60)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 54.04  COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.



   The city shall provide for collection and disposal of all refuse in a
sanitary manner to ensure the health, safety, and general welfare of its
residents, under such terms and conditions as the city may, from time to
time, deem appropriate.



(2006 Code, § 3.60)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 54.05  PROPERTY OF THE CITY.



   All materials at public disposal sites are the property of the city. It
is unlawful for any person to separate, collect, carry off, or dispose of
such materials except by direction of the city.



(2006 Code, § 3.60)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)  Penalty,
see § 50.99



§ 54.06  DISPOSAL SITE.



   Privately-hauled non-refuse disposal from households, and refuse and
non-refuse disposal from commercial establishments, may be deposited at the
disposal site upon payment of charges therefor.



(2006 Code, § 3.60)  (Ord. 88, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



      71.   PARKING REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 70:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section



   70.01   State statutes adopted by reference



   70.02   Truck route



   70.03   Exhibition driving



   70.04   Driving through private property to avoid signal



   70.05   Snowmobile traffic control and regulations



   70.06   Special vehicles



   70.07   Skateboards, roller skates, and bicycles



 



   70.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Parking Regulations, see Ch. 71



   Streets and Sidewalks, see Ch. 90



§ 70.01  STATE STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   M.S. Ch. 168, 169, and 171, as they may be amended from time to time,
are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as
fully as if set out at length herein, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, or in Chs. 72 or 90, the regulatory and procedural provisions of
M.S. Chs. 168, 169 (commonly referred to as the Highway Traffic Regulation
Act), and 171, as they may be amended from time to time,  are hereby adopted
and incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at
length herein, including the penalty provisions thereof.



(2006 Code, § 8.01)  (Ord. 164, 3rd Series, passed 9-20-2005)



§ 70.02  TRUCK ROUTE.



   (A)   Generally. It is unlawful for any person to drive a tractor,
agricultural implement, truck (other than a pick-up truck of one-ton capacity
or less), truck-trailer, tractor-trailer or truck-tractor, in through
traffic, upon any street except those which have been designated and
sign-posted as truck routes.



   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      THROUGH TRAFFIC. Originating without the city and with a
destination without the city, as distinguished from LOCAL TRAFFIC which means
traffic either originating or having a destination within the city.



(2006 Code, § 8.10)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.03  EXHIBITION DRIVING.



   (A)   Prima facie evidence. It is prima facie evidence of exhibition
driving when a motor vehicle stops, starts, accelerates, decelerates, or
turns at an unnecessary rate of speed so as to cause tires to squeal, gears
to grind, soil to be thrown, engine backfire, fishtailing, or skidding, or,
as to two-wheeled or three-wheeled motor vehicles, the front wheel to lose
contact with the ground or roadway surface.



   (B)   Unlawful act.



      (1)   Generally. It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any
exhibition driving on any street, parking lot, or other public or private
property, except when an emergency creates necessity for such operation to
prevent injury to persons or damage to property; provided, that this section
shall not apply to driving on a racetrack.



      (2)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the
following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         RACETRACK. Any track or premises whereon motorized
vehicles, horses, dogs, or other animals or fowl legally compete in a race or
timed contest for an audience, the members of which have directly or
indirectly paid a consideration for admission.



(2006 Code, § 8.11)  (Ord. 21, 3rd Series, passed 6-18-1981)  Penalty, see
§ 70.99



§ 70.04  DRIVING THROUGH PRIVATE PROPERTY TO AVOID SIGNAL.



   It is unlawful for any person to avoid obedience to any traffic-control
device by driving upon or through any private property.



(2006 Code, § 8.12)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.05  SNOWMOBILE TRAFFIC CONTROL AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DEADMAN THROTTLE or SAFETY THROTTLE. A device which, when
pressure is removed from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor
to be disengaged from the driving mechanism.



      NATURAL TERRAIN. Areas other than roadways or driveways (private
or public), parking lots and other areas the surface of which has been
intentionally modified for motor vehicle operation thereon.



      OPERATE. To ride in or on and control the operation of a
snowmobile.



      OPERATOR. Every person who operates or is in actual physical
control of a snowmobile.



      OWNER. A person, other than a lien holder having the property in
or title to a snowmobile entitled to the use or possession thereof.



      SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow
or ice steered by skis or runners.



   (B)   Scope of application. Notwithstanding provisions of this
chapter to the contrary, this section shall apply to control of traffic and
regulation of that certain class of vehicles falling within the definition of
snowmobiles as to matters set forth herein. All provisions of this chapter,
not relating to matters herein stated, apply as equally to snowmobiles as
other vehicles.



   (C)   Operation. Except as otherwise herein permitted, it is
unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile, not licensed as required by
state statute, as follows:



      (1)   On the portion of any right-of-way of any public
highway, street, road, trail, or alley used for motor vehicle travel, except
upon the most right-hand lane of a street or alley and may in passing or
making a left-hand turn, operate on other lanes which are used for vehicle
traffic in the same direction. A snowmobile may also be operated upon the
ditch bottom or the outside bank of trunk, county state-aid, and county
highways where such highways are so configured within the corporate limits;



      (2)   On a public sidewalk provided for pedestrian travel;



      (3)   On boulevards within any public right-of-way;



      (4)   On private property of another without specific
permission of the owner or person in control of said property;



      (5)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper
under all surrounding circumstances, but in no event to exceed 15 mph;



      (6)   At any place in a careless, reckless, or negligent
manner or heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or in a
manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger or cause injury or damage
to any person or property;



      (7)   Closer than 100 feet to any dwelling which is usually
occupied by one or more persons, except when operated on a continuous line of
travel to or from the place where the snowmobile is normally kept or stored,
to areas where snowmobiling is authorized;



      (8)   So as to tow any person or thing, except through use of
a rigid towbar attached to the rear of the snowmobile;



      (9)   At any place while under the influence of alcohol or
drugs as defined in M.S. § 84.91, as it may be amended from time to time, is
hereby adopted and incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully
as if set out at length herein; or



      (10)   Within 100 feet of any pedestrian, fisherman, skating
rink, or sliding area where the operation would conflict with the use or
endanger other persons or property.



   (D)   Special orders. In addition to the regulations provided in
division (C) above, it is unlawful to operate a snowmobile on any public
place where prohibited by order of the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police
shall have the power, by written order, to prohibit such operation whenever
in his or her discretion, the same would be likely to produce damage to
property or endanger the safety or repose of other persons. Such areas shall
be appropriately sign-posted before such order shall become effective.



   (E)   Direct crossings. A snowmobile may make a direct crossing of a
street or highway, except an interstate highway or freeway, provided:



      (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90
degrees to the direction of the street or highway and at a place where no
obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;



      (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before
crossing the shoulder or main traveled way;



      (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming
traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard;



      (4)   In crossing a divided street or highway, the crossing is
made only at an intersection of such street or highway with another public
street or highway; or



      (5)   If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half
hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced
visibility, only if both front and rear lights are on.



   (F)   Yielding the right-of-way. It is unlawful for any person
operating a snowmobile to enter any intersection without yielding the
right-of-way to any vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection, or so close
to the intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard.



   (G)   Persons under 18.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any persons under the age of 14 years
to operate a snowmobile on streets, in city parks or other public land, or
the roadway surface of highways, or make a direct crossing of a trunk, county
state-aid, or county highway as the operator of a snowmobile. A person 14
years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age, may operate a
snowmobile as permitted under this section, only if he or she has in his or
her immediate possession a safety certificate issued by the Commissioner, as
provided by M.S. § 84.872, as it may be amended from time to time.



      (2)   It is unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile to permit
the snowmobile to be operated contrary to the provisions of this division (G).



   (H)   Equipment. It is unlawful for any person to operate a
snowmobile any place within the city unless it is equipped with the following:



      (1)   Standard mufflers which are properly attached and which
reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for
operation. No person shall use a muffler cut-out, by-pass, straight pipe, or
similar device on a snowmobile;



      (2)   Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop
and hold the snowmobile under any condition of operation;



      (3)   A safety or so-called “deadman” throttle in
operating condition;



      (4)   When operated between the hours of one-half hour after
sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or at a time of reduced visibility, at
least one clear lamp attached to the front, with sufficient intensity to
reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead during
the hours of darkness and under normal atmospheric conditions. Such head lamp
shall be so aimed that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of an
oncoming snowmobile operator. It shall also be equipped with at least one red
tail lamp having a minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to exhibit a
red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during the
hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions; or



      (5)   Reflective material at least 16 square inches on each
side, forward of the handlebars, or steering device of a snowmobile and at
the highest practical point on any towed object, as to reflect light at a
90-degree angle.



   (I)   Locking vehicles. It is unlawful for any person to leave a
snowmobile on a public place unless he or she shall lock the ignition, remove
the key, and take the same with him or her.



   (J)   Emergencies. Notwithstanding the prohibition of operating a
snowmobile upon a roadway to the contrary, a snowmobile may be operated on a
public thoroughfare in an emergency during the period of time when, at
locations where, snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile
impractical.



   (K)   Animals. It is unlawful to intentionally drive, chase, run
over, or kill any animal with a snowmobile or ATV.



   (L)   Signal from officer to stop. It is unlawful for a snowmobile
operator or ATV operator, after having received a visual or audible signal
from any law enforcement officer, to come to a stop, to:



      (1)   Operate a snowmobile in willful or wanton disregard of
such signal;



      (2)   Interfere with or endanger the law enforcement officer
or any other person or vehicle; or



      (3)   Increase his or her speed or attempt to flee or elude
the officer.



   (M)   Headgear required. When operating a snowmobile, it is unlawful
for any operator and any passenger to fail to wear protective headgear which
complies with standards established by the Commissioner of Public Safety.



   (N)   Certain statutes adopted. M.S. §§ 84.81 through 84.91, as
they may be amended from time to time, together with rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder, are  hereby adopted and incorporated as part of this
code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein, except as
otherwise provided herein.



(2006 Code, § 8.30)  (Ord. 159, 3rd Series, passed 2-8-2005; Ord. 203, 3rd
Series, passed 2-9-2016)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.06  SPECIAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   Purpose and intent.



      (1)   (a)   The purpose of this section is to provide
reasonable regulations for the use of special and recreational motor vehicles
on public and, in conformance with private property, in the city.



         (b)   This section is not intended to allow what the
Minnesota Statutes prohibit or to prohibit what the Minnesota Statutes
expressly allow.



      (2)   It is intended to ensure the public safety and prevent a
public nuisance.



   (B)   Special vehicles: motorized golf carts, utility task vehicles,
all-terrain vehicles, and mini-trucks.



      (1)   (a)   No person shall operate a motorized golf cart,
utility task vehicle, all-terrain vehicle, or mini-truck on streets, alleys,
sidewalks or other public property without obtaining a permit as provided
herein.



         (b)   Every application for a permit shall be made on a
form supplied by the city and shall contain ail of the following information:



            1.   The name and address of the applicant.



            2.   The nature of the applicant's physical
handicap, if any.



            3.   Model name, make, and year and number of the
motorized golf cart, utility task vehicle, all-terrain vehicle, or mini-truck.



            4.   Current driver's license or reason for not
having a current license.



            5.   Other information as the city may require.



         (c)   The annual permit fee shall be as set by
resolution of the City Council.



         (d)   Permits shall be granted for a period of one year
and may be renewed annually January 1 to December 31.



         (e)   No permit shall be granted or renewed unless the
following conditions are met:



            1.    The applicant must demonstrate that he or
she currently holds or has held a valid Minnesota driver's license to operate
a mini-truck.



            2.   The applicant may be required to submit a
certificate signed by a physician that the applicant is able to safely
operate a motorized golf cart, utility task vehicle, all-terrain vehicle or
mini-trucks on the roadways designated.



            3.   The applicant must provide evidence of
insurance in compliance with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes concerning
insurance coverage for the golf cart, utility task vehicle, all-terrain
vehicle, or mini-truck.



            4.   The applicant has not had his or her driver's
license revoked as the result of criminal proceedings.



         (f)   Motorized golf carts, utility task vehicles,
all-terrain vehicles, and mini-trucks are permitted to operate only on city
streets designated for use of such vehicles by approval of a resolution by a
majority of the members of the City Council. Any area designated shall be
published in the official newspaper of the city in a conspicuous place after
the approval. If an area is changed, the change shall be published in like
manner in the official newspaper of the city. An up-to-date map of any
designated park areas open for special vehicle use shall be kept on file in
the office of the City Administrator, who shall provide on request a copy of
the map together with the applicable rules, regulations, and this section to
each person requesting the information from the city.



         (g)   Except as allowed in division (B)(1)(o), 
motorized golf carts, utility task vehicles and all-terrain vehicles and
mini-trucks may only be operated on designated roadways from sunrise to
sunset. They shall not be operated in inclement weather conditions or at any
time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicles on
the roadway at a distance of 500 feet.



         (f)   Motorized golf carts shall display the slow-moving
vehicle emblem provided for in M.S. § 169.045, as it may be amended from
time to time, when operated on designated roadways.



         (g)   Motorized golf carts, utility task vehicles,
all-terrain vehicles, and mini-trucks shall be equipped with a rear-view
mirror to provide the driver with adequate vision from behind as required by
M.S. § 169.70.



         (h)   The operator of a motorized golf cart, utility
task vehicle, all-terrain vehicle, or mini-truck may cross any street or
highway intersecting a designated roadway.



         (i)   Every person operating a motorized golf cart, a
utility task vehicle, an all-terrain vehicle, or a mini-truck under permit on
designated roadways has all the rights and duties applicable to the driver of
any other vehicle under the provisions of M.S. Ch. 169, as it may be amended
from time to time, except when these provisions cannot reasonably be applied
to motorized golf carts or mini-trucks and except as otherwise specifically
provided in M.S. § 169.045(7), as it may be amended from time to time.



         (j)   The City Council may suspend or revoke a permit
granted hereunder upon a finding that the holder thereof has violated any of
the provisions of this section or M.S. Ch. 169, as it may be amended from
time to time, or if there is evidence that the permit holder cannot safely
operate the motorized golf cart, utility task vehicle, all-terrain vehicle,
or mini-truck on the designated roadways.



         (k)   The number of occupants on the golf cart, utility
task vehicle, all-terrain vehicle, or mini-truck may not exceed the design
occupant load.



         (l)   A special vehicle may only be used for authorized
work activity as designated on the operators permit.



         (m)   Snow removal shall be regarded as an authorized
work activity so long as the permitted vehicle operator provides the Chief of
Police with a list of snow removal locations and the vehicle has snow removal
attachments such as a plow or blade attached to the vehicle. The vehicle used
for snow removal shall display an illuminated safety amber light or a whip
flag with a minimum height of five feet above the rear bumper of the vehicle.
Permitted vehicles may operate between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
and in inclement weather for purposes of snow removal.



         (n)   Special vehicles may not be operated in city parks.



         (o)   No special vehicle may be operated at a speed in
excess of 20 mph.



      (2)   For the purpose of this division, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES. All-terrain vehicle as defined in
M.S. § 84.92 as now existing, or as modified hereafter, including Class 1
and Class 2 all-terrain vehicles.



         MINI-TRUCK. As defined in M.S. § 169.01, subd. 40(a), a
motor vehicle that has four wheels; is propelled by an electric motor with a
rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal combustion engine with a
piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters or less; has a total
dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds; contains an enclosed cabin and a seat for
the vehicle operator; commonly resembles a pickup truck or van, including a
cargo area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle; and was not originally
manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards required of motor
vehicles in the C.F.R. Title 49, §§ 571.101 to 571.404, and successor
requirements. A mini-truck does not include: a neighborhood electric vehicle
or a medium-speed electric vehicle as defined in divisions (C) through (E) of
this section; or a motor vehicle that meets or exceeds the regulations in the
C.F.R. Title 49, § 571.500, as it may be amended from time to time.



         MOTORIZED GOLF CART. Any passenger conveyance being driven
with four wheels with four low-pressure tires that is limited in engine
displacement of less than 800 cubic centimeters and total dry weight less
than 800 pounds.



         OPERATE. To ride in or on and control the operation of a
vehicle referred to herein.



         OWNER. A person, other than a person with a security
interest, having a property interest in or title to an all-terrain vehicle
and entitled to the use and possession of the vehicle.



         PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any real property owned by the city,
including but not limited to, all city parks, city recreational areas, city
streets/roadways.



         PUBLIC ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entire right-of-way of a
public road, including the traveled portions, banks, ditches, shoulders, and
medians of a street/roadway that is not privately owned.



         SNOW REMOVAL. The process of shoveling, blowing, or plowing
snow from roadways, sidewalks, driveways, and walkways.



         UTILITY TASK VEHICLE. As defined by M.S. § 169.045, subd.
1(3), a side-by-side, four-wheel drive, off-road vehicle that has four
wheels, is propelled by an internal combustion engine with a piston
displacement capacity of 1,200 cubic centimeters or less, and has a total dry
weight of 1,800 but less than 2,600 pounds.



      (3)   Authorized city staff may operate city owned motorized
golf carts, utility task vehicles, all-terrain vehicles and mini-trucks
without obtaining a permit within the city on city streets, sidewalks,
trails, rights-of-way, and public property when conducting city business.



      (4)   Mini-truck equipment requirements: A mini-truck may be
operated under permit on designated roadways if it is equipped with all of
the following:



         (a)   At least two headlamps.



         (b)   At least two tail lamps.



         (c)   Front and rear turn-signal lamps.



         (d)   An exterior mirror mounted on the driver's side of
the vehicle and either an exterior mirror mounted on the passenger's side of
the vehicle or an interior mirror.



         (e)   A windshield.



         (f)   A seat belt for the driver and front passenger.



         (g)   A parking brake.



   (C)   Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices.



      (1)   Definition.ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE
means a self-balancing device with two nontandem wheels, designed to
transport not more than one person, and operated by an electric propulsion
system that limits the maximum speed of the device to 15 miles per hour.



      (2)   Rights and responsibilities. Except as otherwise
provided by law, a person operating an electric personal assistive mobility
device has the rights and responsibilities of a pedestrian.



      (3)   Operation.



         (a)   An electric personal assistive mobility device may
be operated on a bicycle path.



         (b)   No person may operate an electric personal
assistive mobility device on a roadway, sidewalk, or bicycle path at a rate
of speed that is not reasonable and prudent under the conditions. Every
person operating an electric personal assistive mobility device on a roadway,
sidewalk, or bicycle path is responsible for becoming and remaining aware of
the actual and potential hazards then existing on the roadway or sidewalk and
must use due care in operating the device.



         (c)   An electric personal assistive mobility device may
be operated on a roadway only under the following circumstances:



            1.   While making a direct crossing of a roadway
in a marked or unmarked crosswalk.



            2.   Where no sidewalk is available.



            3.   Where a sidewalk is so obstructed as to
prevent safe use.



            4.   When so directed by a traffic control device
or by a peace officer.



            5.   Temporarily in order to gain access to a
motor vehicle.



            6.   An electric personal assistive mobility
device may not be operated at any time on a roadway with a posted speed limit
of more than 35 miles per hour except to make a direct crossing of the
roadway in a marked crosswalk.



         (d)   An electric personal assistive mobility device may
not be operated at any time while carrying more than one person.



         (e)   Designated exclusive city streets. The City
Council may, by resolution, designate exclusive city streets within its
jurisdiction where the operation of electric personal assistive mobility
devices is not permitted, provided that any street so designated has a posted
speed limit of more than 35 miles per hour.



         (f)   A person operating an electric personal assistive
mobility device on a sidewalk must yield the right-of-way to pedestrians at
all times. A person operating an electric personal assistive mobility device
on a bicycle path must yield the right-of-way to bicycles at all times.



         (g)   An electric personal assistive mobility device may
not be operated unless the device bears reflectorized material on the front,
back, and wheels, visible at night from 600 feet when illuminated by the
lower beams of headlamps of a motor vehicle.



   (D)   Motorized foot scooters.



      (1)   MOTORIZED FOOT SCOOTER means a device with handlebars
designed to be stood or sat upon by the operator, and powered by an internal
combustion engine or electric motor that is capable of propelling the device
with or without human propulsion, and that has no more than two 12-inch or
smaller diameter wheels and has an engine or motor that is capable of a
maximum speed of 15 miles per hour on a flat surface with not more than 1%
grade in any direction when the motor is engaged. An electric personal
assistive mobility device, a motorized bicycle, an electric-assisted bicycle,
or a motorcycle is not a MOTORIZED FOOT SCOOTER.



      (2)   Operation of a motorized foot scooter on city bicycle
paths, bicycle lanes, bicycle trails, or bikeways is prohibited except as
provided in division (D)(3) below.



      (3)   The City Council may, by resolution, designate specific
bicycle paths, bicycle lanes, bicycle trails, or bikeways as available for
use by motorized foot scooters.



      (4)   Every person operating a motorized foot scooter shall
have all rights and duties applicable to the operator of a bicycle, except in
respect to those provisions relating expressly to motorized foot scooters and
in respect to those provisions of law that by their nature cannot reasonably
be applied to motorized foot scooters.



      (5)   No person may operate a motorized foot scooter upon a
sidewalk, except when necessary to enter or leave adjacent property. No
person may operate a motorized foot scooter that is carrying any person other
than the operator.



      (6)   No person under the age of 12 years may operate a
motorized foot scooter.



      (7)   No person under the age of 18 years may operate a
motorized foot scooter without wearing properly fitted and fastened
protective headgear that complies with standards established by the
Commissioner of Public Safety.



      (8)   A motorized foot scooter must be equipped with a
headlight and a taillight that comply with standards established by the
Commissioner of Public Safety if the vehicle is operated under conditions
when vehicle lights are required by law.



      (9)   A person operating a motorized foot scooter on a roadway
shall ride as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the
roadway, except in the following situations:



         (a)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction.



         (b)   When preparing for a left turn, in which case the
operator shall stop and dismount at the right-hand curb or right edge of the
roadway, and shall complete the turn by crossing the roadway on foot, subject
to restrictions placed by law on pedestrians.



         (c)   When reasonably necessary to avoid impediments or
conditions that make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or edge,
including, but not limited to, fixed or moving objects, vehicles, bicycles,
pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or narrow lanes.



   (E)   Medium-speed electric vehicles and neighborhood electric
vehicles.



      (1)   Definitions.



         (a)   MEDIUM SPEED ELECTRIC VEHICLE.  An electrically
powered four-wheeled motor vehicle, equipped with a roll cage or crushproof
body design, that can attain a maximum speed of 35 miles per hour on a paved
level surface, is fully enclosed and has at least one door for entry, has a
wheelbase of 40 inches or greater and a wheel diameter of ten inches or
greater, and except with respect to maximum speed, otherwise meets or exceeds
regulations in the C.F.R. Title 49, § 571.500, and successor requirements.



         (b)   NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLE.  An electrically
powered motor vehicle that has four wheels, and has a speed attainable in one
mile of at least 20 miles per hour, but not more than 25 miles per hour on a
paved level surface.



      (2)   Prohibited acts. Operation of neighborhood electric
vehicles on city streets is prohibited except as provided in division (E)(3)
below.



      (3)   Use on designated exclusive city streets. The City
Council may, by resolution, designate exclusive city streets within its
jurisdiction where the operation of neighborhood electric vehicles or
medium-speed electric vehicles is permissible, provided that no street so
designated has a posted speed limit of more than 35 miles per hour.



      (4)   Operation permitted. A neighborhood electric vehicle or
a medium-speed electric vehicle may be operated on public streets and
highways only if it meets all equipment and vehicle safety requirements in
C.F.R. Title 49, § 571.500, as it may be amended from time to time.



      (5)   Authorized city staff. Authorized city staff may operate
city owned neighborhood electric vehicles and medium-speed electric vehicles
within the city on city streets, sidewalks, trails, rights-of-way, and public
property when conducting city business.



   (F)   Fee. The fee for the special use vehicle permits as per this
section will be $40 per year and becomes effective with the remainder of this
section.



(Ord. 203, 3rd Series, passed 2-9-2016; Res. 02-03-06, passed 2-9-2016)



§ 70.07  SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, AND BICYCLES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      BICYCLE. Every device propelled solely by human power upon which
any person may ride, having two tandem wheels except scooters and similar
devices and including any device generally recognized as a bicycle though
equipped with two front or rear wheels.



      DOWNTOWN AREA. The following named streets: That portion of the
city that lies between 1st Street Southwest and 1st Street Southeast and
north of Dayton Avenue and south of Ash Avenue. This includes the
rights-of-way within the above described street and avenues, and the
city-owned parking lot on the corner of Aldrich Avenue Southwest and 1st
Street Southwest.



      ROLLER SKATES. A shoe with wheels attached or a device with
wheels which is designed to be attached to a shoe. For purposes of this
section, the term ROLLER SKATES shall include ROLLER BLADES.



      SKATEBOARDS. A wheeled, self-propelled device designed to
transport a rider in a standing position, which device is not otherwise
secured to a rider’s foot or shoes.



   (B)   Skateboard, roller skates, and bicycle regulations.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to operate, propel, or
ride a skateboard, roller skates, or a bicycle upon any public sidewalk,
street or parking lot in the downtown area of the city.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to operate, propel, or
ride a skateboard, roller skates, or a bicycle on or within that portion of
any state trunk highway, county state-aid highway, or county highway designed
for vehicular traffic.



      (3)   It is unlawful for any person to operate, propel, or
ride a skateboard, roller skates, or a bicycle on any private property
without the permission of said property owner.



      (4)   It is unlawful for any person to operate, propel, or
ride a skateboard, roller skates, or a bicycle upon any sidewalk, street, or
parking lot, or other public property, outside of the designated areas within
the parks, or private property without the owner’s consent, carelessly, or
heedlessly in disregard of the rights of others, or in a manner that
endangers or is likely to endanger any person or property.



(2006 Code, § 8.32)  (Ord. 158, 3rd Series, passed 12-15-2004; Ord. 164,
3rd Series 9-20-2005)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or provision
of this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows.



   (A)   Misdemeanor. Where the specific section, division, paragraph,
or provision specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, he or she shall be
punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a manner or
under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or
property, he or she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he or she
stands convicted of violation of any provision of this chapter, exclusive of
violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended vehicle,
within the immediate preceding 12-month period for the third or subsequent
time, he or she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Petty misdemeanor. As to any violations not constituting a
misdemeanor under the provisions of division (A) above, he or she shall be
punished as for a petty misdemeanor.



   (C)   Provisions adopted by reference. As to any violation of a
provision adopted by reference, he or she shall be punished as specified in
such provision, so adopted.



(2006 Code, § 8.99)



   (D)   Violation of section 70.06. Any person convicted of violating
any provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or both, plus the costs of prosecution in either case.



(Ord. 203, 3rd Series, passed 2-9-2016)



CHAPTER 71:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



   71.01   Presumption



   71.02   General parking prohibitions



   71.03   Unauthorized removal



   71.04   Recreational vehicle and trailer parking



   71.05   Direction to proceed



   71.06   Parallel parking



   71.07   Angle parking



   71.08   Streets without curb



   71.09   Parking hours



   71.10   Emergency



   71.11   Truck parking



   71.12   Impounding and removing vehicles



   71.13   Loading vehicles



   71.14   Unattended vehicles



   71.15   Vehicle repair on street



   71.16   Parking for the purpose of advertising or selling merchandise



   71.17   Physically handicapped parking



   71.18   Commercial, industrial, or construction equipment



 



   71.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Streets and Sidewalks, see Ch. 90



   Traffic Regulations, see Ch. 70



§ 71.01  PRESUMPTION.



   As to any vehicle parking in viol ation of Ch. 70, this chapter, and
Ch. 90 when the driver thereof is not present, it shall be presumed that the
owner parked the same, or that the driver was acting as the agent of the
owner.



(2006 Code, § 9.01)



§ 71.02  GENERAL PARKING PROHIBITIONS.



   It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
specific directions of a police officer or traffic-control device in any of
the following places:



   (A)   On a sidewalk;



   (B)   In front of a public or private driveway;



   (C)   Within an intersection;



   (D)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;



   (E)   On a crosswalk;



   (F)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at any intersection;



   (G)   In a sign-posted fire lane;



   (H)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop
sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;



   (I)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;



   (J)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
75 feet of said entrance when properly sign-posted;



   (K)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when such stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;



   (L)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street;



   (M)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street;



   (N)   At any place where official signs prohibit or restrict
stopping, parking, or both;



   (O)   In any alley, except for loading or unloading and then only so
long as reasonably necessary for such loading and unloading to or from
adjacent premises; or



   (P)   On any boulevard which has been curbed.



(2006 Code, § 9.02)  (Ord. 22, 3rd Series, passed 6-18-1981)  Penalty, see
§ 71.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.S. § 169.34, as it may be amended from time
to time



§ 71.03  UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL.



   It is unlawful for any person to move a vehicle not owned, leased, or
under the control of such person into any prohibited area or away from a curb
such distance as is unlawful.



(2006 Code, § 9.03)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.04  RECREATIONAL VEHICLE AND TRAILER PARKING.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLE. Any of the following:



      (a)   CAMPING TRAILER. A folding structure, mounted on wheels,
and designed for travel, recreation and vacation uses;



      (b)   MOTOR HOME. A portable, temporary dwelling to be used
for travel, recreation, and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a
self-propelled vehicle;



      (c)   PICK-UP COACH. A structure designed to be mounted on a
truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and
vacation;



      (d)   TRAILER. A structure or fabrication mounted on wheels,
designed to be towed; or



      (e)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on
a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel,
recreational, and vacation uses, permanently identified TRAVEL TRAILER by the
manufacturer of the trailer.



   (B)   Unlawful acts. It is unlawful for any person to leave or park
a recreational vehicle or trailer on or within the limits of any street or
right-of-way for a continuous period in excess of 24 hours, except where
signs are erected designating the place as a campsite or in a mobile home
park.



(2006 Code, § 9.04)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.05  DIRECTION TO PROCEED.



   It is unlawful for any person to stop or park a vehicle on a street
when directed or ordered to proceed by any police officer invested by law
with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic.



(2006 Code, § 9.05)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.06  PARALLEL PARKING.



   Except where angle parking is specifically allowed and indicated by
curb or street marking or sign-posting, or all or any of them, each vehicle
stopped or parked upon a two-way road where there is an adjacent curb shall
be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel with,
and within 12 inches of, the right-hand curb and where painted markings
appear on the curb or the street, such vehicle shall be within such markings,
front and rear; provided, that upon a one-way roadway all vehicles shall be
so parked, except that the left-hand wheels of the vehicle may be parallel
with and within 12 inches from the left-hand curb, but the front of the
vehicle in any event and with respect to the remainder of the vehicle, shall
be in the direction of the flow of traffic upon such one-way street; and it
is unlawful to park in violation of this section.



(2006 Code, § 9.06)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.07  ANGLE PARKING.



   Where angle parking has been established by Council resolution, and is
allowed, as shown by curb or street marking or sign-posting, or all or any of
them, each vehicle stopped or parked shall be at an angle of approximately 45
to 60 degrees with the front wheel touching the curb and within any parking
lines painted on the curb or street; provided, that the front wheel not
touching the curb shall be the portion of the vehicle furthest in the
direction of one-way traffic; and it is unlawful to park in violation of this
section.



(2006 Code, § 9.07)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.08  STREETS WITHOUT CURB.



   Upon streets not having a curb, each vehicle shall be stopped or parked
parallel and to the right of the paving, improved or main traveled part of
the street; and it is unlawful to park in violation of this section.



(2006 Code, § 9.08)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.09  PARKING HOURS.



   (A)   Standing vehicles. It is unlawful for any person to stop,
park, or leave standing any vehicle upon any street for a continuous period
in excess of 24 hours.



   (B)   Designated limited time zones. The Chief of Police may, when
authorized by resolution of the Council, designate certain streets, blocks,
or portions of streets or blocks as limited time zones stated in either hours
or minutes, limiting parking, and mark such limitations by appropriate signs
in the zone established. Such zones shall be established whenever necessary
for the convenience of the public or to minimize traffic hazards and preserve
a free flow of traffic. It is unlawful for any person to stop, park, or leave
standing any vehicle in any space so limited when sign-posted.



   (C)   Removing marks or signs placed by police officer. It is
unlawful for any person to remove, erase, or otherwise obliterate any mark or
sign placed upon a tire or other part of a vehicle by a police officer for
the purpose of measuring the length of time such vehicle has been parked.



   (D)   Relocation of vehicle less than 300 feet. For the purpose of
enforcement of this section, any vehicle moved to a location less than 300
feet from the previous location in any limited time parking zone shall be
deemed to have remained stationary.



(2006 Code, § 9.30)  (Ord. 53, 3rd Series, passed 3-1-1985; Ord. 127, 3rd
Series, passed 6-5-1998) Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.10  EMERGENCY.



   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      EMERGENCY. A condition created on city streets because of the
presence of snow, freezing rain, sleet, ice, or snow drifts thereon, or other
natural phenomenon which create or are likely to create hazardous road
conditions or impede or likely to impede the free movement of fire, health,
police, emergency, or other vehicular traffic when the same have been duly
declared by the Public Works Director, or in his or her absence, the Chief of
Police.



   (B)   Rules and regulations. Rules and regulations relating to snow
removal shall be in accordance with the uniform policy promulgated by the
Public Works Director. Such regulations shall be posted in the office of the
City Administrator, and further notice may otherwise be given as the Council
may direct.



   (C)   Unlawful act.



      (1)   During an emergency, it is unlawful to park or leave
standing any vehicle upon a snow emergency route designated and duly
sign-posted as such.



      (2)   During an emergency, it is unlawful to park or leave
standing any vehicle upon a street on which parking has been restricted by
the declaration of an emergency.



(2006 Code, § 9.31)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.11  TRUCK PARKING.



   (A)   Public property. It is unlawful to park a detached
semi-trailer upon any street, city-owned parking lot, or other public
property.



   (B)   Residential district. It is unlawful to park a semi-trailer,
whether or not attached to a truck-tractor, within an area zoned as a
residential district, except for the purpose of loading or unloading the same.



   (C)   Commercial vehicles greater than one-ton capacity. It is
unlawful to park a commercial vehicle of more than one-ton capacity upon any
street in the business district which has been duly sign-posted prohibiting
the same, but parking of such vehicle for a period of not more than 30
minutes shall be permitted in such space for the purpose of necessary access
to abutting property for loading or unloading when such access cannot
reasonably be secured from an alley or from an adjacent street where truck
parking is not so restricted.



   (D)   Diagonal parking prohibited. It is unlawful to park a truck or
other vehicle using or equipped with a trailer, or extended body or other
extension or projection beyond the original length of such vehicle, or any
passenger bus, diagonally along any street except for a time sufficient to
load or unload, and in such case, only parallel parking shall be permitted;
provided, however, that a truck may stand backed up to the curb if the weight
or bulk of the load makes parallel parking impracticable, but then only for a
period of time sufficient to load or unload.



   (E)   Loading zones and alleys. Parking of commercial vehicles is
permitted in duly designated and sign-posted loading zones, and in alleys,
for a period of up to 20 minutes, all of which shall be for the purpose of
access to abutting or adjacent property while actively loading or unloading.



(2006 Code, § 9.32)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.12  IMPOUNDING AND REMOVING VEHICLES.



   When any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street or
municipally-owned parking lot in violation of any parking regulation, such
officer is hereby authorized to require the driver or other person in charge
of such vehicle to remove the same to a position in compliance with this
chapter. When any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street
or municipally-owned parking lot in violation of any parking regulation, such
officer is hereby authorized to impound such unlawfully parked vehicle and to
provide for the removal thereof and to remove the same to a convenient garage
or other facility or place of safety; provided, that if any charge shall be
placed against such vehicle for cost of removal or storage, or both, by
anyone called upon to assist therewith, the same shall be paid prior to
removal from such place of storage or safekeeping.



(2006 Code, § 9.33)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.13  LOADING VEHICLES.



   The Council may, by resolution, establish loading zones to be used for
the specific purpose of loading or unloading merchandise from a commercial
vehicle or vehicle temporarily being utilized in the transport of
merchandise. Such loading zones shall be installed by order of the City
Administrator, where in the judgment of the Council, a commercial loading
zone is justified, and duly sign-posted.



(2006 Code, § 9.34)



§ 71.14  UNATTENDED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Engine running. It is unlawful for any person to leave a motor
vehicle unattended while the engine is running.



   (B)   Key in ignition. It is unlawful for any person to leave a
motor vehicle unattended with the key in the ignition.



(2006 Code, § 9.35)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.15  VEHICLE REPAIR ON STREET.



   It is unlawful for any person to service, repair, assemble, or
dismantle any vehicle parked upon a street, or attempt to do so, except to
service such vehicle with gasoline or oil or to provide emergency repairs
thereon.



(2006 Code, § 9.36)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.16  PARKING FOR THE PURPOSE OF ADVERTISING OR SELLING MERCHANDISE.



   It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on any street for the
purpose of selling merchandise thereon or therein, or advertising any
merchandise for sale or a forthcoming event.



(2006 Code, § 9.37)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.17  PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PARKING.



   (A)   Strict enforcement. Statutory parking privileges for
physically handicapped shall be strictly observed and enforced. Police
officers are authorized to tag vehicles on either private or public property
in violation of such statutory privileges.



   (B)   Parking otherwise prohibited. It is unlawful for any person,
whether or not physically handicapped, to stop, park, or leave standing, a
motor vehicle:



      (1)   In a sign-posted fire lane at any time; or



      (2)   In lanes where, and during such hours as, parking is
prohibited to accommodate heavy traffic during morning and afternoon rush
hours.



(2006 Code, § 9.38)  (Ord. 39, 3rd Series, passed 5-30-1984) Penalty, see
§ 71.99



§ 71.18  COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, OR CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT.



   It is unlawful for any person to leave or park a commercial,
industrial, or construction vehicle or equipment on or within the limits of
any street right-of-way, city-owned parking lot, other public property or
private property for a continuous period in exceed of 24 hours within an R-1
or R-2 zoned district within the city.



(2006 Code, § 9.39)  (Ord. 84, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-1991)  Penalty, see
§ 71.99



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph, or provision of
this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows.



   (A)   Misdemeanor. Where the specific section, division, paragraph,
or provision specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, he or she shall be
punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a manner or
under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or
property, he or she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he or she
stands convicted of violation of any provision of this chapter, exclusive of
violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended vehicle,
within the immediate preceding 12-month period for the third or subsequent
time, he or she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Petty misdemeanor. As to any violation not constituting a
misdemeanor under the provisions of division (A) above, he or she shall be
punished as for a petty misdemeanor.



(2006 Code, § 9.99)



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      91.   RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT



      92.   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES



CHAPTER 90:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



   90.01   Application



   90.02   Scope and orders of police officers



   90.03   Traffic and parking control



   90.04   Ice and snow on streets, sidewalks, and other public safety



   90.05   Regulation of grass, weeds, and trees in streets



   90.06   Construction and reconstruction of roadway surfacing,
sidewalks, curbs, and gutters



   90.07   Street openings or excavations



   90.08   Requirement of sewer and water main service lateral
installations



   90.09   Obstructions, fire, dump, signs, and other structures



   90.10   Limiting speed of railroad trains



   90.11   Load limits



   90.12   Curb setbacks



   90.13   Curb and gutter, street, and sidewalk painting or coloring



   90.14   Sidewalk maintenance and repair



 



   90.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Traffic Code, see Title VII



§ 90.01  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Chapters applicable. The provisions this of chapter and Title
VII applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the streets shall apply to the
drivers of all vehicles, including, but not limited to, those owned or
operated by the United States, this state, or any county, city, town,
district, or any other political subdivision of the state, subject to such
specific exemptions as may be set forth in this chapter and Title VII.



   (B)   Persons subject. Every person riding a bicycle or an animal or
driving any animal drawing a vehicle upon a roadway shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter and Title VII  applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except those provisions which by their nature can have no
application. Provisions specifically referring to bicycle shall be in
addition to other provisions of these chapters applying to vehicles.



(2006 Code, § 7.01)



§ 90.02  SCOPE AND ORDERS OF POLICE OFFICERS.



   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter and Title VII  relate
exclusively to the streets, alleys, and private roads in the city, and the
operation and parking of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation and
parking of vehicles upon such streets, alleys and private roads.



   (B)   Orders of a police officer. It is a misdemeanor for any person
to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any police or peace officer invested by law with authority to direct,
control, or regulate traffic.



(2006 Code, § 7.02)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  TRAFFIC AND PARKING CONTROL.



   (A)   Council action. No device, sign, or signal shall be erected or
maintained for traffic or parking control unless the Council shall first have
approved and directed the same, except as otherwise  provided in this
section; provided, that when traffic and parking control is marked or
sign-posted, such marking or sign-posting shall attest to Council action
thereon.



   (B)   Temporarily restricting or directing traffic and parking; curb
painting.



      (1)   When clearly marked, barricaded, or sign-posted, traffic
and parking may be temporarily restricted for any public or private use. All
such restrictions shall be in accordance with the uniform policy promulgated
by the city, acting through the Chief of Police, who shall be ultimately
responsible to the Council for the proper enforcement thereof.



      (2)   Restricted or prohibited use of parking and traffic
lanes may be designated by painting the same upon streets and curbs. Such
work shall be done under the direction of the city and in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and Title VII.



      (3)   It is unlawful to use traffic or parking lanes contrary
to sign-posting or marking authorized and described in this section.



      (4)   Experimental restrictions and directions may be placed
on traffic and parking by the city, acting through the Chief of Police, and
it shall be his or her duty to do so when an extra hazardous condition is
observed or arises. It is unlawful to violate any restriction or direction
when the same has been duly marked, barricaded, or sign-posted.



(2006 Code, § 7.03)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  ICE AND SNOW ON STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND OTHER PUBLIC SAFETY.



   (A)   Ice and snow nuisance. All snow and ice remaining upon public
sidewalks is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and shall be
abated by the owner or responsible tenant of the abutting private property
within 24 hours after such snow or ice has ceased to be deposited.



   (B)   City to remove snow and ice. The city may cause without
advance notice all snow and ice to be removed from all public sidewalks,
beginning 24 hours after snow or ice has ceased to fall, and it shall keep a
record of the cost of such removal and the private property abutting to which
such accumulations were found and removed.



   (C)   Cost of removal to be assessed. The City Administrator shall,
upon direction of the Council, and on receipt of the information provided for
in division (B) above, extend the cost of such removal of snow or ice as a
special assessment against the lots or parcels of ground abutting on walks
which were cleared, and such special assessments shall at the time of
certifying taxes to the County Auditor be certified for collection as other
special assessments are certified and collected.



   (D)   Civil suit for cost of removal. The City Administrator shall,
in the alternative, upon direction of the Council, bring suit in a court of
competent jurisdiction to recover from the persons owning land adjacent to
which sidewalks were cleared, as provided in division (B) above, the cost of
such clearing and the cost and disbursements of a civil action therefor.



   (E)   Placing snow or ice in public street or on other city
property. It is a misdemeanor for any person, not acting under a specific
contract with the city, to remove snow from private property, driveways,
sidewalks, parking lots, or alleys and place the same on a public street in
such quantity, or in such manner as to cause a hazard to travel without
adequate arrangements for the immediate removal thereof, and it is also a
misdemeanor for any person not acting under a contract with the city to dump
snow on other city property and boulevards other than the boulevards adjacent
to his or her property. It is also a misdemeanor to place snow on the
property of another person without approval.



   (F)   Public safety. It is a misdemeanor to allow rainwater, ice, or
snow to fall directly from any building or building roof downspouts upon any
street or sidewalk or flow across any sidewalk as to cause a safety hazard.



(2006 Code, § 7.04)  (Ord. 118, 3rd Series, passed 5-22-1998)  Penalty,
see § 90.99



§ 90.05  REGULATION OF GRASS, WEEDS, AND TREES IN STREETS.



   (A)   City to control tree planting (standards). The city shall have
control and supervision of planting shrubs and trees upon, or overhanging,
all streets or other public property. The city may establish and enforce
uniform standards relating to the species and types of trees to be planted,
placement, and the maintenance and removal thereof. Such standards shall be
kept on file in the office of the City Administrator and may be revised from
time to time by action of the Council upon the recommendation of the City
Administrator.



   (B)   Permit to plant or remove trees. It is a misdemeanor for any
person to plant or remove any tree upon or overhanging streets, without first
procuring from the city a permit in writing to do so.



   (C)   Property owners to cut grass and weeds and maintain trees and
shrubs. Every owner of property abutting on any street shall cause the grass
and weeds to be cut from the line of such property nearest to such street to
the center of such street. If the grass or weeds in such a place attain a
height in excess of eight inches, it shall be prima facie evidence of a
failure to comply with this division (C). Every owner of property abutting on
any street shall, subject to the provisions herein requiring a permit
therefor, trim, cut, remove, and otherwise maintain all trees and shrubs in
unhazardous and healthy condition, from the line of such property nearest to
such street to the center thereof.



   (D)   City may order work done. The city may, in cases of failure to
comply with this section, perform such work with employees of the city,
keeping an accurate account of the cost thereof for each lot, piece, or
parcel of land abutting upon such street.



   (E)   Assessment. If such maintenance work described in division (D)
above is performed by the city, the City Administrator shall forthwith, upon
completion thereof, ascertain the cost attributable to each lot, piece, or
parcel of abutting land. The City Administrator shall, at the next regular
meeting thereof, present such certificate to the Council and obtain its
approval thereof, when such certificate has been approved, it shall be
extended as to the cost therein stated as a special assessment against such
abutting land and such special assessment shall, at the time of certifying
taxes to the County Auditor, be certified for collection as other special
assessments are certified and collected.



(2006 Code, § 7.05)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.06  CONSTRUCTION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF ROADWAY SURFACING, SIDEWALKS,
CURBS, AND GUTTERS.



   (A)   Methods of procedure.



      (1)   Abutting or affected property owners may contract for,
construct, or reconstruct roadway surfacing, sidewalk, or curb and gutter in
accordance with this section if advance payment is made therefor or
arrangements for payment considered adequate by the city are completed in
advance.



      (2)   With or without petition by the methods set forth in the
Local Improvement Code of state statutes, presently beginning with M.S. §
429.011, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Permit required.



      (1)   It is a misdemeanor to construct or reconstruct a
sidewalk, curb and gutter, driveway, or roadway surfacing in any street or
other public properly in the city without a permit in writing from the City
Administrator. Application for such permit shall be made on forms approved
and provided by the city and shall sufficiently describe the contemplated
improvements, the contemplated date of beginning of work, and the length of
time required to complete the same; provided, that no permit shall be
required for any such improvement ordered installed by the Council.



      (2)   All applications shall be referred by the City
Administrator to the Council and no permit shall be issued until approval has
been received from the Council. All such applications shall contain an
agreement by the applicant to be bound by this chapter and plans and
specifications consistent with the provisions of this chapter and good
engineering practices shall also accompany the application. A permit from the
city shall not relieve the holder from damages to the person or property of
another caused by such work.



   (C)   Specifications and standards. All construction and
reconstruction of roadway surfacing, sidewalk and curb, and gutter
improvements, including curb cuts, shall be strictly in accordance with
specifications and standards on file in the office of the City Administrator
and open to inspection and copying there. Such specifications and standards
may be amended from time to time by the city, but shall be uniformly enforced.



   (D)   Inspection. The Council shall designate a suitable and
competent person to perform inspections required herein and such other
inspection of such work as deemed necessary. Any work not done according to
the applicable specifications and standards shall be removed and corrected at
the expense of the permit holder. Any work done hereunder may be stopped by
the Inspector if found to be unsatisfactory or not in accordance with the
specifications and standards, but this shall not place a continuing burden
upon the city to inspect or supervise such work.



(2006 Code, § 7.06)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.07  STREET OPENINGS OR EXCAVATIONS.



   (A)   Generally. It is a misdemeanor for any person, except a city
employee acting within the course and scope of his or her employment, or a
contractor acting within the course and scope of a contract with the city, to
make any excavation, opening, or tunnel in, over, across, or upon a street or
other public property without first having obtained a written permit from the
City Administrator as herein provided.



   (B)   Application. Application for a permit to make a street
excavation shall describe with reasonable particularity the name and address
of the applicant, the place, purpose and size of the excavation, and such
other information as may be necessary or desirable to facilitate the
investigation hereinafter provided for, and shall be filed with the City
Administrator.



   (C)   Investigation and payment of estimated costs. Upon receipt of
such application, the City Administrator shall cause such investigation to be
made as he or she may deem necessary to determine estimated cost of repair,
such as back-filling, compacting, resurfacing, and replacement, manner of
procedure, and time limitation upon such excavation. The foregoing estimated
costs shall include permanent and temporary repairs clue to weather or other
conditions, and the cost of such investigation shall be included in such
estimate.



   (D)   Issuance of permit. The City Administrator shall issue such
permit after:



      (1)   Completion of such investigation;



      (2)   Payment by the applicant in advance of all estimated
costs as aforesaid;



      (3)   Agreement by the applicant to the conditions of time and
manner as aforesaid; and



      (4)   Agreement in writing by the applicant to pay all actual
cost of repairs over and above such estimate, including cost of such
investigation.



   (E)   Repairs. All temporary and permanent repairs, including
back-filling, compacting, and resurfacing shall be made, or contracted for,
by the city in a manner prescribed by the city, and an accurate account of
costs thereof shall be kept.



   (F)   Cost adjustment. Within 60 days following completion of such
permanent repairs, the City Administrator shall determine actual costs of
repairs, including cost of investigation, and prepare and furnish to such
permit holder an itemized statement thereof and claim additional payment
from, or make refund to, the permit holder, as the case may be.



   (G)   Alternate method of charging. In lieu of the above provisions
relating to cost and cost adjustment for street openings, the city may charge
on the basis of surface square feet removed, excavated cubic feet, or a
combination of surface square feet and excavated cubic feet, on an
established unit price uniformly charged.



(2006 Code, § 7.07)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.08  REQUIREMENT OF SEWER AND WATER MAIN SERVICE LATERAL INSTALLATIONS.



   (A)   Requirement of sewer and water laterals. No petition for the
improvement of a street shall be considered by the Council if such petition
contemplates constructing therein any part of a pavement or stabilized base,
or curb and gutter, unless all sewer and water main installations shall have
been made therein, including the installation of service laterals to the
curb, if the area along such street will be served by such utilities
installed in the street.



   (B)   Sewer system service and water main service laterals. No sewer
system shall be hereafter constructed or extended unless service laterals to
platted lots and frontage facing thereon shall be extended simultaneously
with construction of mains.



   (C)   Waiver. The Council may waive the requirements of this section
only if it finds the effects thereof are burdensome and upon such notice and
hearing as the Council may deem necessary or proper.



(2006 Code, § 7.08)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.09  OBSTRUCTIONS, FIRE, DUMP, SIGNS, AND OTHER STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Obstructions. It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit,
display, or offer for sale, any fence, goods, or other obstructions upon,
over, across, or under any street or other public property without first
having obtained a written permit from the Council, and then only in
compliance in all respects with the terms and conditions of such permit, and
taking precautionary measures for the protection of the public. An electrical
cord or device of any kind is hereby included, but not by way of limitation,
within the definition of an obstruction unless it provides at least as much
clearance above the surface as provided in the National Electric Code.



   (B)   Dumping in streets. It is unlawful for any person to throw or
deposit in any street or any other public property any nails, dirt, glass,
tin cans, metal scraps, garbage, leaves, grass, or tree limbs, shreds, or
rubbish, or to empty any water containing salt or other injurious chemical
thereon; the effect of this division (B) shall extend, but not by way of
limitation, to depositing grease, oil, and other fuel or lubricants in such
places, and to place a motor vehicle with essential parts (as defined in
state statutes) removed, except such vehicles as are temporarily disabled for
a period not in excess of 12 hours.



   (C)   Signs and other structures. It is unlawful for any person to
place or maintain a sign or other structure in the traveled or untraveled
portion of any street or other public property without first having obtained
a written permit from the Council. In a district zoned for commercial or
industrial enterprises, special permission allowing an applicant to erect and
maintain signs overhanging the street may be granted upon such terms and
conditions as may be set forth in the zoning or construction provisions of
this code of ordinances.



(2006 Code, § 7.20)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.10  LIMITING SPEED OF RAILROAD TRAINS.



   It is unlawful for any person operating or in charge of a railroad
train, car, engine, or other railroad equipment, or combination of such
equipment, to operate such equipment at a greater rate of speed than is
reasonable and proper, having due regard to the conditions then existing.



(2006 Code, § 7.21)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.11  LOAD LIMITS.



   The Council, upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police, may from
time to time impose upon vehicular traffic on any part or all of the streets
such load limits as may be necessary or desirable. Such limits, and the
specific extent or weight to which loads are limited, shall be clearly and
legibly sign-posted thereon. It is unlawful for any person to operate a
vehicle on any street in violation of the limitation so posted.



(2006 Code, § 7.22)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.12  CURB SETBACKS.



   (A)   Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to hereafter
remove, or cause to be removed, any curb from its position abutting upon the
roadway to another position without first making application to the Council
and obtaining a permit therefor.



   (B)   Agreement required. No such permit shall be issued until the
applicant, and abutting landowner if other than applicant, shall enter into a
written agreement with the city agreeing to pay all costs of constructing and
maintaining such setback area in at least as good condition as the abutting
roadway, and further agreeing to demolish and remove such setback and
reconstruct the area as was at the expense of the landowner, his or her heirs
or assigns if the area ever, in the Council’s opinion becomes a public
hazard. Such agreement shall be recorded in the office of the County
Recorder, and shall run with the adjoining land.



   (C)   Sign-posting. “Angle Parking Only” signs shall be
purchased from the city and erected and maintained at the expense of the
adjoining landowner in all such setback areas now in use or hereafter
constructed. It is unlawful for any person to park other than at an angle in
such setback areas, as such angle parking is herein described and allowed.



   (D)   Public rights preserved. Such setback parking areas shall be
kept open for public parking and the abutting landowner shall at no time
acquire any special interest or control of or in such areas.



(2006 Code, § 7.23)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.13  CURB AND GUTTER, STREET, AND SIDEWALK PAINTING OR COLORING.



   It is unlawful for any person to paint, letter, or color any street,
sidewalk or curb, and gutter for advertising purposes, or to paint or color
any street, sidewalk or curb, and gutter for any purpose, except as the same
may be done by city employees acting within the course or scope of their
employment; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to
uniformly coloring concrete or other surfacing, or uniformly painted house
numbers, as such coloring may be approved by the city.



(2006 Code, § 7.24)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.14  SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.



   (A)   Primary responsibility. It is the primary responsibility of
the owner of property upon which there is abutting any sidewalk to keep and
maintain such sidewalk in safe and serviceable condition.



   (B)   Construction, reconstruction, and repair specifications. All
construction, reconstruction, or repair of sidewalks shall be done in strict
accordance with specifications on file in the office of the City
Administrator.



   (C)   Notice; no emergency. Where, in the opinion of the Public
Works Director, no emergency exists, notice of the required repair or
reconstruction shall be given to the owner of the abutting property. Such
notice shall require completion of the work within 90 days, and shall be
mailed to the owner or owners shown to be such on the records of the County
Officer who mails tax statements.



   (D)   Notice; emergency. Where, in the opinion of the Public Works
Director, an emergency exists, notice of the required repair or
reconstruction may be given to the owner of the abutting property. Such
notice shall require completion of the work within ten days, and may be
mailed to the owner or owners shown to be such on the records of the County
Officer who mails tax statements.



   (E)   Failure of owner to reconstruct or make repairs. If the owner
of the abutting property fails to make repairs or accomplish reconstruction
as herein required, the City Administrator may report such failure to the
Council and the Council may order such work to be done under its direction
and the cost thereof assessed to the abutting property owner as any other
special assessment.



   (F)   Duty to inspect. In order to accomplish the purpose of this
section, it may be the duty of the Public Works Director to inspect sidewalks
within the city, or cause the same to be inspected under his or her direction.



(2006 Code, § 7.25)  (Ord. 20, 3rd Series, passed 6-18-1981)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph, or
provision of this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
follows.



      (1)   Misdemeanor. Where the specific section, division,
paragraph, or provision specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, he or she
shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a
manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any
person or property, he or she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where
he or she stands convicted of violation of any provision of this chapter,
exclusive of violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended
vehicle, within the immediate preceding 12-month period for the third or
subsequent time, he or she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.



      (2)   Petty misdemeanor. As to any violation not constituting
a misdemeanor under the provisions of division (A) above, he or she shall be
punished as for a petty misdemeanor.



(2006 Code, § 7.99)



   (D)   Continuing violation. Each day that any person continues in
violation of § 90.09 shall be a separate offense, and punishable as such.



(2006 Code, § 7.20)



CHAPTER 91:  RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT



Section




General Provisions




   91.01   Findings and purpose



   91.02   Definitions



   91.03   Administration



   91.04   Utility Coordination Committee



   91.05   Franchise; franchise supremacy



   91.06   Registration and right-of-way occupancy



   91.07   Registration information



   91.08   Reporting obligations



   91.09   Right-of-way patching and restoration



   91.10   Joint applications



   91.11   Supplementary applications



   91.12   Other obligations



   91.13   Installation requirements



   91.14   Inspections



   91.15   Supplementary notification



   91.16   Mapping data



   91.17   Location of facilities



   91.18   Relocation of facilities



   91.19   Pre-excavation facility and facilities location



   91.20   Damage to other facilities



   91.21   Right-of-way vacations



   91.22   Indemnification and liability



   91.23   Abandoned and unusable facilities



   91.24   Appeal



   91.25   Reservation of regulatory and police powers




Permits




   91.40   Permit requirements



   91.41   Permit applications



   91.42   Issuance of permits; conditions



   91.43   Permit fees



   91.44   Denial of permit



   91.45   Work done without a permit



   91.46   Revocation of permits



 



   91.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 91.01  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   Health and safety. To provide for the health, safety, and
well-being of its citizens, and to ensure the structural integrity of its
streets and the appropriate use of the right-of-way, the city strives to keep
its right-of-way in a state of good repair and free from unnecessary
encumbrances. Although the general population bears the financial burden for
the upkeep of the right-of-way, a primary cause for the early and excessive
deterioration of its right-of-way is frequent excavation.



      (1)   Right-of-way obstruction is a source of frustration for
merchants, business owners, and the general population which must avoid these
obstructions or change travel or shopping plans because of them and has a
detrimental effect on commerce. Persons whose equipment is within the
right-of-way are the primary cause of these frequent obstructions.



      (2)   The city holds the rights-of-way within its geographical
boundaries as an asset in trust for its citizens. The city and other public
entities have invested millions of dollars in public funds to build and
maintain the rights-of-way. It also recognizes that some persons, by placing
their equipment in the right-of-way and charging the citizens of the city for
goods and services delivered thereby, are using this property held for the
public good. Although such services are often necessary or convenient for the
citizens, such persons receive revenue and/or profit through their use of
public property.



      (3)   As a result of all these intrusions in the right-of-way,
it is necessary for the city to establish a system of documenting what is
placed in the rights-of-way within its municipal boundaries and to serve as a
central record agency to inform its citizens and the other public entities of
the facilities that have been placed in the right-of-way that is held in
trust for them.



   (B)   Permits and administration.



      (1)   In response to the foregoing facts, the city hereby
enacts this new chapter relating to right-of-way permits and administration,
together with making necessary revisions to other provisions of this code of
ordinances. This chapter imposes reasonable regulations on providers of
electricity, light, heat, cooling energy, liquid, and gaseous fuels;
information and communication service; and sewer and water lines and
connection to them to the public that place and maintain facilities or
equipment currently within the city’s rights-of-way or to be placed therein
at some future time.



      (2)   It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of
state and federal agencies. Under this chapter, persons disturbing and
obstructing the rights-of-way will bear a fair share of the financial
responsibility for their integrity. Finally, this chapter provides for
recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons using the public
right-of-way and adopts the standards developed by the Public Utilities
Commission (PUC) on maximum restoration requirements, Minn. Rules pts.
7819.5000 through 7819.9950.



   (C)   Reimbursement payments. In addition to the foregoing recovery
of costs and regulation of use, the Council determines that there is an
existing and legitimate state and local public policy, which authorizes the
city to require payments as reimbursement or return to the public for the use
value of the public rights-of-way from those who obtain revenue or profits
from such use. This reimbursement is provided for and defined in this section
as the “user fee”. This fee does not apply to the repair, replacement or
reconstruction of an existing facility. Telecommunication facilities are
exempt from a user fee by state statute.



   (D)   Public interest and welfare. The Council finds that it is in
the public interest to provide for the payment of a user fee by all persons
who use and occupy the right-of-way to pay an annual lease if not  a
franchised entity apportioned equally among them all for the value and
benefit of using such right-of-way.



   (E)   Legislative power. In these situations, the Council desires to
exercise its lawful police power and common law authority, and all statutory
authority which is available to it, including but not limited to, the powers
conferred on it under M.S. §§ 216B.36, 222.37, 237.16, 301B.01, 410.09, and
412.221, subd. 6, 23, and 32, as they may be amended from time to time. The
Council finds and determines that the public interest will be best protected
by adopting this chapter conferring the right to occupy the right-of-way in
return for payment as authorized by law.



   (F)   Not a rate. The Council finds and determines that the user fee
authorized by this chapter is not and is not intended to be a rate as that
term is defined in M.S. § 216B.02, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time
to time. Such user fee is not a fee for a service that is provided to the
customer or a person using the right-of-way, but is rather a fee paid for the
right of that person to operate in the public right-of-way, and to maintain
the equipment of a utility in the right-of-way in the city.



   (G)   Notification requirement. Registrants shall be notified of any
proposed ordinance changes prior to adoption by the Council.



(2006 Code, § 14.01)  (Ord. 196, Third Series, passed 4-14-2015)



§ 91.02  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      APPLICANT. Any person requesting permission to excavate or
obstruct a right-of-way.



      CITY. The City of Wadena. For purposes of this chapter, CITY
means its elected officials, officers, employees, and agents.



      CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND. Any of the following forms of
security provided at the permittee’s option:



         (a)   Individual project bond;



         (b)   Cash deposit based on square foot of disruption
and material disruption to right-of way (see city fee schedule);



         (c)   Security of a form listed or approved under M.S.
§ 15.73, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time;



         (d)   Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city;



         (e)   Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city;
and



         (f)   A blanket bond for projects within the city, or
other form of construction bond, for a time specified and in a form
acceptable to the city.



      DEGRADATION. A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way
caused by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the
need to reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the
excavation did not occur.



      DEGRADATION COST. The cost to achieve a level of restoration as
determined by the city at the time the permit is issued, not to exceed the
maximum restoration shown in Plates 1 to 13, set forth in proposed Minn.
Rules pts. 7819.5000 to 7819.9950.



      DEGRADATION FEE. The estimated fee established at the time of
permitting by the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the
useful life of the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals
the degradation costs.



      DELAY PENALTY. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable
delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as
established by permit.



      DEPARTMENT. The Street Department of the city.



      DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR. Any person authorized by the Public Works
Director to carry out inspections related to the provisions of this chapter.



      EMERGENCY. A condition that:



         (a)   Poses a clear and immediate danger to life or
health, or of a significant loss of property; or



         (b)   Requires immediate repair or replacement of
facilities in order to restore service to a customer.



      EQUIPMENT. Any tangible asset to install, repair, or maintain
facilities in any right-of-way.



      EXCAVATE. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb
or penetrate any part of a right-of-way.



      EXCAVATION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter,
must be obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An
EXCAVATION PERMIT allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way
described in such permit.



      EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by an applicant to
cover the costs as provided in § 91.43.



      FACILITY or FACILITIES. Any tangible asset in the right-of-way
required to provide utility service.



      LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE. A local person or persons, or designee of
such person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to
make decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of
this chapter.



      MANAGEMENT COSTS. The actual costs the city incurs in managing
its rights-of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated
with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way
permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects;
maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during
right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration;
restoring work inadequately performed after providing notice and the
opportunity to correct the work; and revoking right-of-way permits.
MANAGEMENT COSTS do not include payment by a telecommunications right-of-way
user for the use of the right-of-way, the fees and cost of litigation
relating to the interpretation of M.S. §§ 237.162 or 237.163, as they may
be amended from time to time, or any ordinance enacted under those sections,
or the city fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to § 91.24.



      OBSTRUCT. To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to
hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way for a
period in excess of eight consecutive hours.



      OBSTRUCTION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter,
must be obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the
holder to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that
right-of-way for a period of eight hours by placing equipment described
therein on the right-of-way for the duration specified in § 91.43.



      OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by a permittee to
cover the costs as provided herein.



      PATCH or PATCHING.



         (a)   A method of pavement replacement that is temporary
in nature.



         (b)   A PATCH consists of



            1.   The compaction of the subbase and aggregate
base; and



            2.   The replacement, in kind, of the existing
pavement for a minimum of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all
directions.



         (c)   A PATCH is considered full restoration only when
two month periods have elapsed.



      PAVEMENT. Any type of improved surface that is within the public
right-of-way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with asphalt,
concrete, aggregate, or gravel.



      PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way has been granted by the city under this chapter.



      PERSON. Any natural or corporate person, business association or
other business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole
proprietorship, apolitical subdivision, a public or private agency of any
kind, a utility, a successor, or assign of any of the foregoing, or any other
legal entity.



      PROBATION. The status of a person that has not complied with the
conditions of this chapter.



      PROBATIONARY PERIOD. One year from the date that a person has
been notified in writing that they have been put on probation.



      PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR/S. The head of the Street Department of the
city, or his or her designee.



      REGISTRANT. Any person who:



         (a)   Has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities
located in any right-of-way;



         (b)   In any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or
use, the right-of-way or place its facilities in the right-of-way; or



         (c)   Engages in the practice of excavation in the
right-of-way.



      RESTORATION COST. The amount of money paid to the city by a
permittee to achieve the level of restoration according to Plates 1 to 13 of
PUC Rules.



      RESTORE or RESTORATION. The process by which a right-of-way is
returned to the same condition and life expectancy that existed before
excavation.



      RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway,
highway, street, alley, park land, boulevard, or other city-owned land
cartway, bicycle lane, and public sidewalk in which the city has an interest,
including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility
easements of the city. A RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include the airwaves above a
RIGHT-OF-WAY with regard to cellular or other non-wire telecommunications or
broadcast service.



      RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT. Either the excavation permit or the
obstruction permit, or both, depending on the context, required by this
chapter.



      SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE. Includes but is not limited to:



         (a)   Those services provided by a public utility as
defined in M.S. § 216B.02, subds. 4 and 6, as they may be amended from time
to time;



         (b)   Telecommunications, pipeline, community antenna
television, fire and alarm communications, water, sewer, electricity, light,
heat, cooling energy, or power services;



         (c)   The services provided by a corporation organized
for the purposes set forth in M.S. § 301B.01, as it may be amended from time
to time;



         (d)   The services provided by a district heating or
cooling system;



         (e)   Cable communications systems as defined in M.S.
Ch. 238, as it may be amended from time to time; and



         (f)   Telecommunication right-of-way user as defined
herein.



      SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION. An application made to excavate or
obstruct more of the right-of-way than permitted, or to extend a permit that
had already been issued.



      TELECOMMUNICATION RIGHTS-OF-WAY USER.



         (a)   A person owning or controlling a facility in the
right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the right-of-way,
that is used or intended to be used for transporting telecommunication or
other voice or data information.



         (b)   For purposes of this chapter, a cable
communication system defined and regulated under M.S. Ch. 238, as it may be
amended from time to time, and telecommunication activities related to
providing natural gas or electric energy services whether provided by a
public utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02, as it may be amended from time
to time, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency organized under M.S.
Chs. 453 and 453A, as they may be amended from time to time, or a cooperative
electric association organized under M.S. 308A, as it may be amended from
time to time, are not telecommunications right-of-way uses for purposes of
this chapter.



      UNUSABLE FACILITIES. Facilities in the right-of-way which have
remained unused for one year and for which the registrant is unable to
provide proof that it has either a plan to begin using it within the next 12
months or a potential purchaser or user of the facilities.



   (B)   Sections of this chapter. References hereafter to
“sections” are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in
this chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized.



(2006 Code, § 14.02)  (Ord. 196, Third Series, passed 4-14-2015)



§ 91.03  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Public Works Director is the principal city official responsible
for the administration of the right-of-way permits, and the ordinances
related thereto. The Public Works Director may delegate any or all of the
duties hereunder.



(2006 Code, § 14.03)



§ 91.04  UTILITY COORDINATION COMMITTEE.



   The city may create an advisory Utility Coordination Committee.
Participation on the Committee is voluntary. It will be composed of any
registrants that wish to assist the city in obtaining information and by
making recommendation regarding use of the right-of-way, and to improve the
process of performing construction work therein. The city may determine the
size of such Committee and shall appoint members from a list of registrants
that have expressed a desire to assist the city.



(2006 Code, § 14.04)



§ 91.05  FRANCHISE; FRANCHISE SUPREMACY.



   The city may, in addition to the requirements of this chapter, require
any person which has or seeks to have equipment located in any right-of-way
to obtain a franchise to the full extent permitted by law now or hereinafter
enacted. The terms of any franchise which are in direct conflict with any
provision of this chapter whether granted prior or subsequent to enactment of
this chapter, shall control and supersede the conflicting terms of this
chapter. All other terms of this chapter shall be fully applicable to all
persons whether franchised or not.



(2006 Code, § 14.05)  (Ord. 137, 3rd Series, passed 4-7-2000)



§ 91.06  REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Registration. Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to
occupy or use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in the
right-of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance
responsibilities by lease, sublease, or assignment, must register with the
Planning and Zoning Director. Registration will consist of providing
application information and paying a registration fee.



   (B)   Registration prior to work. No person may construct, install,
repair, remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities
or any part thereof, in any right-of-way without first being registered with
the Planning and Zoning Director.



   (C)   Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or
amend the provisions of a city ordinance permitting persons to plant or
maintain boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of the right-of-way
between their property and the street curb. Persons planting or maintaining
boulevard plantings or gardens shall not be deemed to use or occupy the
right-of-way, and shall not be required to obtain any permits or satisfy any
other requirements for planting or maintaining such boulevard plantings or
gardens under this chapter; however, nothing herein relieves a person from
complying with the provisions of M.S. Ch. 216D, as it may be amended from
time to time, “One Call Law”.



(2006 Code, § 14.10)



§ 91.07  REGISTRATION INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information required. The information provided to the Planning
and Zoning Director at the time of registration shall include, but not be
limited to:



      (1)   Each registrant’s name, Gopher One Call registration
certificate number, address, and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers;



      (2)   The name, address, and e-mail address, if applicable,
and telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local
representative or his or her designee shall be available at all times.
Current information regarding how to contact the local representative in an
emergency shall be provided at the time of registration;



      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:



         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued
to the registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the
state, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the city;



         (b)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against
claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property
damage arising out of the:



            1.   Use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the
registrant, its officers, agents, employees, and permittees; and



            2.   Placement and use of facilities in the
right-of-way by its officers, agents, employees, and permittees, including,
but not limited to, protection against liability arising from completed
operations, damage of underground facilities, and collapse of property;



            3.   Naming the city as an additional insured as
to whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable, and for
whom defense will be provided as to all such coverages;



            4.   Requiring that the city be notified 30 days
in advance of cancellation of the policy or material modification of a
coverage term; and



            5.   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage,
automobile liability coverage, worker’s compensation, and umbrella coverage
established by the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the
public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter.



      (4)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance
policies.



      (5)   A copy of the person’s order granting a certificate of
authority from the State Public Utilities Commission or other applicable
state of federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such
certificate from said Commission or other state of federal agency.



   (B)   Notice of changes. The registrant shall keep all of the
information listed above current at all times by providing to the city
information as to changes within 15 days following the date on which the
registrant has knowledge of any change.



(2006 Code, § 14.11)



§ 91.08  REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   Operations.



      (1)   (a)   Each registrant shall, at the time of
registration and by December 1 of each year, file a construction and major
maintenance plan for underground facilities with the Planning and Zoning
Director.



         (b)   1.Such plan shall be submitted using a format
designated by the city and shall contain the information to be necessary to
facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of excavations and
obstructions of rights-of-way.



            2.   The plan shall include, but not be limited
to, the following information:



               a.   The locations and the estimated
beginning and ending dates of all projects to be commenced during the next
calendar year (in this section, a “next-year project”); and



               b.   To the extent known, the tentative
locations and estimated beginning and ending dates for all projects
contemplated for the five years following the next calendar year (in this
section, a “five-year project”).



      (2)   The term “project” in this section shall include
both next-year projects and five-year projects.



      (3)   By January 1 of each year, the city will have available
for inspection in the Planning and Zoning Director’s office a composite
list of all projects of which the city has been informed in the annual plans.
All registrants are responsible for keeping themselves informed of the
current status of this list.



      (4)   Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change
any project in its list of next-year projects, and must notify the city and
all other registrants of all such changes in said list. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of
another registrant listed by the other registrant.



   (B)   Additional next year projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the city will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure
to include a project in a plan submitted to the city if the registrant has
used commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project.



(2006 Code, § 14.12)



§ 91.09  RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.



   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and
the patching or restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of extraordinary circumstances beyond the
control of the permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or
unreasonable under § 91.12.



   (B)   Patch and restoration. The permittee shall patch its own work.
The city may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or
to restore the right-of-way itself.



      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way,
the permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If,
during the 30 months following such restoration, the pavement settles due to
the permittee’s improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city,
within 30 days of billing, all costs associated with having to correct the
defective work.



      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the
right-of-way itself, it shall, at the time of application for an excavation
permit, post a construction performance bond in an amount determined by the
city to be sufficient to cover the cost of restoration. If, within 24 months
after completion of the restoration of the right-of-way, the Public Works
Director determines that the right-of-way has been properly restored, the
surety on the construction performance bond shall be released.



      (3)   Turf establishment specification. Disturbed area in city
right-of-way shall be re-seeded in accordance with MNDOT, Standard
Specification for Construction, § 2575, and the following:



         (a)   Topsoil shall be placed to a minimum depth of four
inches and hand-raked;



         (b)   Seed mixture MNDOT No. 65A, or equal, shall be
applied at 100 pounds per acre;



         (c)   Fertilizer analysis 18-18-18 shall be applied at
700 pounds per acre;



         (d)   Erodible areas shall be covered with wood fiber
blanket or Type I mulch;



         (e)   The season of planting is April 1 to June 1, July
20 to September 20, or dormant seeding between October 20 and November 15;



         (f)   All water for seed maintenance shall be furnished
and applied by the contractor; and



         (g)   The contractor shall continue watering and
maintenance as necessary until a good stand of grass is established and
accepted by the city.



   (C)   Standards.



      (1)   The permittee shall perform patching or restoration
according to the standards and with the materials specified by the Public
Works Director. The Public Works Director shall have the authority to
prescribe the manner and extent of the restoration, and may do so in written
procedures of general application or on a case-by-case basis.



      (2)   The Public Works Director in exercising this authority
shall comply with PUC Standards for right-of-way restoration and shall
further be guided by the following considerations:



         (a)   The number, size, depth, and duration of the
excavations, disruptions, or damage to the right-of-way;



         (b)   The traffic volume carried by the right-of-way,
the character of the neighborhood surrounding the right-of-way;



         (c)   The pre-excavation condition of the right-of-way,
the remaining life expectancy of the right-of-way affected by the excavation;



         (d)   Whether the relative cost of the method of
restoration to the permittee is in reasonable balance with the prevention of
an accelerated depreciation of the right-of-way that would otherwise result
from the excavation, disturbance, or damage to the right-of-way; and



         (e)   The likelihood that the particular method of
restoration would be effective in slowing the depreciation of the
right-of-way that would otherwise take place.



   (D)   Guarantees. By choosing to restore the right-of-way itself,
the permittee guarantees its work and shall maintain it for 24 months
following its completion. During this 24-month period, it shall, upon
notification from the Public Works Director, correct all restoration work to
the extent necessary, using the method required by the Public Works Director.
Said work shall be completed within ten working days of the receipt of the
notice from the Public Works Director, not including days during which work
cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force majeure or days
when work is prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under § 91.12.



   (E)   Obligation. Construction triggers an obligation of the
right-of-way user that the right-of-way restoration be completed according to
the conditions set forth in this chapter. The right-of-way user also assumes
responsibility for “as built” drawings and for repairing facilities or
structures, including rights-of-way that were damaged during facility
installation. The obligation is limited to one year for plantings and turf
establishment.



   (F)   Failure to restore.



      (1)   If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in
the manner and to the condition required by the Public Works Director, or
fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the
Public Works Director, the Public Works Director at its option may do such
work.



      (2)   In that event, the permittee shall pay to the city,
within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If the
permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its rights under
the construction performance bond.



   (G)   Degradation cost in lieu of restoration. In lieu of
right-of-way restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation
fee; however, the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and
the degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these
responsibilities.



   (H)   Site restoration and cleanup.



      (1)   As the excavation work progresses, all streets shall be
thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock, and other debris
resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the locations of such
excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee. From time
to time, as may be ordered by the Public Works Director, and in any event
immediately after completion of said work, the permittee shall, at its own
expense, clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind
resulting from said work.



      (2)   (a)   This may be done by the city and the cost
thereof charged to the permittee. Whenever it may be necessary for the
permittee to excavate through any landscaped area, said area shall be
re-established in a like manner after the excavation has been backfilled as
required.



         (b)   All construction and maintenance work shall be
done in a manner designed to leave the area clean of earth and debris and in
a condition as nearly as possible to that which existed before such work
began.



         (c)   The permittee shall not remove, even temporarily,
any existing trees or shrubs without first obtaining the consent of the
Public Works Director.



   (I)   Winter construction.



      (1)   Between October 1 and May 1, all trenches must be
backfilled with gravel and tamped in six-inch lifts or layers to at least one
foot back of curb line.



      (2)   The upper two inches of the trench shall be composed of
asphaltic cold materials to be kept at grade at all times between October 1
and May 1 and then restored to permanent resurfacing by June 1.



(2006 Code, § 14.30)  (Ord. 137, 3rd Series, passed 4-7-2000)



§ 91.10  JOINT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits
to excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.



   (B)   With city initiated projects. Registrants who join in a
scheduled obstruction or excavation performed by the city, whether or not it
is a joint application by two or more registrants or a single application,
are not required to pay the obstruction and degradation portions of the
permit fee.



   (C)   Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same
obstruction or excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the
payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee. Registrants must agree
among themselves as to the portion each will pay and indicate the same on
their applications.



(2006 Code, § 14.40)



§ 91.11  SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Limitation on area.



      (1)   A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the
right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside
the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein.



      (2)   Any permittee which determines that an area greater than
that specified in the permit must be obstructed or excavated must before
working in that greater area:



         (a)   Make application for a permit extension and pay
any additional fees required thereby; and



         (b)   Be granted a new permit or permit extension.



   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the dates specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the
permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the
end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it
must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs and receive the
new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end
date of the previous permit. This supplementary application must be done
before the permit end date.



(2006 Code, § 14.41)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.12  OTHER OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit
does not relieve the permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary
permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or
other applicable rule, law, or regulation.



   (B)   Compliance with state law. A permittee shall comply with all
requirements of local, state, and federal laws, including M.S. §§ 216D.01
through 215D.09, as they may be amended from time to time, (“One Call
Excavation Notice System”). A permittee shall perform all work in
conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations,
and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its
permit, regardless of who does the work.



      (1)   Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, and with the
approval of the Public Works Director, no right-of-way obstruction or
excavation may be done when seasonally prohibited, when conditions are
unreasonable for such work, when air temperatures remain below 25°F as
recorded at the City WWTP for the previous five consecutive days, or the
frost depth at the excavation site exceeds four inches.



      (2)   Interference with right-of-way. A permittee shall not so
obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water
through the gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. Private
vehicles of those doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or
next to a permit area, unless parked in conformance with city parking
regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks must be done solely within
the defined permit area unless specifically authorized by the permit.



(2006 Code, § 14.42)  (Ord. 196, Third Series, passed 4-14-2015)  Penalty,
see § 91.99



§ 91.13  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   General excavation. The excavation, backfilling, patching, and
restoration, and all other work performed in the right-of-way shall be done
in conformance with engineering and OSHA standards.



   (B)   Excavation protection. The permittee shall be responsible for
barricading the excavation in conformance with the Uniform Traffic-Control
Manual as adopted by the State Department of Transportation.



      (1)   It shall be the duty of every person cutting or making
an excavation in or upon any public place to place and maintain barricades
and warning devices necessary for the safety of the general public. Warning
signs shall be placed far enough in advance of the construction operation to
alert traffic within a public street, and cones or other approved devices
shall be placed to channel traffic, in accordance with the instructions of
the administrative authority. All safety precautions and traffic-control
measures shall conform to current requirements as specified in the latest
edition of the Uniform Traffic-Control Manual as adopted by the State
Department of Transportation.



      (2)   The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure
that during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions, as
near normal as possible, shall be maintained at all times so as to minimize
inconvenience to the occupants of the adjoining property and to the general
public. Adequate pedestrian passageways shall be maintained.



      (3)   The permittee shall maintain safe crossings for two
lanes of vehicle traffic at all street intersections, where possible. If any
excavation is made across any public street, alley, sidewalk, or established
crosswalk, adequate crossings shall be maintained for vehicles and for
pedestrians.



      (4)   The Public Works Director may, by written approval,
permit the closing of streets and alleys for a prescribed period of time. The
Public Works Director may require that the permittee give notification to
various public agencies and to the general public before approval becomes
valid. In specific instances, even though the street may not be closed, the
permittee may also be required to give such notice.



   (C)   Protection of adjoining property. The permittee shall at all
times preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing
adequate support and taking other necessary measures. The permittee shall, at
its own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences, or other
property likely to be damaged during the process of the work and shall be
responsible for all damage to public or private property resulting from its
failure to properly protect and carry out said work.



   (D)   Maintenance of roadway drainage. The permittee shall maintain
all gutters free and unobstructed for the full depth of the adjacent curb and
for at least one foot in width from the face of such curb at the gutter line.



   (E)   Care of excavated material. All excavated material piled
adjacent to the trench or in the street shall be maintained in such a manner
as not to endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians, or users of the
streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those
using the streets and adjoining property. The Public Works Director may
require the permittee to remove the excavation material from the work site.
It shall be the permittee’s responsibility to secure the necessary
permission and make all necessary arrangements for all required storage and
disposal sites.



   (F)   Noise, dust, and debris. Each permittee shall conduct and
carry out excavation work in such a manner as to avoid unnecessary
inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of
neighboring property. In the performance of the excavation work, the
permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce, to the fullest extent
practical, noise, dust, and unsightly debris. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., the permittee shall not use, except with the express written
permission of the administrative authority, or in case of an emergency as
herein otherwise provided, any tool, appliance, or equipment producing noise
of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep of occupants of the neighboring
property.



   (G)   Breaking through pavement.



      (1)   Heavy-duty pavement breakers may be prohibited by the
city when their use may endanger existing substructures or other property.



      (2)   Sections of sidewalks shall be removed to the nearest
scoreline or joint.



      (3)   Unstable pavement shall be removed over caveouts and
overbreaks and the restoration shall be treated as part of the main
excavation.



      (4)   Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and
neatly aligned with the center line of the trench.



      (5)   Cutouts, outside the trench lines must be normal or
parallel to the trench line.



      (6)   Boring or other methods to prevent cutting of pavement
may be required.



      (7)   All pavements shall be cut a minimum depth of two inches
on the outside edge of the area to be excavated before excavation begins to
prevent lifting of surfaces outside the area being excavated.



   (H)   Clearance for emergency facilities. The excavation work shall
be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire
hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, and any other emergency facilities.



   (I)   Placement and compaction.



      (1)   Backfilling shall progress uniformly in horizontal
layers throughout the excavation area to be filled. Select materials shall be
placed around the pipe, conduit, and the like, and carefully compacted with
mechanical equipment and non-mechanical tamping within the pipe zone to at
least six inches above the conduit. At this point, succeeding layers of
backfill material shall be placed in uniform layers before compaction of
approximately six inches, tamped by mechanical means specially fabricated for
this use only. Compacting with the backhoe bucket or front end loader tires
will not be acceptable. Compaction of each layer shall continue until the
density is equal to that of adjacent undisturbed materials at the same
elevation in the trench. Compacted granular materials shall meet at least
100% standard proctor density, ASTM D-698-70, if density tests are required.



      (2)   (a)   The permittee shall refill the excavation in a
manner which is satisfactory to the administrative authority and is most
effective to accomplish through consolidation and enable the public place to
be restored to a condition equivalent to that in which it was prior to the
excavation.



         (b)   When required, soil tests are to be furnished by a
registered professional engineer specializing in soil engineering.



         (c)   Prior to resurfacing, tests must show that the
backfill material meets the minimum requirements as prescribed by the
administrative authority.



         (c)   The permittee shall be required to bear the
expense of such tests.



(2006 Code, § 14.50)  (Ord. 137, 3rd Series, passed 4-7-2000; Ord. 196,
Third Series, passed 4-14-2015)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.14  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder
is completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in
accordance with PUC Rules.



      (1)   Unless waived by the city, a person designated by the
right-of-way user as a responsible employee shall sign a completion
certificate showing the completion date for the work performed, identifying
the installer and designer of record, and certifying that work was completed
according to the requirements of the city.



      (2)   If necessary, due to approved changes for the work as
projected when the permit was applied for, the permittee shall submit “as
built” drawings or maps within six months of completing the work, showing
any deviations from the plan that are greater than plus or minus two feet.



      (3)   The city shall respond within 30 days of receipt of the
completion certificate. Failure to approve or disapprove the permittee’s
performance within 30 days is deemed to be approval by the city.



   (B)   Site inspection. The permittee shall make the work site
available to the Public Works Director and to all others as authorized by law
for inspection of utility main connections and entirety of project at all
reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.



   (C)   Authority of Public Works Director.



      (1)   At the time of inspection the Public Works Director may
order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the
life, health, safety, or well-being of the public.



      (2)   (a)   The Public Works Director may issue an order to
the permittee for any work which does not conform to the terms of the permit
or other applicable standards, conditions, or codes.



         (b)   The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after
issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the Public Works
Director that the violation has been corrected.



         (c)   If such proof has not been presented within the
required time, the Public Works Director may revoke the permit pursuant to §
91.46.



(2006 Code, § 14.60)  (Ord. 196, Third Series, passed 4-14-2015)



§ 91.15  SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.



   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or
ends sooner than the date given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the
city of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.



(2006 Code, § 14.62)



§ 91.16  MAPPING DATA.



   (A)   Information required. Each registrant shall provide mapping
information required by the city in accordance with PUC Rules to include the
following information:



      (1)   Location and approximate depth of applicant’s mains,
cables, conduits, switches, and related equipment, and facilities, with the
location based on:



         (a)   Offsets from property lines, distances from the
centerline of the public right-of-way, and curb lines as determined by the
city;



         (b)   Coordinates derived from the coordinate system
being used by the city; or



         (c)   Any other system agreed upon by the right-of-way
user and city. The type and size of the utility.



      (2)   A description showing above-ground appurtenances;



      (3)   A legend explaining symbols, characters, abbreviations,
scale, and other data shown on the map;



      (4)   Mapping data shall be provided with the specificity
requested by the city for inclusion in the mapping system used by the city;
and



      (5)   For mapping data provided to the city in GIS compatible
and city format, the mapping portion of the excavation/obstruction fee is
waived.



   (B)   Submittal requirement.



      (1)   Within 60 days after the acquisition installation or
construction of additional equipment or any relocation, abandonment, or
disuse of existing equipment, each registrant shall submit the mapping data
required herein or they will forfeit cash deposit to the city and no future
excavation permits will be issued to that registrant.



      (2)   Within two years after the effective date of this
chapter, all right-of-way users shall submit detailed plans as may be
reasonable and practical for all facilities and equipment installed, used, or
abandoned within the public right-of-way.



      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, mapping data shall be
submitted by all registrants for all equipment which is to be installed or
constructed after the effective date of this chapter at the time any permits
are sought under these provisions.



      (4)   Six months after the effective date of this chapter, a
new registrant, or a registrant which has not submitted a plan as required
above, shall submit complete and accurate mapping data for all its equipment
at the time any permits are sought under these provisions.



   (C)   Telecommunication equipment. Information on existing
facilities and equipment of telecommunications right-of-way users need only
be supplied in the form maintained by the telecommunication right-of-way user.



   (D)   Trade secret information. At the request of any registrant,
any information requested by the city, which qualifies as a
“trade-secret” under M.S. § 13.37, subd. 1(b), as it may be amended from
time to time, shall be treated as trade secret information as detailed
therein.



(2006 Code, § 14.70)  (Ord. 196, Third Series, passed 4-14-2015)



§ 91.17  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   Underground installation. New construction and the
installation of new facilities shall be done underground or contained within
buildings or other structures in conformity with applicable codes when
directed by the Council, except where emergency service is required.



   (B)   Corridors.



      (1)   The city may assign specific corridors within the
right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each
type of facilities that is, or pursuant to current technology, the city
expects will someday be located within the right-of-way. All excavation,
obstruction, or other permits issued by the city involving the installation
or replacement of facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the
facilities at issue.



      (2)   Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in
a position at variance with the corridors established by the city shall, no
later than at the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area
where the facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned
position within the right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the
city for good cause shown, upon consideration of such factors as the
remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety, customer service
needs, and hardship to the registrant.



   (C)   Nuisance. Two years after the effective date of this chapter,
any facilities found in a right-of-way that have not been registered shall be
deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has
at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or
taking possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a
useable condition.



   (D)   Limitation of space. To protect the health, safety, and
welfare, or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use,
the city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or
additional facilities within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the
city shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and
potential users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by
considerations of the public interest, the public’s needs for the
particular utility service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of
year with respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing
facilities in the right-of-way, and future city plans for public improvements
and development projects which have been determined to be in the public
interest.



(2006 Code, § 14.71)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.18  RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   Relocation and removal from right-of-way.



      (1)   A registrant must promptly, and at its own expense, with
due regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and relocate
its facilities in the right-of-way whenever the city for good cause requests
such removal and relocation, and shall restore the right-of-way to the same
condition it was in prior to said removal or relocation.



      (2)   The city may make such request to prevent interference
by the company’s equipment or facilities with:



         (a)   A present or future city use of the right-of-way;



         (b)   A public improvement undertaken by the city;



         (c)   An economic development project in which the city
has an interest or investment;



         (d)   When the public health, safety, and welfare
require it; or



         (e)   When necessary to prevent interference with the
safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way.



   (B)   Payment. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person shall not be
required to remove or relocate its facilities from any right-of-way which has
been vacated in favor of a non-governmental entity, unless and until the
reasonable costs thereof are first paid to the person therefor.



(2006 Code, § 14.72)



§ 91.19  PRE-EXCAVATION FACILITY AND FACILITIES LOCATION.



   (A)   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. §§
216D.01 through 215D.09, as they may be amended from time to time, (“One
Call Excavation Notice System”) before the start date of any right-of-way
excavation, each registrant who has facilities or equipment in the area to be
excavated shall mark the horizontal and approximate vertical placement of all
said facilities.



   (B)   Any registrant whose facilities are less than 20 inches below
a concrete or asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with the
excavation contractor to establish the exact location of its facilities and
the best procedure for excavation.



(2006 Code, § 14.73)



§ 91.20  DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.



   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support, or move a registrant’s facilities to protect it, the
city shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably
possible. The costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant
and must be paid within 30 days from the date of billing. Each registrant
shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the
right-of-way which it or its facilities damages. Each registrant shall be
responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another
registrant caused during the city’s response to an emergency occasioned by
that registrant’s facilities.



(2006 Code, § 14.74)



§ 91.21  RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATIONS.



   (A)   Reservation of right. If the city vacates a right-of-way which
contains the facilities of a registrant, and if the vacation does not require
the relocation of the registrant’s or the permittee’s facilities, the
city shall reserve, to and for itself and all registrants having facilities
in the vacated right-of-way, the right to install, maintain, and operate any
facilities in the vacated right-of-way and to enter upon such right-of-way at
any time for the purpose of reconstructing, inspecting, maintaining, or
repairing the same.



   (B)   Relocation of facilities. If the vacation requires the
relocation of the registrant’s or the permittee’s facilities, and:



      (1)   If the vacation proceedings are initiated by the
registrant or the permittee, the registrant or permittee must pay the
relocation costs;



      (2)   If the vacation proceedings are initiated by the city,
the registrant or permittee must pay the relocation costs unless otherwise
agreed to by the city and the registrant or permittee; or



      (3)   If the vacation proceedings are initiated by a person or
persons other than the registrant or permittee, such other person or persons
must pay the relocation costs.



(2006 Code, § 14.75)



§ 91.22  INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.



   (A)   Limitation of liability. By reason of the acceptance of a
registration or the grant of a right-of-way permit, the city does not assume
any liability:



      (1)   For injuries to persons, damage to property, or loss of
service claims by parties other than the registrant or the city; or



      (2)   For claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the
installation, presence, maintenance, or operation of facilities by
registrants or activities of registrants.



   (B)   Indemnification.



      (1)   A registrant or permittee shall indemnify, keep, and
hold the city free and harmless from any and all liability on account of
injury to persons or damage to property occasioned by the issuance of permits
or by the construction, maintenance, repair, inspection, or operation of the
registrant’s or permittee’s facilities located in the right-of-way.



      (2)   (a)   The city shall not be indemnified for losses or
claims occasioned through its own negligence except for losses or claims
arising out of or alleging the local government unit’s negligence as to the
issuance of permits or inspections to ensure permit compliance.



      (b)   The city shall not be indemnified if the injury or
damage results from the performance in a proper manner of acts that the
registrant or permittee reasonably believes will cause injury or damage, and
the performance is nevertheless ordered or directed by the city after
receiving notice of the registrant’s or permittee’s determination.



   (C)   Defense.



      (1)   If a suit is brought against the city under
circumstances where the registrant or permittee is required to indemnify, the
registrant or permittee, at its sole cost and expense, shall defend the city
in a suit if written notice of the suit is promptly given to the registrant
or permittee within a period in which the registrant or permittee is not
prejudiced by the lack or delay of notice.



      (2)   If the registrant or permittee is required to indemnify
and defend, it shall thereafter have control of the litigation, but the
registrant or permittee may not settle the litigation without the consent of
the city. Consent will not be unreasonably withheld.



      (3)   (a)   This part is not, as to their parties, a waiver
of any defense, immunity, or damage litigation otherwise available to the
city.



         (b)   In defending an action on behalf of the city, the
registrant or permittee is entitled to assert in an action every defense,
immunity, or damage limitation that the city could assert in its own behalf.



(2006 Code, § 14.76)  (Ord. 137, 3rd Series, passed 4-7-2000)



§ 91.23  ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE FACILITIES.



   (A)   Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to
discontinue its operations in the city must either:



      (1)   Provide information satisfactory to the city that the
registrant’s obligations for its facilities in the right-of-way under this
chapter have been lawfully assumed by another registrant; or



      (2)   (a)   Submit to the city a proposal and instruments
for transferring ownership of its facilities to the city.



         (b)   If a registrant proceeds under this clause, the
city may, at its option:



            1.   Purchase the facilities;



            2.   Require the registrant, at its own expense,
to remove it; or



            3.   Require the registrant to post a bond in an
amount sufficient to reimburse the city for reasonably anticipated costs to
be incurred in removing the facilities.



   (B)   Abandoned facilities.



      (1)   Facilities of a registrant who fails to comply with
division (A) above, and which, for two years remains unused, shall be deemed
to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance.



      (2)   The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at
law or in equity, including, but not limited to:



         (a)   Abating the nuisance;



         (b)   Taking possession of the facilities and restoring
it to a useable condition; or



         (c)   Requiring removal of the facilities by the
registrant, or the registrant’s successor in interest.



   (C)   Removal. Any registrant who has unusable and abandoned
facilities in any right-of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way during
the next scheduled excavation, unless this requirement is waived by the city.



(2006 Code, § 14.90)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.24  APPEAL.



   (A)   Right of review by Council.



      (1)   A right-of-way user that:



         (a)   Has been denied registration;



         (b)   Has been denied a permit;



         (c)   Has had a permit revoked; or



         (d)   Believes that the fees imposed are valid, may have
the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon written request, by
the Council.



      (2)   The Council shall act on a timely written request. A
decision by the Council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition
will be in writing and supported by written findings establishing the
reasonableness of the decision.



   (B)   Arbitration.



      (1)   Upon affirmation by the Council of the denial,
revocation, or fee imposition, the right-of-way user shall have the right to
have the matter resolved by binding arbitration. Binding arbitration must be
before an arbitrator agreed to by both the Council and right-of-way user. If
the parties cannot agree on an arbitrator, the matter must be resolved by a
three-person arbitration panel made up of one arbitrator selected by the
city, one arbitrator selected by the right-of-way user, and one selected by
the other two arbitrators.



      (2)   The costs and fees of single arbitrator shall be borne
equally by the city and right-of-way user. In the event there is a third
arbitrator, each party shall bear the expense of his, her, or its own
arbitrator and shall jointly and equally bear with the other party the
expense of the third arbitrator and of the arbitration.



(2006 Code, § 14.91)



§ 91.25  RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.



   A permittee’s or registrant’s rights are subject to the regulatory
and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.



(2006 Code, § 14.92)




PERMITS




§ 91.40  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
no person may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having
obtained the appropriate right-of-way permit from the Planning and Zoning
Director to do so.



      (1)   Excavation permit.



         (a)   An excavation permit is required by a registrant
to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way
by placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration
specified therein.



         (b)   A construction/improvement/upgrade project
requiring excavation within the right of-way requires an excavation permit.



         (c)   Multiple excavations limited to one city block are
considered one project and require an excavation permit except major
reconstruction or extensions by a franchised utility will be issued under one
permit provided all locations are included on one permit and project is
completed within 60 days of issuing permit.



         (d)   Each permit application will require the mapping
data per § 91.16.



      (2)   Obstruction permit.



         (a)   An obstruction permit is required by a registrant
to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-of-way
for periods in excess of eight consecutive hours by placing equipment
described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for the duration
specified therein. Proper traffic and pedestrian control devices shall be in
place at all times during the obstruction. An obstruction permit is not
required if a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same
project.



         (b)   Failure to obtain an obstruction permit prior to
the obstruction will require an after-the-fact obstruction permit fee plus
payment of a delay permit. Applicants obtaining Wadena or Ottertail County
Highway or State Department of Transportation excavation permits for
facilities in their rights-of-way must obtain a city obstruction permit and
submit a copy of the plans with mapping data for recording purposes per §
91.16.



      (3)   Permit waiver. In the event of a major catastrophe or
emergency declared by the city requiring the restoration of services that are
within the right-of-way, the requirement for permits and permit fees may be
waived by the city at its discretion. After restoration of the service has
been completed, an updated mapping plan per § 91.16 must be submitted to the
city within 60 days.



   (B)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the
right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless such
person:



      (1)   Makes a supplementary application for another
right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit; and



      (2)   A new permit or permit extension is granted.



   (C)   Permit display. Permits issued under this chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or other wise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the Public Works Director.



(2006 Code, § 14.13)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.41  PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Application for a permit is made to the Planning and Zoning
Director.



   (B)   Right-of-way permit applications shall contain, and will be
considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the
following provisions:



      (1)   Registration. Registration with the Planning and Zoning
Director pursuant to this chapter;



      (2)   Submission. Submission of a completed permit application
form, including all required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the
location and area of the proposed project and the location of all known
existing and proposed facilities;



      (3)   Payment. Payment of money due the city for:



         (a)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs, and
other management costs;



         (b)   Prior obstructions or excavations;



         (c)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered
by the city because of applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the
rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city; and



         (d)   Franchise or user fees, if applicable.



      (4)   Disputed amounts. Payment of disputed amounts due the
city by posting security or depositing in an escrow account an amount equal
to at least 110% of the amount owing; and



      (5)   Additional facilities. When an excavation permit is
requested for purposes of installing additional facilities, and the posting
of a construction performance bond for the additional facilities is
insufficient, the posting of an additional or larger construction performance
bond for the additional facilities may be required.



(2006 Code, § 14.14)



§ 91.42  ISSUANCE OF PERMITS; CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the
requirements of this chapter, the Planning and Zoning Director shall issue a
permit.



   (B)   Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the
right-of-way and its current use.



(2006 Code, § 14.15)



§ 91.43  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Excavation permit fees. The excavation permit fee shall be
established by the Council in an amount sufficient to recover the following
costs:



      (1)   The city management costs;



      (2)   Degradations costs, if applicable; and



      (3)   City mapping cost.



   (B)   Obstruction permit fee. The obstruction permit fee shall be
established by the Council and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover
the city management costs associated with recording and inspecting the
right-of-way obstructions.



   (C)   Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction
permit shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit
fees.



   (D)   Non-refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that
the city has revoked for a breach as stated in § 91.46 are not refundable.



(2006 Code, § 14.16)  (Ord. 196, Third Series, passed 4-14-2015)



§ 91.44  DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the denial is
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use.



   (A)   Mandatory denial. Except in an emergency, no right-of-way will
be granted:



      (1)   To any person required by § 91.06 to be registered who
has not done so;



      (2)   To any person required by § 91.08 to file an annual
report but has failed to do so;



      (3)   To any person who has failed within the past two years
to comply, or is presently not in full compliance with the requirements of
this chapter;



      (4)   To any person as to whom there exists grounds for the
revocation of a permit under § 91.46; or



      (5)   (a)   If, in the discretion of the city, the issuance
of a permit for the particular date and/or time would cause a conflict or
interfere with an exhibition, celebration, festival, or any other event.



         (b)   The city in exercising this discretion, shall be
guided by the safety and convenience of ordinary travel of the public over
the right-of-way, and by considerations relating to the public health,
safety, and welfare.



   (B)   Permissive denial.



      (1)   The city, may deny a permit to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare; to prevent interference with the safety and
convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way; or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its users.



      (2)   The city in its discretion, may consider one or more of
the following factors:



         (a)   The extent to which right-of-way space where the
permit is sought is available;



         (b)   The competing demands for the particular space in
the right-of-way;



         (c)   The availability of other locations in the
right-of-way or in other rights-of-way that affect location of equipment in
the right-of-way;



         (d)   The applicability of provisions of this code of
ordinances or other regulations of the right-of-way that affect location of
equipment in the right-of-way;



         (e)   The degree of compliance of the applicant with the
terms and conditions of its franchise, this chapter, and other applicable
provisions of this code of ordinances and regulations;



         (f)   The degree of disruption to surrounding
neighborhoods and businesses that will result from the use of that part of
the right-of-way;



         (g)   The condition and age of the right-of-way, and
whether and when it is scheduled for total or partial reconstruction; and



         (h)   The balancing of the costs of disruption to the
public and damage to the right-of-way, against the benefits to that part of
the public served by the expansion into additional parts of the right-of-way.



   (C)   Discretionary issuance. Notwithstanding the provisions of
division (A) above, the city may issue a permit in any case where the permit
is necessary:



      (1)   To prevent substantial economic hardship to a customer
of the permit applicant;



      (2)   To allow such customer to materially improve its utility
service; and



      (3)   To allow a new economic development project, or
otherwise required by law; and where the permit applicant did not have
knowledge of the hardship, the plans for improvement of service, or the
development project when said applicant was required to submit its list of
next year projects.



   (D)   Permits for additional next year projects. Notwithstanding the
provisions of division (A) above, the city may issue a permit to a registrant
who was allowed under § 91.40 to submit an additional next- year project,
such permit to be subject to all conditions and requirements of law,
including such conditions as may be imposed under § 91.42.



(2006 Code, § 14.43)  (Ord. 137, 3rd Series, passed 4-7-2000)



§ 91.45  WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   (A)   Emergency situations.



      (1)   Each registrant shall immediately notify the city of any
event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The
registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to
the emergency.



      (2)   Within two business days after the occurrence of the
emergency, the registrant shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees
associated therewith, and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to
bring itself into compliance with this chapter for the actions it took in
response to the emergency.



   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person
who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or
excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, and as a penalty
pay double the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees
required by the Legislative Code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to
correct any damage to the right-of-way and comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter.



(2006 Code, § 14.61)



§ 91.46  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   Substantial breach.



      (1)   The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to
revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund, if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance,
rule, or regulation, or any material condition of the permit.



      (2)   A substantial breach by the permittee shall include, but
shall not be limited, to the following:



         (a)   The violation of any material provision of the
right-of-way permit;



         (b)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material
provision of the right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to
perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;



         (c)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the
application for a right-of-way permit;



         (d)   The failure to complete the work in a timely
manner; unless a permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to
complete work is due to reasons beyond the permittee’s control; or



   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the
permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any
statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or any condition of the permit, the
city shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation.
The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation
of the permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city at
its discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to
mitigate and remedy the breach.



   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, the permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city that will cure the breach. The permittee’s failure
to so contact the city or the permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable
plan, or the permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan,
shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, the
permittee’s failure to so contact the city, or the permittee’s failure to
submit an acceptable plan, or the permittee’s failure to reasonably
implement the approved plan, shall automatically place the permittee on
probation for one full year.



   (D)   Cause for probation. From time to time, the city may establish
a list of conditions of the permit, which if breached, will automatically
place the permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited
to, working out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-way
grossly outside of the permit authorization.



   (E)   Automatic revocation. If a permittee, while on probation,
commits a breach as outlined above, the permittee’s permit will
automatically be revoked and the permittee will not be allowed further
permits for one full year, except for emergency repairs.



   (F)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revokes, the
permittee shall also reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable costs,
including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable
attorneys’ fees incurred in connection with such revocation.



(2006 Code, § 14.63)  (Ord. 137, 3rd Series, passed 4-7-2000)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph, or provision of
this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.



(2006 Code, § 14.99)  (Ord. 137, 3rd Series, passed 4-7-2000)



CHAPTER 92:  ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES



Section



   92.01   Findings and purpose



   92.02   Definitions



   92.03   Violation to abandon motor vehicle



   92.04   Authority to impound vehicles



   92.05   Sale; waiting periods



   92.06   Notice of taking and sale



   92.07   Right to reclaim



   92.08   Operator’s deficiency claim; consent to sale



   92.09   Disposition by impound lot



   92.10   Disposal authority



   92.11   Contracts; reimbursement by MPCA



§ 92.01  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   M.S. Ch. 168B, and Minn. Rules Ch. 7035, as they may be amended from
time to time, are hereby adopted by reference. This subchapter is adopted
under the authority of M.S. § 168B.09, subd. 2, as it may be amended from
time to time. If any of these provisions are less stringent that the
provisions of M.S. Ch. 168B or Minn. Rules Ch. 7035, as it may be amended
from time to time, the statute or rule shall take precedence.



§ 92.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE.



      (1)   A motor vehicle, as defined in M.S. § 169.011, subd. 42
as it may be amended from time to time, that:



         (a)   Has remained illegally:



            1.   For a period of more than 48 hours on any
property owned or controlled by a unit of government, or more than four hours
on that property when it is properly posted; or



            2.   On private property for a period of time, as
determined under § 92.04(B), without the consent of the person in control of
the property; and



         (b)   Lacks vital component parts or is in an inoperable
condition that it has no substantial potential for further use consistent
with its usual functions, unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage
building.



      (2)   A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in M.S. §
168.10 as it may be amended from time to time, is not considered an abandoned
vehicle.



      (3)   Vehicles on the premises of junk yards and automobile
graveyards that are defined, maintained, and licensed in accordance with M.S.
§ 161.242 as it may be amended from time to time, or that are licensed and
maintained in accordance with local laws and zoning regulations, are not
considered abandoned vehicles.



      (4)   A vehicle being held for storage by agreement or being
held under police authority or pursuant to a writ or court order is not
considered abandoned, nor may it be processed as abandoned while the police
hold, writ or court order is in effect.



   DEPARTMENT. The Minnesota Department of Public Safety.



   IMPOUND. To take and hold a vehicle in legal custody. There are two
types of IMPOUNDS: public and nonpublic.



   IMPOUND LOT OPERATOR or OPERATOR. A person who engages in impounding or
storing, usually temporarily, unauthorized, or abandoned vehicles. OPERATOR
includes an operator of a public or nonpublic impound lot, regardless of
whether tow truck service is provided.



   JUNK VEHICLE. A vehicle that:



      (1)   Is three years old or older;



      (2)   Is extensively damaged, with the damage including things
as broken or missing wheels, motor, drive train, or transmission;



      (3)   Is apparently inoperable;



      (4)   Does not have a valid, current registration plate; and



      (5)   Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the
approximate value of the scrap in it.



   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. Has the meaning given “motor vehicle” in
M.S. § 169.011, subd. 42, as it may be amended from time to time.



   MOTOR VEHICLE WASTE. Solid waste and liquid wastes derived in the
operation of or in the recycling of a motor vehicle, including such things as
tires and used motor oil, but excluding scrap metal.



   MPCA or AGENCY. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   NONPUBLIC IMPOUND LOT. An impound lot that is not a public impound lot.



   PUBLIC IMPOUND LOT. An impound lot owned by or contracting with a unit
of government under § 92.10.



   UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE. A vehicle that is subject to removal and
impoundment pursuant to M.S. § 168B.035 as it may be amended from time to
time, but is not a junk vehicle or an abandoned vehicle.



   UNIT OF GOVERNMENT. Includes a state department or agency, a special
purpose district, and a county, statutory or home rule charter city, or town.



   VITAL COMPONENT PARTS. Those parts of a motor vehicle that are
essential to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including such things
as the motor, drive train and wheels.



§ 92.03  VIOLATION TO ABANDON MOTOR VEHICLE.



   Any person who abandons a motor vehicle on any public or private
property, without the consent of the person in control of the property, is
guilty of a misdemeanor.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.04  AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES.



   (A)   Abandoned or junk vehicles. The City Administrator or his or
her designee or any peace officer employed or whose services are contracted
for by the city may take into custody and impound any abandoned or junk
vehicle if the vehicle is on public property. If the abandoned or junk
vehicle is located on private property, the vehicle shall not be removed or
impounded until the provisions of division (C) below are complied with.



   (B)   Unauthorized vehicles. The City Administrator, or his or her
designee or any peace officer employed or whose services are contracted for
by the city, may take into custody and impound any unauthorized vehicle under
M.S. § 168B.035 as it may be amended from time to time. A vehicle may also
be impounded after it has been left unattended in one of the following public
or private locations for the indicated period of time:



      (1)   In a public location not governed by M.S. § 168B.035 as
it may be amended from time to time:



         (a)   On a highway and properly tagged by a peace
officer, four hours;



         (b)   Located so as to constitute an accident or traffic
hazard to the traveling public, as determined by a peace officer,
immediately; or



         (c)   That is a parking facility or other public
property owned or controlled by a unit of government, properly posted, four
hours; or



      (2)   On private property, only with the express permission of
the owner of the property, a resident or other person in control of the
premises:



         (a)   That is single-family or duplex residential
property, immediately;



         (b)   That is private, nonresidential property, properly
posted, immediately;



         (c)   That is private, nonresidential property, not
posted, 24 hours; or



         (d)   That is any residential property, properly posted,
immediately.



      (3)   If under division (B)(2) above, permission is not
granted, then the city shall not remove and impound any vehicle until the
procedure established in division (C) below has been followed.



   (C)   If the vehicle is on private property, the City Administrator
or his or her designee or any peace officer employed or whose services are
contracted for by the city may take into custody and impound any abandoned or
junk vehicle on private property only with the permission of the owner of the
property, a resident, or other person in control of the premises. If
permission is denied, the city may declare the existence of the abandoned or
junk vehicle to be a nuisance and proceed to abate the nuisance as provided
for in §§ 92.01 through 92.07. Once the abatement procedure has been
completed, the city may apply for an order from a court of competent
jurisdiction authorizing the removal and impoundment of the vehicle and,
after the order has been granted, the city may then remove and impound the
vehicle.



§ 92.05  SALE; WAITING PERIODS.



   (A)   Sale after 15 days. An impounded vehicle is eligible for
disposal or sale under § 92.09, 15 days after notice to the owner, if the
vehicle is determined to be:



      (1)   A junk vehicle, except that it may have a valid, current
registration plate and still be eligible for disposal or sale under this
subdivision; or



      (2)   An abandoned vehicle.



   (B)   Sale after 45 days. An impounded vehicle is eligible for
disposal or sale under § 92.09, 45 days after notice to the owner, if the
vehicle is determined to be an unauthorized vehicle or upon the date of a
voluntary written title transfer by the registered owner to the impound lot
operator.



§ 92.06  NOTICE OF TAKING AND SALE.



   (A)   Contents; notice given within five days.



      (1)   When an impounded vehicle is taken into custody, the
city or impound lot operator taking it into custody shall give notice of the
taking to the registered owner and any registered lien holders within five
days.



      (2)   The notice shall:



         (a)   Set forth the date and place of the taking; the
year, make, model and serial number of the impounded motor vehicle if the
information can be reasonably obtained; and the place where the vehicle is
being held;



         (b)   Inform the owner and any lien holders of their
right to reclaim the vehicle under § 92.07; and



         (c)   State that failure of the owner or lien holders to
exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle and contents within the
appropriate time allowed under § 92.05 shall be deemed a waiver by them of
all right, title and interest in the vehicle and contents and a consent to
the transfer of title to and disposal or sale of the vehicle and contents
pursuant to § 92.09.



      (4)   State that the vehicle owner who provides to the impound
lot operator documentation from a government or nonprofit agency or legal aid
office that the owner is homeless, receives relief based on need, or is
eligible for legal aid services, has the unencumbered right to retrieve any
and all contents of the vehicle without charge.



   (B)   Notice by mail or publication. The notice shall be sent by
mail to the registered owner, if any, of an impounded vehicle and to all
readily identifiable lien holders of record. The Department makes this
information available to impound lot operators for notification purposes. If
it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and
address of the registered owner and all lien holders, the notice shall be
published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the
motor vehicle was towed from or abandoned. Published notices may be grouped
together for convenience and economy.



   (C)   Unauthorized vehicles; notice. If an unauthorized vehicle
remains unclaimed after 30 days from the date the notice was sent under
division (B) above, a second notice shall be sent by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the registered owner, if any, of the unauthorized
vehicle and to all readily identifiable lien holders of record.



§ 92.07  RIGHT TO RECLAIM.



   (A)   Payment of charges. The owner or any lien holder of an
impounded vehicle shall have a right to reclaim the vehicle from the city or
impound lot operator taking it into custody upon payment of all towing and
storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into custody within 15 or
45 days, as applicable under § 92.05, after the date of the notice required
by § 92.06.



   (B)   Lien holders. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
impair any lien of a garagekeeper under the laws of this state, or the right
of a lien holder to foreclose. For the purposes of this section, GARAGEKEEPER
is an operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a motor
vehicle storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for the
servicing, repair or maintenance of motor vehicles.



   (C)   (1)   At any time before the expiration of the waiting
periods provided in § 92.07, a registered owner who provides documentation
from a government or nonprofit agency or legal aid office that the registered
owner is homeless, receives relief based on need, or is eligible for legal
aid service, has the unencumbered right to retrieve any and all contents
without charge and regardless of whether the registered owner pays incurred
charges or fees, transfers title, or reclaims the vehicle.



      (2)   For the purposes of this section:



         (a)   CONTENTS does not include any permanently affixed
mechanical or nonmechanical automobile parts; automobile body parts; or
automobile accessories, including audio or video players; and



         (b)   RELIEF BASED ON NEED includes, but is not limited
to, receipt of MFIP and Diversionary Work Program, medical assistance,
general assistance, general assistance medical care, emergency general
assistance, state supplemental aid, MSA-emergency assistance, MinnesotaCare,
supplemental security income, energy assistance, emergency assistance, food
stamps, earned income tax credit, or state working family tax credit. The
city or impound lot operator shall establish reasonable procedures for
retrieval of vehicle contents under this section, and may establish
reasonable procedures to protect the safety and security of the impound lot
and its personnel.



§ 92.08  OPERATOR’S DEFICIENCY CLAIM; CONSENT TO SALE.



   (A)   Deficiency claim.



      (1)   The nonpublic impound lot operator has a deficiency
claim against the registered owner of the vehicle for the reasonable costs of
services provided in the towing, storage and inspection of the vehicle minus
the proceeds of the sale or auction.



      (2)   The claim for storage costs may not exceed the costs of:



         (a)   Twenty-five days storage for a vehicle described
in § 92.05(A); and



         (b)   Fifty-five days storage for a vehicle described in
§ 92.05(B).



   (B)   Implied consent to sale. A registered owner who fails to claim
the impounded vehicle within the applicable time period allowed under §
92.05 is deemed to waive any right to reclaim the vehicle and consents to the
disposal or sale of the vehicle and its contents and transfer of title. The
failure to exercise rights to claim contents under § 92.07(C) constitutes a
waiver of all right, title and interest in the contents of the vehicle and a
consent to the transfer of title to and disposal or sale of the contents.



§ 92.09  DISPOSITION BY IMPOUND LOT.



   (A)   Auction or sale.



      (1)   If an abandoned or unauthorized vehicle and contents
taken into custody by the city or any impound lot is not reclaimed under §
92.07, it may be disposed of or sold at auction or sale when eligible
pursuant to §§ 92.06 and 92.07.



      (2)   The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form
prescribed by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles which shall be sufficient title
to dispose of the vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to
register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of
all liens and claims of ownership. Before a vehicle is issued a new
certificate of title, it must receive a motor vehicle safety check.



   (B)   Unsold vehicles. Abandoned or junk vehicles not sold by the
city or public impound lots pursuant to division (A) above shall be disposed
of in accordance with § 92.10.



   (C)   Sale proceeds; public entities. From the proceeds of a sale
under this section by the city or public impound lot of an abandoned or
unauthorized motor vehicle, the city shall reimburse itself for the cost of
towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and all administrative, notice
and publication costs incurred in handling the vehicle pursuant to this
chapter. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the
owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for 30 days and then shall be
deposited in the treasury of the city.



   (D)   Sale proceeds; nonpublic impound lots. The operator of a
nonpublic impound lot may retain any proceeds derived from a sale conducted
under the authority of division (A) above. The operator may retain all
proceeds from sale of any personal belongings and contents in the vehicle
that were not claimed by the owner or the owner’s agent before the sale,
except that any suspected contraband or other items that likely would be
subject to forfeiture in a criminal trial must be turned over to the
appropriate law enforcement agency.



§ 92.10  DISPOSAL AUTHORITY.



   The city may contract with others or may utilize its own equipment and
personnel for the inventory of impounded motor vehicles and abandoned scrap
metal and may utilize its own equipment and personnel for the collection,
storage and transportation of these vehicles and abandoned scrap metal. The
city may utilize its own equipment and personnel only for the collection and
storage of not more than five abandoned or unauthorized vehicles without
advertising for or receiving bids in any 120-day period.



§ 92.11  CONTRACTS; REIMBURSEMENT BY MPCA.



   (A)   MPCA review and approval.



      (1)   If the city proposes to enter into a contract with a
person licensed by the MPCA pursuant to this section or a contract pursuant
to § 92.10, the MPCA may review the proposed contract before it is entered
into by the city, to determine whether it conforms to the MPCA’s plan for
solid waste management and is in compliance with MPCA rules. A contract that
does so conform may be approved by the MPCA and entered into by the city.
Where a contract has been approved, the MPCA may reimburse the city for the
costs incurred under the contract that have not been reimbursed under §
92.09.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in § 92.10, the MPCA shall
not approve any contract that has been entered into without prior notice to
and without a request for bids from all persons duly licensed by the MPCA to
be a party to a disposal contract pursuant to M.S. § 116.07, as it may be
amended from time to time; nor that does not provide for a full performance
bond; or does not provide for total collection and transportation of
abandoned motor vehicles, except that the MPCA may approve a contract
covering solely collection or transportation of abandoned motor vehicles
where the MPCA determines total collection and transportation to be
impracticable and where all other requirements herein have been met and the
unit of government, after proper notice and request for bids, has not
received any bid for total collection and transportation of abandoned motor
vehicles.



   (B)   The city may perform work. If the city utilizes its own
equipment and personnel pursuant to its authority under § 92.09, and the use
of the equipment and personnel conforms to the MPCA’s plan for solid waste
management and is in compliance with MPCA rules, the city may be reimbursed
by the MPCA for reasonable costs incurred which are not reimbursed under §
92.09.



   (C)   The city required to contract work. The MPCA may demand that
the city contract for the disposal of abandoned motor vehicles and other
scrap metal pursuant to the MPCA’s plan for solid waste disposal. If the
city fails to contract within 180 days of the demand, the MPCA, through the
Department of Administration and on behalf of the city, may contract with any
person duly licensed by the MPCA for the disposal.



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS AND LICENSING



      111.   HAWKERS, PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS



      112.   JUNK DEALERS



      113.   SALES OF CERTAIN TYPES



      114.   SAUNA AND MASSAGE PARLORS



      115.   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES



      116.   TOBACCO



      117.   PAWNBROKERS



      118.   KENNELS



      119.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE HAULERS



      120.   TAXICABS



      121.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



      122.   TATTOOING, BODY PIERCING, AND THE LIKE



      123.   FRANCHISES



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS AND LICENSING



Section



   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   Applications



   110.03   Action on application, transfer, termination, and duplicate
license



   110.04   Carrying or posting



   110.05   Property owner’s obligations



   110.06   Responsibility of licensee



   110.07   Conditional licenses



   110.08   Renewal of licenses



   110.09   Fixing license fees



   110.10   Insurance requirements



   110.11   License denial and fixing rates; hearing



   110.12   Worker’s compensation



   110.13   City approval requirements



 



   110.99   Penalty



§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of Chs. 110 through 120, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   APPLICANT. Any person making an application for a license under Chs.
110 through 120.



   APPLICATION. A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in and
completed by the applicant as his or her request for a license, furnished by
the city and uniformly required as a prerequisite to the consideration of the
issuance of a license for a business.



   BOND. A corporate surety document in the form and with the provisions
acceptable and specifically approved by the City Attorney.



   BUSINESS. Any activity, occupation, sale of goods or services, or
transaction that is either licensed or regulated, or both licensed and
regulated, by the terms and conditions of Chs. 110 through 120.



   LICENSE. A document issued by the city to an applicant permitting him
or her to carry on and transact a business.



   LICENSE FEE. The money paid to the city pursuant to an application and
prior to issuance of a license to transact and carry on a business.



   LICENSEE. An applicant who, pursuant to his or her application, holds a
valid, current, unexpired, and unrevoked license from the city for carrying
on a business.



   SALE, SELL, or SOLD. All forms of barter and all manner or means of
furnishing merchandise to persons.



(2006 Code, § 6.01)



§ 110.02  APPLICATIONS.



   All applications shall be made as follows.



   (A)   Location and forms. All applications shall be made at the
office of the City Administrator upon forms that have been furnished by the
city for such purposes.



   (B)   Fee. All initial applications shall be accompanied by a
payment of a single fee to cover the cost of investigation as herein
provided, which fee shall be fixed and determined by the Council and adopted
by resolution.



   (C)   Applications subscribed and sworn. All such applications must
be subscribed, sworn to, and include, but not be limited to, the following:



      (1)   Applicant’s name, age, and citizenship;



      (2)   Applicant’s present address and length of time he or
she has lived at that address;



      (3)   Applicant’s occupation and length of time so engaged;



      (4)   Applicant’s addresses and occupations for the three
years last preceding the date of application;



      (5)   Names and addresses of applicant’s employers, if any,
for the three years last preceding the date of application;



      (6)   Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of
a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor, including violation of a
municipal ordinance, but excluding traffic violations, and if so, the date
and place of conviction and the nature of the offense;



      (7)   Type of license and location of premises for which
application is made. At least four character references if applicant has not
resided in the city for two years last preceding the date of application; and



      (8)   Such other information as the Council shall deem
necessary considering the nature of the business for which license
application is made.



   (D)   False statements. It is unlawful for any applicant to
intentionally make a false statement or omission upon any application form.
Any false statement in such application, or any willful omission to state any
information called for on such application form, shall, upon discovery of
such falsehood work an automatic refusal of license, or if already issued,
shall render any license or permit issued pursuant thereto, void, and of no
effect to protect the applicant from prosecution for violation Chs. 110
through 120, or any part hereof.



   (E)   City Administrator. The City Administrator shall, upon receipt
of each application completed in accordance herewith, forthwith investigate
the truth of statements made therein and the moral character and business
reputation of each applicant for license to such extent as he or she deems
necessary. For such investigation, the City Administrator may enlist the aid
of the Chief of Police. The Council shall not consider an application before
such investigation has been completed.



   (F)   Renewal form. Applications for renewal licenses may be made in
such abbreviated form as the Council may by resolution adopt.



(2006 Code, § 6.02)  (Ord. 18, 3rd Series, passed 6-18-1981)  Penalty, see
§ 110.99



§ 110.03  ACTION ON APPLICATION, TRANSFER, TERMINATION, AND DUPLICATE
LICENSE.



   (A)   Granting. The Council may grant any application for the period
of the remainder of the then current calendar year or for the entire ensuing
license year. All applications, including proposed license periods, must be
consistent with Chs. 110 through 120.



   (B)   Issuing. If an application is approved, the City Administrator
shall forthwith issue a license pursuant thereto in the form prescribed by
the Council upon proof of ownership, payment of the appropriate license fee,
and approval of the bond or insurance as to form and surety or carrier, if
required. All licenses shall be on a calendar-year basis, unless otherwise
specified herein as to particular businesses. Unless otherwise herein
specified, license fees shall be prorated on the basis of one-twelfth for
each calendar month or part thereof remaining in the then current license
year; provided, that for licenses where the fee is less than $100, a minimum
license fee equal to one-half of the annual license fee shall be charged.
Licenses shall be valid only at one location and on the premises therein
described.



   (C)   Transfer. A license shall be transferable between persons upon
consent of the Council and payment of the investigation fee. No license shall
be transferable to a different location without prior consent of the Council
and upon payment of the fee for a duplicate license. It is unlawful to make
any transfer in violation of this division (C).



   (D)   Termination. Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or
revocation.



   (E)   Refusal and revocation.



      (1)   The Council may, for any reasonable cause, refuse to
grant any application, or revoke any license. No license shall be granted to
a person of questionable moral character or business reputation. Before
revocation of any license, the Council shall give notice to the licensee and
grant such licensee opportunity to be heard.



      (2)   Notice to be given and the exact time of hearing shall
be stated in the resolution calling for such hearing.



   (F)   Duplicate license.



      (1)   Duplicates of all original licenses may be issued by the
City Administrator without action by the Council, upon licensee’s affidavit
that the original has been lost, and upon payment of a fee of $2 for issuance
of the duplicate.



      (2)   All duplicate licenses shall be clearly marked
“Duplicate”.



(2006 Code, § 6.03)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.04  CARRYING OR POSTING.



   All solicitors shall at all times when so engaged, carry their license
on their person. All other licensees shall post their licenses in their place
of business near the licensed activity; provided, however, that in the case
of machine or other device licensing, the city may provide a sticker for the
current license year which shall be affixed to each machine or device
requiring such sticker. All licensees shall display their licenses upon
demand by any officer or citizen.



(2006 Code, § 6.04)



§ 110.05  PROPERTY OWNER’S OBLIGATIONS.



   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any real property
owned or controlled by him or her to be used, without a license, for any
business for which a license is required by Chs. 110 through 120.



(2006 Code, § 6.05)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.06  RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE.



   The conduct of agents or employees of a person to whom a license is
issued shall be deemed the conduct of the licensee himself or herself.



(2006 Code, § 6.06)



§ 110.07  CONDITIONAL LICENSES.



   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Council may,
upon a finding of the necessity therefor, place such conditions and
restrictions upon a license as it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and
justified.



(2006 Code, § 6.07)



§ 110.08  RENEWAL OF LICENSES.



   Applications for renewal of an existing license shall be made at least
30 days prior to the date of expiration of the license, and shall contain
such information as is required by the city. This time requirement may be
waived by the Council for good and sufficient cause.



(2006 Code, § 6.08)



§ 110.09  FIXING LICENSE FEES.



   Except as otherwise herein provided, all fees for licenses and
investigations under Chs. 110 through 120 shall be fixed and determined by
the Council, adopted by resolution, and uniformly enforced. Such license fees
may, from time to time, be amended by the Council by resolution. A copy of
the resolution setting forth currently effective license and investigation
fees shall be kept on file in the office of the City Administrator, and open
to inspection during regular business hours. For the purpose of fixing such
fees, the Council may subdivide and categorize licenses under a specific
license requirement; provided, that any such subdivision or categorization
shall be included in the resolution authorized by this section.



(2006 Code, § 6.09)



§ 110.10  INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   Whenever insurance is required by a section of Chs. 110 through 120,
after approval by the Council, but before the license shall issue, the
applicant shall file with the City Administrator a policy or certificate of
public liability insurance showing:



   (A)   The limits are at least as high as required;



   (B)   Coverage is effective for at least the license term approved;
and



   (C)   Such insurance will not be cancelled or terminated without
30-days’ written notice served upon the City Administrator. Cancellation or
termination of such coverage shall be grounds for license revocation.



(2006 Code, § 6.10)



§ 110.11  LICENSE DENIAL AND FIXING RATES; HEARING.



   (A)   Right to deny. The Council reserves to itself the right to
deny any application for a license to operate any business licensed or
regulated under Chs. 110 through 120 where such business involves service to
the public, rates charged for service, use of public streets, or other public
property by the applicant or the public, or the public health, safety, and
convenience. The Council may also consider the location of such business in
making such determination; provided, however, that before making such
determination, the Council shall hold a public hearing thereon pursuant to
such notice to interested parties and the public as it may deem necessary or
proper in action calling for such hearing.



   (B)   Rates. Where, under specific provisions of Chs. 110 through
120, the Council has reserved to itself the right to fix or approve fees,
rates, or charges of a licensed or regulated business, such rates shall be
uniform for each category or class of service, and no licensee or proprietor
of a regulated business shall claim or demand payment in excess thereof.



   (C)   Hearing. Any applicant or licensee under Chs. 110 through 120
who challenges denial of a license or rates fixed or approved by the Council
shall have a right to a hearing before the Council upon written request
therefor. Notice of time, place, and purpose of such hearing shall be given
to such persons and by such means as the Council may determine in calling the
hearing.



(2006 Code, § 6.11)  (Ord. 18, 3rd Series, passed 6-18-1981)



§ 110.12  WORKER’S COMPENSATION.



   No license to operate a business shall be issued by the city until the
applicant presents acceptable evidence of compliance with the worker’s
compensation insurance coverage requirement of state statutes by providing
the name of the insurance company, the policy number, and dates of coverage,
or the permit to self-insure.



(2006 Code, § 6.12)  (Ord. 91, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 110.13  CITY APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Approval and authorization. No city official, board, council,
or other city entity may grant a license, permit, or other form of city
approval or authorization to any person/entity unless:



      (1)   The person/entity has complied with all relevant
statutory and requirements of this code of ordinances;



      (2)   The person/entity has paid all fees, charges, taxes,
special assessments, or other debt or obligation owed by the person to the
city regarding any other matter; and



      (3)   The person/entity is in compliance with all ordinance
requirements and  previously-imposed conditions of approval regarding any
other city approval or authorization that was granted to the person.



   (B)   Inapplicability of section.



      (1)   If the person/entity has provided sufficient safeguards
to assure payment of debts or compliance with city requirements within a
reasonable time after the city approval or authorization; or



      (2)   If enforcement of this section would result in a
significant hardship to the person/entity through no fault of his or her own
or would result in an otherwise unfair situation.



(2006 Code, § 6.13)  (Ord. 167, 3rd Series, passed 2-14-2006)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph, or provision of
Chs. 110 through 120 when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a
misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.



(2006 Code, § 6.99)



CHAPTER 111:  HAWKERS, PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS



Section



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   License required



   111.03   Application for license



   111.04   Bond required



   111.05   Duration of license



   111.06   License not transferable



   111.07   License to be carried



   111.08   Person in charge of premises



   111.09   Fees



   111.10   Exclusions



   111.11   Prohibited solicitation practices



   111.12   Revocation



   111.13   Investigation



 



   111.99   Penalty



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HAWKER AND PEDDLER. Any person selling any goods or products from a
vehicle pack, going about from place to place carrying said goods for the
purpose of sale and delivery. If the goods or products be edible, such person
is a HAWKER; if the goods be non-edible, such a person is a PEDDLER.



   LOCALLY GROWN. Vegetables, butter, eggs, or other farm or garden
products grown within a 50-mile radius of the city.



   SOLICITOR. Any person selling goods by sample or taking orders for
future delivery and accepting a deposit or advance payment.



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT.Any person, individual corporation, limited
liability company, co-partnership, and corporation, both principal and agent,
who engages in, does, or transacts any temporary and transient business in
the city either in one locality or in traveling from place to place, selling
goods, wares, and merchandise; and who, for the purpose of carrying on such
business, hires, leases, occupies, or uses a building, structure, vacant lot,
or railroad car for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, and
merchandise.



(2006 Code, § 6.20)  (Ord. 125, Second Series, passed 6-5-1998)



§ 111.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any transient merchant, hawker, peddler, or
solicitor to sell or offer for sale any merchandise or attempt to do any
business in the city without having obtained a license from the Council to do
so.



(2006 Code, § 6.20)



§ 111.03  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   In addition to the information required by § 111.02, each applicant
will provide the following:



   (A)   The name and address of the applicant and of all persons
associated with him or her in the business;



   (B)   The type of business for which the license is desired;



   (C)   The place where the business is to be conducted or carried out;



   (D)   The name and address of the applicant’s employer or
employers for the last two years prior to the date of the application;



   (E)   The length of time during which the applicant intends to do
business within the city and the dates on which the sale or business will be
conducted;



   (F)   An itemized description of the goods or merchandise to be
offered for sale;



   (G)   A description of the nature and content of any advertising to
be done to promote the sale of goods or merchandise;



   (H)   If the sale is to be conducted by a person or persons other
than the applicant, credentials from the applicant shall be furnished
authorizing such person or persons to act as the representative of the
applicant; and



   (I)   The applicant’s state sales tax permit number.



(2006 Code, § 6.20)



§ 111.04  BOND REQUIRED.



   No transient merchant, hawker or peddler license shall be issued unless
and until the applicant shall have filed with the city a corporate surety
bond in the penal sum of $10,000, or such greater amount as may be determined
by the Council, with sufficient sureties and in favor of the city, but for
the benefit of any residents who may sustain individual loss by means of
fraud, artifice, trick, or other means of theft practiced by the licensee on
such resident; provided, however, that a certificate evidencing such bond
coverage and the availability of the penalty for the uses and purposes herein
expressed, shall be sufficient to satisfy this chapter without a separate
bond, in order that the applicant might be spared the necessity for duplicate
bonding.



(2006 Code, § 6.20)



§ 111.05  DURATION OF LICENSE.



   Each license shall be valid for the period specified therein and no
license will extend for a period longer than one year.



(2006 Code, § 6.20)



§ 111.06  LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.



   Licenses issued under this chapter shall be non-transferable.



(2006 Code, § 6.20)



§ 111.07  LICENSE TO BE CARRIED.



   All licenses issued under this chapter shall be carried by the licensee
or conspicuously posted in his or her place of business and such licensee
shall whenever requested show said license to any officer or citizen who
demands to see the same.



(2006 Code, § 6.20)



§ 111.08  PERSON IN CHARGE OF PREMISES.



   The owner or person in charge of any premises within the city who
enters into an agreement with a transient merchant as defined herein to
operate or temporarily conduct a transient merchant business on such premises
shall be responsible for the conduct of such business on his or her premises,
including the application for and obtaining of a license for such transient
merchant business as provided in this chapter.



(2006 Code, § 6.20)  (Ord. 95, 3rd Series, passed 5-1-1992)



§ 111.09  FEES.



   (A)   (1)   Transient merchant, hawker, peddler, or solicitor
license fees to include the first thee operating days shall be as set by city
resolution annually.



      (2)   In addition to the transient merchant, hawker, peddler,
or solicitor license fee a per diem of $10 per day shall be charged after the
initial thee operating days.



   (B)   A solicitation license fee shall be as set by city resolution
annually.



(2006 Code, § 6.20)  (Ord. 150, 3rd Series, passed 1-23-2004)



§ 111.10  EXCLUSIONS.



   No applicant shall be required to apply for a license in the following
cases:



   (A)   For the conduct of business by appointment;



   (B)   For the conduct of garage sales or rummage sales when
conducted in or by a nonprofit institution, or when conducted upon the
premises of the owner of the articles being offered for sale, provided, that
such sales do not last longer than thee consecutive days in any one-month
period of time, and provided further, that such sales are adequately
advertised by notices in a paper of local distribution or by placing of signs
announcing the sale upon the premises;



   (C)   For the conduct of church bazaars or other such sales or fairs
when such events are conducted by nonprofit institutions, provided, such
events do not last longer than 72 hours;



   (D)   To any regularly scheduled community event such as, but not
limited to the following: Wadena “Crazy” Days; Chamber of
Commerce-sponsored events; weekly flea markets; June Jubilee; Christmas
Festival; and events of similar nature;



   (E)   To any sale under court order;



   (F)   To any bona fide auction sale of a city resident;



   (G)   To any sale at wholesale to retail dealers only;



   (H)   Persons making an initial uninvited call upon the householders
of the city as preliminary to the subsequent establishment of a regular
service on a minimum monthly service for the sale and delivery to customers;



   (I)   Charitable organizations and representatives thereof, duly
registered under the laws of state as set forth in state statutes or
specifically exempted from registration under the provisions thereof,
including, but not limited to, schools, scouts, organized youth athletic
leagues, social, fraternal, educational, or related organizations and their
representatives; and



   (J)   Farmers or truck gardeners who order for sale or sell,
vegetables, butter, eggs, or other farm or garden products which are locally
grown, provided the sale of such items is restricted to the areas designated
by the Council; provided, that every such farmer or truck gardener shall upon
request of the City Administrator, present satisfactory proof by means of
sworn statements or otherwise, that such farmer or truck gardener is entitled
to such license exemption; provided, further, that whoever shall execute a
false sworn statement or make any false representations which shall induce
the city to grant such exemption, shall upon conviction thereof, be deemed to
be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(2006 Code, § 6.20)  (Ord. 95, 3rd Series, passed 5-1-1992; Ord. 102,
Second Series, passed 2-17-1994)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.11  PROHIBITED SOLICITATION PRACTICES.



   Its is unlawful for any transient merchant, hawker, peddler, or
solicitor to:



   (A)   Engage in solicitation for any unlawful business or
organizational purpose or activity;



   (B)   Practice harassment, nuisance, theft, deceit, or menacing,
troublesome, or otherwise unlawful activities during the course of
solicitation;



   (C)   Solicit to residential premises displaying at such entrance a
sign with the words “Peddlers and Solicitors Prohibited” or “Solicitors
Prohibited”;



   (D)   Refuse to leave premises when requested by owner, lessee, or
person in charge thereof;



   (E)   Call attention to his or her business or to his or her
merchandise by crying out, by blowing a horn, by ringing a bell or by any
loud or unusual noise;



   (F)   Displaying merchandise, parking vehicles, or placing temporary
structure in such place or position as to prohibit or interfere with the
movement of traffic or restrict the view of traffic on any city sidewalk,
street, or highway;



   (G)   Displaying or selling merchandise on any right-of-way or
public property. Soliciting to residential premises other than the hours
between 8:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m.;



   (H)   It is unlawful for any solicitor to offer for sale any of the
following items at a flea market, except by an authorized manufacturer’s
representative:



      (1)   Infant formula or other food intended primarily for
consumption by a child under the age of two years; and



      (2)   Over-the-counter drugs, medical devices, and cosmetics.



(2006 Code, § 6.20)  (Ord. 95, 3rd Series, passed 5-1-1992; Ord. 125,
Second Series, passed 6-5-1998) Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.12  REVOCATION.



   A license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the Council
after notice and hearing for any of the following reasons:



   (A)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in
the application;



   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in
connection with the selling of the goods and merchandise offered for sale;



   (C)   Any violation of any provisions of this chapter; or



   (D)   The conduct of business by the applicant in an unlawful manner
or in a manner which constitutes a breach of peace, nuisance, or menace to
the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.



(2006 Code, § 6.20)



§ 111.13  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   All applications for licensing or registration shall be
immediately referred to the Chief of Police, and by him or her or other
person acting in his or her stead, investigated as to the truth thereof. The
Chief of Police shall have 24 hours within which to investigate and make a
recommendation thereon.



   (B)   If he or she finds no past history of the applicant indicating
violations similar to those declared unlawful in this chapter, he or she
shall recommend issuing a license or approving registration, as the case may
be, and the City Administrator shall forthwith advise the applicant. The City
Administrator shall issue a license, upon payment of the fee therefor, to the
approved applicant for business solicitation.



   (C)   If the Chief of Police finds a past history of the applicant
indicating violations similar to those declared unlawful in this chapter, he
or she shall recommend denial of the license or registration. In all matters
of recommended denial, the applicant shall be forthwith advised thereof, and
the application shall be referred to the Council and considered by it at its
next regular or special meeting occurring more than ten days thereafter. The
applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard at such meeting.



(2006 Code, § 6.20)  (Ord. 95, 3rd Series, passed 5-1-1992)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or applicant who
violates any provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be punished in accordance with the state law.



(2006 Code, § 6.20)



CHAPTER 112:  JUNK DEALERS



Section



   112.01   Definition



   112.02   License required



   112.03   Requirement



§ 112.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   JUNK. Includes, but is not limited to, scrap of all kinds such as
metal, paper, rags, and wood.



(2006 Code, § 6.21)



§ 112.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person to deal in junk without having a license
therefor from the city.



(2006 Code, § 6.21)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 112.03  REQUIREMENT.



   All requirements of this code of ordinances, including, but not by way
of limitation, those provisions relating to zoning, shall be strictly adhered
to. Failure of any licensee to observe all such provisions shall be grounds
for license revocation.



(2006 Code, § 6.21)



CHAPTER 113:  SALES OF CERTAIN TYPES



Section



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   License required



   113.03   Eligible applicants and exceptions



   113.04   Inventory



   113.05   License period



   113.06   Nature of sale



   113.07   Salable goods



   113.08   Duties of licensee



Cross-reference:



   General Business Regulations and Licensing, see Ch. 110



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FIRE AND OTHER ALTERED GOODS SALE. A sale held out in such a manner as
to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods
damaged or altered by a fire, smoke, water, or other means.



   GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALE. A sale held out in such a manner as to
reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock of
goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued, including, but
not limited to, the following sales: adjuster’s; adjustment; alteration;
assignee’s; bankrupt; benefit of administrator’s; benefit of creditors;
benefit of trustees; building coming down; closing; creditor’s committee;
creditor’s; end; executor’s; final days; forced out; forced out of
business; insolvents; last days; lease expires; liquidation; loss of lease;
mortgage sale; receiver’s; trustee’s; quitting business.



   GOODS. Any goods, wares, merchandise, or other property capable of
being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.



   REMOVAL OF BUSINESS SALE. A sale held out in such a manner as to
reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale
will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the
stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume business at a new
location or will then continue business from other existing locations.



   SALE. Any  fire or other altered goods sale, going-out-of-business
sale, or removal of business sale.



(2006 Code, § 6.22)



§ 113.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person to conduct a sale as defined in this
chapter without a license therefor from the city.



(2006 Code, § 6.22)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 113.03  ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS AND EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No license shall be granted to a person who has not been the
owner of the business owning the goods, and conducting the sale, for at least
six months prior to the date of application; provided, that this division (A)
shall not apply to heirs, devisees, legatees, or personal representatives of
the owner.



   (B)   No license shall be granted at the same location within the
period of two years.



   (C)   No license shall be granted to a person who has been convicted
of violating any provisions of this chapter within five years prior to the
application.



   (D)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sales made
by public officials in the performance of their duties or by persons acting
pursuant to a court order or legal process.



(2006 Code, § 6.22)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 113.04  INVENTORY.



   The application for a sale license shall be accompanied by a detailed
inventory of the goods to be sold.



(2006 Code, § 6.22)



§ 113.05  LICENSE PERIOD.



   Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be for a period not
to exceed 60 consecutive business days; provided, that upon good cause being
shown, the Council may renew such license for an additional period of 60 days.



(2006 Code, § 6.22)



§ 113.06  NATURE OF SALE.



   The license shall authorize only the one type of sale described in the
application and at the location described.



(2006 Code, § 6.22)



§ 113.07  SALABLE GOODS.



   The license shall authorize only the sale of goods described in the
inventory attached to the application.



(2006 Code, § 6.22)



§ 113.08  DUTIES OF LICENSEE.



   Any licensee under this chapter shall:



   (A)   Make no additions whatsoever, during the period of the
licensed sale, to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to
the application for license;



   (B)   Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive, or misleading
advertising;



   (C)   Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with any
advertising or holding out incident thereto;



   (D)   Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate copy of the
inventory submitted with the application and shall present such duplicate to
inspecting officials upon request; or



   (E)   Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed
in the filed inventory as being objects of sale and shall make such
distinction clear to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in
and about the place of sale apprising the public of the status of all such
goods.



(2006 Code, § 6.22)



CHAPTER 114:  SAUNA AND MASSAGE PARLORS



Section




General Provisions




   114.01   Definitions



   114.02   License required



   114.03   License application



   114.04   Restrictions and regulations



   114.05   Construction and maintenance requirements




Licensing




   114.20   License required



   114.21   License application



   114.22   Restrictions and regulations




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MASSAGE. The practice of rubbing, stroking, kneading, tamping, or
rolling of the body with the hands, for the exclusive purposes of relaxation,
physical fitness, or beautification, and for no other purpose, by a person
not licensed as a medical doctor, chiropractor, osteopath, podiatrist, nurse
who works solely under the direction of such person, physical therapist,
athletic director and trainer, or beautician and barber who confine their
treatments to the scalp, face, and neck.



   MASSAGE PARLOR. Any room or rooms wherein persons may, for a separate
fee, receive a massage.



   MASSEUR. A male person who, for compensation, practices massage.



   MASSEUSE. A female person who, for compensation, practices massage.



   SAUNA. A steam bath used for the purpose of bathing, relaxing, or
weight reduction, utilizing steam as the agent therefor.



   SAUNA PARLOR. Any room or rooms wherein persons may, for a separate
fee, receive a sauna.



(2006 Code, § 6.31)



§ 114.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person to operate a sauna parlor or a massage
parlor without a license therefor from the city. It is unlawful for any
person to practice massage in any place except upon licensed premises.



(2006 Code, § 6.31)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 114.03  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   All initial applications for licenses to operate sauna
parlors or massage parlors shall be accompanied by a non-returnable
investigation fee. Applications shall contain the names and addresses of the
owners, lessees, and operators of the applicant, together with a description
and location of the premises. The application shall also include information
as to any convictions of any crime or offense committed by the applicant,
together with such other information as the Council may require before
consideration of the application.



      (2)   All applications by corporations shall include the names
and addresses of all persons having a beneficial interest therein. An
investigation by the Building Inspector shall be conducted of all premises
proposed to be licensed before consideration by the Council. The Police
Department shall conduct an investigation of all persons proposed to be
licensed before consideration by the Council. All applications shall
thereafter be considered by the Council.



   (B)   Insurance requirements.



      (1)   All licensees shall at all times have a valid
certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to do
business in the state with minimum liability coverage of $500,000 for each
claim and $1,000,000 for each aggregate claim.



      (2)   Said certificate of insurance shall be filed with the
city as a condition of approval of the license by the City Council, with the
city listed as an additional insured.



(2006 Code, § 6.31)  (Ord. 191, 3rd Series, passed 3-12-2013)



§ 114.04  RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Licenses shall be granted only for operation upon fixed
premises which must be located in a commercial or industrial district as
established by the zoning laws of the city.



   (B)   Licenses shall be granted only upon a showing of compliance
with all laws of sanitation.



   (C)   No beer, liquor, narcotic drug, or controlled substances, as
such terms are defined by state statutes or this code of ordinances shall be
permitted on licensed premises.



   (D)   Violation of any law or regulation relating to building,
safety, or health shall be grounds for revocation of any license.



   (E)   Only masseurs and masseuses who are licensed by the city shall
practice massage.



   (F)   Only masseurs shall be allowed to massage male customers and
only masseuses shall be allowed to massage female customers.



(2006 Code, § 6.31)  (Ord. 174, 3rd Series, passed 5-13-2008)  Penalty,
see § 110.99



§ 114.05  CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All sauna rooms and restrooms and bathrooms used in connection
therewith shall be constructed of materials which are impervious to moisture,
bacteria, mold, and fungus growth. The floor-to-wall and wall-to-wall joists
shall be constructed to provide a sanitary cove with a minimum radius of one
inch. There shall be no locks on doors of sauna rooms or massage rooms, nor
on any other rooms in the licensed premises except on one business office,
closets for the storage of supplies, and toilet rooms.



   (B)   All toilet rooms used in connection with saunas shall be
provided with mechanical ventilation with 2cfm per square foot of floor area,
a minimum of 30 footcandles of illumination, a hand washing sink, or sinks
equipped with hot and cold running water under pressure, sanitary towels, and
soap dispenser.



   (C)   Each sauna shall have a janitor’s closet which shall be
provided for the storage of cleaning supplies. Such closet shall have
mechanical ventilation with 2cfm per square foot of floor area and a minimum
of 30 footcandles of illumination. Such closet shall include a mop sink.



   (D)   Floors, walls, and equipment in sauna rooms, in restrooms, and
in bathrooms used in connection therewith must be kept in a state of good
repair and clean at all times. Linens and other materials shall be stored at
least 12 inches off the floor. Clean towels and wash cloths must be made
available to each customer.



   (E)   Individual lockers shall be made available for use by patrons.
Such lockers shall have separate keys for locking.



   (F)   The premises shall contain adequate refuse receptacles, which
shall be emptied at least daily.



(2006 Code, § 6.31)  Penalty, see § 110.99




LICENSING




§ 114.20  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person to practice massage without a license
therefor from the city.



(2006 Code, § 6.32)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 114.21  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   Generally. All applications for a license to practice massage
shall be accompanied by a medical certificate from a physician duly licensed
to practice medicine in the state stating that the applicant has no
communicable disease. All initial applications shall be accompanied by a
non-return able investigation fee. Applications shall contain such other
information as the Council may, from time to time, require. All applicants
shall be at least 18 years of age.



   (B)   Insurance requirements. All licensees shall at all times have
a valid certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to
do business in the state with minimum liability coverage of $500,000 for each
claim and $1,000,000 for each aggregate claim. Said certificate of insurance
shall be filed with the city as a condition of approval of the license by the
City Council, with the city listed as an additional insured.



(2006 Code, § 6.32)  (Ord. 191, 3rd Series, passed 3-12-2013)



§ 114.22  RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Whenever a massage is given, it shall be required by the
masseur or masseuse that the person who is receiving the massage shall have
his or her buttocks, anus, and genitals covered with an appropriate
non-transparent covering.



   (B)   Any masseur performing any massage shall at all times have his
anus, buttocks, and genitals covered with a non-transparent material.



   (C)   Any masseuse performing massage shall at all times have her
breasts, buttocks, anus, and genitals covered with a non-transparent material.



(2006 Code, § 6.32)  (Ord. 174, 3rd Series 5-13-2008)



CHAPTER 115:  SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section



   115.01   Purpose



   115.02   Findings and conclusions of the Council



   115.03   Definitions



   115.04   License required; application and fees



   115.05   Issuance of license



   115.06   Inspection



   115.07   Expiration of license



   115.08   Regulation of sexually-oriented businesses



   115.09   Suspension/revocation



   115.10   Transfer of license



 



   115.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Sexually-oriented business zoning, see § 152.02



§ 115.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe licensing requirements and
regulation of sexually-oriented businesses in order to protect the general
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city, and to control
certain land uses that may have a direct and detrimental effect on the
character of the city’s residential and commercial neighborhoods.



(2006 Code, § 6.33)  (Ord. 148, 3rd Series, passed 10-24-2003)



§ 115.02  FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS OF THE COUNCIL.



   (A)   Findings.



      (1)   The Council makes the following findings regarding the
need to license sexually-oriented businesses.



      (2)   The findings are based upon the city’s review and
analysis of numerous studies, reports, articles, judicial decisions, and the
experience and legislative findings of other cities around the country
concerning the impacts or secondary effects of sexually-oriented businesses
and the sale, distribution, and display of sexually-oriented materials
(collectively, “sexually-oriented business activities”) on the areas in
which such activities are located or take place.



         (a)   1.   Sexually-oriented businesses can exert a
dehumanizing influence on persons attending places of worship, children
attending licensed family day care homes, state-licensed group family day
care homes, and state-licensed child care centers, clients attending
state-licensed developmental achievement centers, students attending school,
and people using public parks and recreational areas.



            2.   Sexually-oriented businesses can be used as
fronts for prostitution and other criminal activity thereby taxing crime
prevention, law enforcement, and public health services. The experience of
other cities indicates that the proper management and operation of the
businesses can, however, minimize this risk, provided, the owners and
operators of the facilities are regulated by licensing or other procedures.



         (b)   Sexually-oriented businesses can significantly
contribute to the deterioration of residential neighborhoods and can impair
the character and quality of the residential housing in the area in which the
businesses are located, thereby exacerbating the shortage of affordable and
habitable housing for city residents.



         (c)   1.   The concentration of sexually-oriented
businesses in one area can have a substantially detrimental effect on the
area in which the businesses are concentrated and on the overall quality of
life in the community.



            2.   A cycle of decay can result from the influx
and concentration of sexually-oriented businesses. The presence of the
businesses is often perceived by others as an indication that the community
or area is deteriorating and the result can be devastating to other
businesses that may be required to move out of the vicinity and which could
influence residents to relocate from the area.



            3.   It has been noted that the presence of the
businesses can have the overall effect of causing declining real estate
values, which result can be exacerbated by the concentration of the
businesses, which can erode the city’s tax base and contribute to overall
blight.



         (d)   Sexually-oriented businesses can increase the risk
of exposure to communicable diseases including, but not limited to, Acquired
Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) for which currently there is no cure.
Experiences of other cities indicate that the businesses can facilitate the
spread of communicable diseases by virtue of the design and use of the
premises, thereby endangering not only the patrons of the establishments but
also the general public.



         (e)   Sexually-oriented businesses can cause or
contribute to public health problems by the presence of live adult
entertainment in conjunction with food and/or drink on the same premises.



   (B)   Conclusion of the Council. In direct furtherance of the
substantial goals of public health, safety, and welfare, the city adopts the
following provisions, recognizing that it has a great interest in the present
and future character of the city’s residential and commercial neighborhoods.



2006 Code, § 6.33)  (Ord. 148, 3rd Series, passed 10-24-2003)



§ 115.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT ARCADE/MINI MOTION PICTURE THEATER. Any place which excludes
minors from all or part of the establishment wherein coin-operated,
slug-operated, or for any form of consideration, or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture
machines, projectors, video, or laser disc players, or other image-producing
devices (10% or more of the floor space) are maintained to show images to
five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined
herein.



   ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO. An establishment or business which provides
the service of applying paint or other substances, (10% or more of the floor
space) whether transparent or non-transparent to or on the body of a patron
when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of specified anatomical
area as defined herein.



   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO AND/OR MEDIA
STORE. A commercial establishment which excludes minors and which has a
substantial portion of its stock in trade or stock (10% or more of the floor
space) displayed as instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed
for use in connection with specified sexual activities or displayed as books,
magazines, films, videotape, or other media which are characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas as defined herein.



   ADULT CABARET. A commercial establishment which provides dancing or
other live entertainment (10% or more of the floor space), which excludes
minors by virtue of age from all or part of the establishment and if such
dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the performance, depiction, or description of specified sexual
activities or by exposure of specified anatomical areas, for observation or
participation by patrons therein.



   ADULT CAR WASH. A wash facility for any type of motor vehicle (10% or
more of the floor space) that allows employees, agents, independent
contractors, or persons to appear in a state of partial or total nudity in
terms of specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR. A commercial establishment which
provides the service of engaging in, listening to conversation talk or
discussion, (10% or more of the floor space) which excludes minors by reason
of age, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation or
participation by patrons therein.



   ADULT CENTER. A commercial establishment which excludes minors by
reason of age, and wherein (10% or more of the floor space) an admission is
charged for entrance into the facility, or for food or beverages intended for
consumption within the facility, wherein may be observed or which contains
one or more coin-operated mechanisms which when activated permit a customer
to view one or more live persons unclothed or in such attire, costume, or
clothing as to expose to view any specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



   ADULT HEALTH CLUB or ADULT SPORTS CLUB. A business or commercial
enterprise that is named, signed, advertised, or promoted as a facility or
club providing health or sports-related goods, services, or equipment, from
which minors are excluded by reason of age or that is distinguished or
characterized (10% or more of the floor space) by an emphasis on specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.



   ADULT HOTELOR MOTEL. A hotel or motel or similar commercial
establishment from which minors are specifically excluded from patronage and
which:



      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activities;



      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time
that is less than ten hours; or



      (3)   Allows tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent
the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.



   ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR. A commercial establishment which provides the
service of “massage” (10% or more of the floor space), which excludes
minors by reason of age, if such service is distinguished by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation or
participation by patrons therein.



   ADULT MODELING STUDIO. An establishment, which excludes minors from all
or part of the establishment, and whose major business (10% or more of the
floor space) is the provision to customers, of figure models who are so
provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation to sexual
gratification to such customers and who engage in specified sexual activities
or display specified anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted
upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by
such customers.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment from which
minors are excluded by reason of age, where for any form of consideration,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, DVDs, or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown (10% or more of the floor
space) which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified
sex activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT SAUNA. A commercial establishment which provides a steam bath or
hot air bathing, and/or massage services (10% or more of the floor space)
which excludes minors by reason of age where such service(s) is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas for observation or participation by patrons therein.



   ADULT STEAMROOM/BATHHOUSE. An establishment providing a steam bath or
heat bathing for the pleasure, bathing, relaxation or reducing, utilizing
steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing, or reducing agent (10% or more of
the floor space), which excludes minors by reason of age where such
servicers) is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation or
participation by patrons therein.



   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment from which minors are excluded from all or part of
the establishment, (10% or more of the floor space) which regularly features
live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities for observation or
participation by patrons therein.



   MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.



   NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area
with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with
less than a fully opaque covering below a point immediately above the top of
the areola; or the depiction or showing of the covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.



   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS/ADULT ESTABLISHMENT. Any business which
offers its patrons services, entertainment, or the sale of merchandise
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, exposing, describing,
discussing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas. Specifically included in the term, but without limitation,
are adult arcade/mini-motion picture theater, adult body painting studio,
adult book store, novelty store or video/media store, adult cabaret, adult
car wash,, adult conversation/rap parlor, adult entertainment center, adult
health club/sports club, adult hotel or motel, adult massage parlor, adult
modeling studio, adult motion picture theater, adult sauna, adult steam
room/bathhouse, adult theater, and any other sexually-oriented business/adult
establishments.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, pubic hair, buttocks, anus, or female breast(s) below
a point immediately above the top of the areola; and



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernable turgid state even
if completely and opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY. Any of the following offenses: any
unlawful lewd, or immoral conduct, including specifically, but without
limitation any of the lewd, indecent, or immoral criminal acts specified in
any of the following statutes:



      (1)   M.S. §§ 609.283 to 609.353 and 609.365, as they may be
amended from time to time, (sex offenses);



      (2)   M.S. §§ 617.23 to 617.299, as they may be amended from
time to time, (obscenity statute); or



      (3)   M.S. §§ 152.021 to 152.0262, as they may be amended
from time to time, (controlled substances law).



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Includes the following:



      (1)   An act of sexual intercourse, normal or perverted,
actual or simulated, including genital to genital, anal to genital, or oral
to genital intercourse, whether between human beings or between a human being
and an animal;



      (2)   Sadomasochistic abuse, meaning flagellation, or torture
by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a revealing
costume or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically
restricted on the part of one so clothed;



      (3)   Masturbation actual or simulated, or lewd exhibitions of
the genitals including any explicit close-up representation of a human
genital organ clothed or unclothed;



      (4)   Physical contact or simulated physical contact with the
clothed or unclothed pubic areas or buttocks of a human male or female, or
the breast of a female, whether alone or between members of the same or
opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual
stimulation or gratification; or



      (5)   Excretory function as part of or in connection with any
of the activities set forth in this definition.



(2006 Code, § 6.33)  (Ord. 148, 3rd Series, passed 10-24-2003)



§ 115.04  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION AND FEES.



   (A)   All establishments, including any business operating at the
time this chapter becomes effective, operating or intending to operate a
sexually-oriented business, shall apply for and obtain a license from the
city. A person is in violation of this chapter if he or she or she operates a
sexually-oriented business without a valid license issued by the city.



   (B)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided
by the city.



   (C)   All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions
of this chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide
such information (including fingerprints) as to enable the city to determine
whether the applicant(s) meet the qualifications established in this chapter.



   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business
is an individual, the person must sign the application for a license as an
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is
other than an individual, each individual who has a 20% or greater interest
in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each
applicant must be qualified under the following provisions and each applicant
shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.



   (E)   The completed application for a sexually-oriented business
license shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by
the following documents:



      (1)   If the applicant is:



         (a)   An individual, the individual shall state his or
her legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he or she is 18 years of
age;



         (b)   A partnership, the partnership shall state its
complete name, and the names and dates of birth of all partners whether the
partnership is general or limited, and a true copy of the partnership
agreement; or



         (c)   A corporation, the corporation shall state its
complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation
is in good standing under the laws of the state of incorporation, the names,
dates of birth, and capacities of all officers, directors, and principal
stockholders, and the name and date of birth of the registered corporate
agent(s), manager(s), proprietor(s), or other agent(s) in charge of the
business and the address of the registered office for service of process.



      (2)   The name of the owner of the property where the
sexually-oriented business is to be located, if a corporation then the names
of the principal owners of the corporation;



      (3)   The type, name, and location of every business or
occupation in which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding two
years and the name(s) and address(es) of the applicant’s employer(s) and
partner(s), if any, for the preceding two years;



      (4)   If the applicant intends to operate the
sexually-oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, he
or she must state:



         (a)   The sexually-oriented business’s fictitious
name; and



         (b)   Submit the required registration documents.



      (5)   Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the
applicant, has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in
this chapter, and if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date,
place, and jurisdiction of each;



      (6)   Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the
applicant has had a previous license under this chapter or other similar
sexually-oriented business ordinances from another city, county, or state
denied, suspended, or revoked, including the name and location of the
sexually-oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended, or
revoked, as well as the date of denial, suspension, or revocation, and
whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant has been a
partner in a partnership or an officer, director, or principal stockholder of
a corporation that is licensed under this chapter whose license has
previously been denied, suspended, or revoked including the name and location
of the sexually-oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended,
or revoked as well as the date of denial suspension or revocation;



      (7)   Whether the applicant or a person residing with the
applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or other similar
sexually-oriented business ordinance from another city, county, or state and,
if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses;



      (8)   The location of the proposed sexually-oriented business,
including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone,
if any;



      (9)   The applicant’s mailing address, residential address,
and phone number;



      (10)   The applicant’s driver’s license number, Social
Security number, and/or his or her state or federally issued tax
identification number;



      (11)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the
business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches;



      (12)   A straight-line drawing prepared within 30 days prior
to application depicting the property lines and the structures containing any
existing sexually-oriented businesses within 1,500 feet of the property to be
licensed; the property lines of any established religious institution,
school, or public park or recreation area within 1,500 feet of the property
to be licensed. For purposes of this chapter, a use shall be considered
existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is
submitted. The drawing shall be reviewed by the Council for accuracy. In the
event of a dispute between the applicant and the city as to the accuracy of
the drawing, the city may order the applicant to provide a drawing with the
information required under this division (E)(12) prepared by a registered
land surveyor;



      (13)   Copy of lease and all financing documents, all business
related contracts for supply of material and consulting management;



      (14)   The name, address, and phone number of two persons who
shall be residents of the state, and who may be called upon to attest to the
applicant’s character;



      (15)   Every application for a sexually-oriented business
license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license)
shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application and investigation fee
which shall be set by Council resolution and amended from time to time; and



      (16)   All license applications and fees shall be submitted to
the City Administrator.



(2006 Code, § 6.33)  (Ord. 148, 3rd Series, passed 10-24-2003)  Penalty,
see § 115.99



§ 115.05  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   (1)   Upon the filing of said application for a
sexually-oriented business license, said application shall be referred to the
appropriate city departments for an investigation to be made on such
information as is contained in the application. The application process shall
be completed within 60 days from the date the completed application is filed.
If the application is deficient, the Council shall act on the application
within 120 days from the date that the deficiency has been corrected;



      (2)   After the investigation, the city shall issue a license,
unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more
of the following findings is true:



         (a)   An applicant is not 18 years of age or older on
the date the application is submitted to the city;



         (b)   An applicant or a person with whom the applicant
is residing is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or
penalties assessed against or imposed upon him or her in relation to any
business;



         (c)   An applicant has failed to provide information
reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;



         (d)   An applicant, or a person with whom the applicant
is residing, has been denied a license by the city or any other jurisdiction
to operate a sexually-oriented business within the preceding 12 months or
whose license to operate sexually-oriented business has been revoked within
the preceding 12 months; or



         (e)   An applicant, or a person with whom the applicant
is residing, has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined
herein, for which:



            1.   Less than two years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense;



            2.   Less than five years have elapsed since the
date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a gross
misdemeanor or felony offense;



            3.   Less than five years have elapsed since the
date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
first conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of two or
more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any 24-month period;



            4.   The fact that a conviction of applicant or a
person with whom the applicant is residing, is being appealed shall have no
effect on disqualification of the applicant. The license fee required by this
chapter has not been paid; and



            5.   An applicant of the proposed establishment is
in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this
chapter.



   (B)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of
the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address
of the sexually-oriented business, and the classification for which the
license is issued pursuant to this chapter. All licenses shall be posted in a
conspicuous, unobstructed place, at or near the entrance to the
sexually-oriented business so that they may be easily read at any time.



(2006 Code, § 6.33)  (Ord. 148, 3rd Series, passed 10-24-2003)



§ 115.06  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of
the Police Department, Fire Department, or other city departments or agencies
to inspect the premises of a sexually-oriented business for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with this chapter, at any time it is open for business
and/or occupied.



      (2)   A person who operates a sexually-oriented business or
his or her agent or employee commits a violation of this section if he or she
refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is
open for business and/or occupied. Refusal to permit inspections may result
in the suspension of the license as provided in this chapter.



   (B)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to
areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for
use as a permanent or temporary habitation.



(2006 Code, § 6.33)  (Ord. 148, 3rd Series, passed 10-24-2003)  Penalty,
see § 115.99



§ 115.07  EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance
and may be renewed only by making application as provided herein. Application
for renewal shall be made at least 60 days before the expiration date.



   (B)   When the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall
not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial, subsequent to
denial the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has
been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least
90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final.



(2006 Code, § 6.33)  (Ord. 148, 3rd Series, passed 10-24-2003)



§ 115.08  REGULATION OF SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   (A)   All licensed sexually-oriented businesses shall comply with
the provisions of this chapter, all other applicable provisions of this code
of ordinances, and all other applicable federal and state laws.



   (B)   (1)   No sexually-oriented business shall be maintained or
operated in any manner that causes, creates, or allows public viewing of any
adult material or any entertainment depicting, describing, or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, from any sidewalk,
public or private right-of-way, or any property other than the lot on which
the licensed premises is located.



      (2)   No portion of the exterior of a sexually-oriented
business shall utilize or contain any flashing lights, searchlights, or
spotlights, or any other similar lighting systems, or any words, lettering,
photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any
manner except to the extent specifically allowed herein.



      (3)   This division (B) shall apply to any advertisement,
display, promotional material, decoration, or sign; to any performance or
show, and to any window, door, or other opening.



   (C)   No sexually-oriented business, except for an adult motel, may
be open on Christmas Eve Day, Christmas Day, Thanksgiving, or Sundays, or
remain open at any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on
weekdays and Saturdays.



   (D)   No sexually-oriented business shall have on-sale or off-sale
and/or consume liquor on the premises or operate in the same building as a
business that does.



   (E)   All performers, dancers, and persons providing live
entertainment shall be a minimum of ten feet from patrons and on a platform
at least two feet high.



   (F)   There shall be no physical contact (including caressing or
fondling) between patrons and dancers/performers.



   (G)   No customer, patron, or spectator shall directly pay or give
any gratuity to any dancer or performer and no dancer or performer shall
solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or spectator.



   (H)   (1)   Individual motion picture viewing booths must be
without doors and the occupant must be visible from the room in which the
booth is located.



      (2)   Only one person at a time is allowed in a viewing booth
and the booth must be clean and sanitary.



   (I)   Walls separating booths must be such that an occupant cannot
engage in sexual activity with an occupant of another booth.



   (J)   All entrances to sexually-oriented businesses, with the
exception of emergency fire exits, which are not usable by patrons to enter
the business, shall be visible from a public right-of-way.



   (K)   Illumination of the premises exterior shall be adequate to
observe the location and activities of all persons on the exterior premises.



   (L)   A person commits a violation of this chapter if the person
knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a
sexually-oriented business.



(2006 Code, § 6.33)  (Ord. 148, 3rd Series, passed 10-24-2003)  Penalty,
see § 115.99



§ 115.09  SUSPENSION/REVOCATION.



   (A)   The city shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30
days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:



      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of
this chapter;



      (2)   Engaged in the use of alcoholic beverages while on the
sexually-oriented business premises other than at an adult hotel or motel;



      (3)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually-oriented
business premises as authorized by this chapter;



      (4)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the
sexually-oriented business premises; or



      (5)   Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a
sexually-oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus
necessitating action by law enforcement officers.



   (B)   The city shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension
occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.



   (C)   The city shall revoke a license if it determines that:



      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted during the application process;



      (2)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed
possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;



      (3)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises;



      (4)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the
sexually-oriented business during a period of time when the licensee’s
license was suspended;



      (5)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense defined
herein as specified criminal activity for which the required time period
listed in this chapter has not elapsed;



      (6)   On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a
person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed
premises of a crime herein defined as specified criminal activity for which a
conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the
sexually-oriented business at the time the offenses were committed;



      (7)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act
of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex
act to occur in or on the licensed premises. This provision does not apply to
adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or
employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in a public place or
within public view; or



      (8)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city, county,
or state for any taxes or fees past due or issued NSF (non-sufficient funds)
checks to the city, county, or state.



   (D)   When the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue
for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually-oriented
business license for one year from the date the revocation became effective.
If, subsequent to revocation, the city finds that the basis for the
revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a
license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became
effective.



   (E)   Within 90 days after denial of an application, or denial of a
renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation of any license, the
applicant or licensee may seek judicial review of such administrative action
in any court of competent jurisdiction.



   (F)   (1)   A revocation or suspension shall be preceded by
written notice to the licensee and a public hearing.



      (2)   The notice shall give at least ten days’ notice of the
time and place of the hearing and shall state the nature of the charges
against the licensee.



      (3)   The notice may be served upon the licensee personally,
or by leaving the same at the licensed premises with the person in charge
thereof.



(2006 Code, § 6.33)  (Ord. 148, 3rd Series, passed 10-24-2003)



§ 115.10  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall
a licensee operate a sexually-oriented business under the authority of a
license at any place other than the address designated in the application.



(2006 Code, § 6.33)  (Ord. 148, 3rd Series, passed 10-24-2003)



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates, neglects, refuses to comply with, or assists
or participates in any way in the violation of any of the provisions or
requirements of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor as defined in this
chapter. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.



(2006 Code, § 6.33)  (Ord. 148, 3rd Series, passed 10-24-2003)



CHAPTER 116:  TOBACCO



Section



   116.01   Purpose



   116.02   Definitions



   116.03   License



   116.04   Fees



   116.05   Basis for denial of license



   116.06   Prohibited sales



   116.07   Vending machines



   116.08   Self-service sales



   116.09   Responsibility



   116.10   Compliance checks and inspections



   116.11   Other illegal acts



   116.12   Violations



   116.13   Exception and defenses



 



   116.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Unlawful use and furnishing of tobacco, see § 130.35



§ 116.01  PURPOSE.



   Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of 18 years
purchase or otherwise obtain, possess, and use tobacco, tobacco products, and
tobacco-related devices, and such sales, possession, and use are violations
of both state and federal laws; and because studies have shown that most
smokers begin smoking before they have reached the age of 18 years and that
those persons who reach the age of 18 years without having started smoking
are significantly less likely to begin smoking; and because smoking has been
shown to be the cause of several serious health problems which subsequently
place a financial burden on all levels of government, this chapter shall be
intended to regulate the sale, possession, and use of tobacco, tobacco
products, and tobacco-related devices for the purpose of enforcing and
furthering existing laws; to protect minors against the serious effects
associated with the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco products, and
tobacco-related devices; and to further the official public policy of the
state in regard to preventing young people from starting to smoke in M.S. §
144.391, as it may be amended from time to time.



(2006 Code, § 6.40)  (Ord. 114A, 3rd Series, passed 1-2-1988)



§ 116.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure
that those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related
devices are following and complying with the requirements of this chapter.
COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall involve the use of minors as authorized by this
chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall also mean the use of minors who attempt to
purchase tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices for
educational, research, and training purposes as authorized by state and
federal laws. COMPLIANCE CHECKS may also be conducted by other units of
government for the purpose of enforcing appropriate federal, state, or local
laws or regulations, or provisions in this code of ordinances relating to
tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices.



   ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE. Any product containing or delivering
nicotine, lobelia, or any other substance intended for human consumption that
can be used by a person to simulate smoking in the delivery of nicotine or
any other substance through inhalation of vapor from the product. ELECTRONIC
DELIVERY DEVICE shall include any component part of such a product whether or
not sold separately. ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE shall not include any product
that has been approved or otherwise certified by the United States Food and
Drug Administration for legal sales for use in tobacco cessation treatment or
other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that
approved purpose.



   INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED. The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco
product wrapped individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and
tobacco products shall include, but not be limited to, single cigarette
packs, single bags, or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or
other packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging
containing more than a single pack or other container as described in this
section shall not be considered INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED.



   LOOSIES. The common term used to refer to a single or individually
packaged cigarette.



   MINOR. Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years.



   MOVABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business operated out of a
truck, van, automobile, or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and
not a fixed address store front or other permanent type of structure
authorized for sales transactions.



   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco-related devices are available for sale to the general
public. RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS shall include, but not be limited to, grocery
stores, convenience stores, and restaurants.



   SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other
consideration.



   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open displays of tobacco, tobacco products,
or tobacco-related devices in any manner where any person shall have access
to the tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices, without the
assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee’s employee. The
assistance or intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the
tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco-related device between the customer and
the licensee or employee. SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING shall not include
vending machines.



   TOBACCO or TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Any substance or item containing tobacco
leaf, including but, not limited to, cigarettes; pipe tobacco; snuff; fine
cut or other chewing tobacco; cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug
cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff flowers;
cavendish; shorts; plug and twist tobaccos; dipping tobaccos; refuse scraps,
clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of
tobacco leaf prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing, sniffing,
or smoking.



   TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICES. Any tobacco product as well as a pipe, rolling
papers, or other device intentionally designed or intended to be used in a
manner which enables the chewing, sniffing, or smoking of tobacco or tobacco
products.



   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type
of device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related
devices upon the insertion of money, tokens, or other form of payment
directly into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco,
tobacco product, or tobacco-related device.



(2006 Code, § 6.40)  (Ord. 114A, 3rd Series, passed 1-2-1988)



§ 116.03  LICENSE.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any
tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices or electronic delivery
devices without first having obtained a license to do so from the city.



   (B)   The issuance of a license issued under this chapter shall be
considered a privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant and shall
not entitle the holder to an automatic renewal of the license.



      (1)   Application. An application for a license to sell
tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices shall be made on a form
provided by the city. The application shall contain the full name of the
applicant, applicant’s residential and business addresses and telephone
numbers, the name of the business for which the license is sought, and any
additional information the city deems necessary. Upon receipt of a completed
application, the City Administrator shall forward the application to the
Council for action at its next regularly scheduled meeting. If the City
Administrator shall determine that an application is incomplete, he or she
shall return the application to the applicant with notice of the information
necessary to make the application complete.



      (2)   Action. The Council may either approve or deny the
license, or it may delay action for such reasonable period of time as
necessary to complete any investigation of the application. If the Council
denies the license, notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant
along with notice of the applicant’s right to appeal the decision.



      (3)   Term. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be
valid for one calendar year which shall be from January 1 through December 31.



      (4)   Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this
chapter may be revoked or suspended as provided in the violations and
penalties provisions of this chapter. (See §§ 116.12 and 116.99.)



      (5)   Transfers. All licenses issued under this chapter shall
be valid only on the premises for which the license was issued and only for
the person to whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to
another location or person shall be valid without the prior approval of the
Council.



      (6)   Movable place of business. No license shall be issued to
a movable place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible
to be licensed under this chapter.



      (7)   Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in
plain view of the general public on the licensed premises.



      (8)   Renewals.



         (a)   The renewal of a license issued under this chapter
shall be handled in the same manner as the original application.



         (b)   The request for a renewal shall be made at least
30 days, but no more than 60 days before the expiration of the current
license.



         (c)   Prior to the first renewal of a license, the
licensee shall have completed a server/vendor training as approved by the
Chief of Police.



      (9)   Number of licenses. The number of licenses which the
Council may issue shall be a maximum of 20 in any one year.



(2006 Code, § 6.40)  (Ord. 114A, 3rd Series, passed 1-2-1988)  Penalty,
see § 116.99



§ 116.04  FEES.



   No license shall be issued under this chapter until the appropriate
license fee shall be paid in full. The fee for a license under this chapter
shall be as set by city resolution annually. (This new fee will be effective
January 1, 1999.)



(2006 Code, § 6.40)  (Ord. 114A, 3rd Series, passed 1-2-1988)



§ 116.05  BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or
renewal of a license under this chapter; however, except as may otherwise be
provided by law, the existence of any particular ground for denial does not
mean that the city must deny the license.



   (B)   If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it
shall be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the
license under this chapter:



      (1)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years;



      (2)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five
years of any violation of a federal, state or local law, provisions of this
code of ordinances, or other regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco
products, or tobacco-related devices;



      (3)   The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco-related devices revoked within the preceding 12 months
of the date of application;



      (4)   The applicant fails to provide any information required
on the application, or provides false or misleading information; or



      (5)   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state or other
local law, provisions of this code of ordinances, or other regulation, from
holding such a license.



(2006 Code, § 6.40)  (Ord. 114A, 3rd Series, passed 1-2-1988)



§ 116.06  PROHIBITED SALES.



   It is a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or offer for
sale any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device or electronic
delivery devices:



   (A)   To any person under the age of 18 years;



   (B)   By means of any type of vending machine;



   (C)   By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not
need to make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed
premises in order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related
device or electronic delivery devices and whereby there is not a physical
exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device or
electronic delivery devices between the licensee or the licensee’s employee
and the customer; however, this division (C) does not apply to retail stores
which derive at least 90% of their revenue from tobacco and tobacco-related
products and which cannot be entered at any time by persons younger than 18
years; provided, however, that no sale of cigarettes shall be self-service
sales;



   (D)   By means of “loosies” as defined in this § 116.02;



   (E)   Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna,
strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic,
or controlled substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally
in tobacco or added as part of any otherwise lawful manufacturing process; or



   (F)   By any other means, to any other person, or in any other
manner or form prohibited by federal, state, or other local law, provisions
of this code of ordinances, or other regulation.



(2006 Code, § 6.40)  (Ord. 114A, 3rd Series, passed 1-2-1988; Ord. 170, 3rd
Series, passed 8-8-2006)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.07  VENDING MACHINES.



   It is unlawful for any person licensed under this chapter to allow the
sale of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices or electronic
delivery devices by the means of a vending machine.



(2006 Code, § 6.40)  (Ord. 114A, 3rd Series, passed 1-2-1988)  Penalty,
see § 116.99



§ 116.08  SELF-SERVICE SALES.



   It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this  chapter to allow the
sale of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices or electronic
delivery devices by any means where the customer may have access to such
items without having to request the item from the licensee or the
licensee’s employee and whereby there is not a physical exchange of
cigarettes between the licensee or his of her clerk and the customer.
Self-service sales of tobacco, tobacco products, and other related devices,
other than cigarettes, are authorized only in a retail store, which derive at
least 90% of its revenue from tobacco, and tobacco related products and which
cannot be entered at any time by persons younger than 18 years of age.



(2006 Code, § 6.40)  (Ord. 114A, 3rd Series, passed 1-2-1988; Ord. 170, 3rd
Series, passed 8-8-2006) Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.09  RESPONSIBILITY.



   All licensees under this chapter shall be responsible for the actions
of their employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco-related devices on the licensed premises, and the sale of such an
item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder. Nothing
in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the city from also
subjecting the clerk to whatever penalties are appropriate under this
chapter, state or federal law, or other applicable law or regulation.



(2006 Code, § 6.40)  (Ord. 114A, 3rd Series, passed 1-2-1988)  Penalty,
see § 116.99



§ 116.10  COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by
the Police Department during regular business hours.



      (2)   From time to time, but at least once per year, the
Police Department shall conduct compliance checks by engaging, with the
written consent of their parents or guardians, minors over the age of 15
years, but less than 18 years, to enter the licensed premises to attempt to
purchase tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices or electronic
delivery devices.



   (B)   Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be
supervised by designated law enforcement officers or other designated city
personnel. Minors used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of the
unlawful purchase or attempted purchase, nor the unlawful possession of
tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices or electronic delivery
devices when such items are obtained or attempted to be obtained as part of
the compliance check.



   (C)   (1)   No minor used in compliance checks shall attempt to
use a false identification misrepresenting the minor’s age, and all minors
lawfully engaged in compliance checks shall answer all questions about the
minor’s age asked by the licensee or his or her employee and shall produce
any identification, if any exists, for which he or she is asked.



      (2)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit compliance checks
authorized by state or federal laws for educational, research, or training
purposes, or required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal
law.



(2006 Code, § 6.40)  (Ord. 114A, 3rd Series, passed 1-2-1988)  Penalty,
see § 116.99



§ 116.11  OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS.



   (A)   Illegal sales. It is a violation of this chapter for any
person to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product,
tobacco-related device or electronic delivery devices to any minor.



   (B)   Illegal possession. It is a violation of this chapter for any
minor to have in his or her possession any tobacco, tobacco product,
tobacco-related device or electronic delivery devices. This division (B)
shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check.



   (C)   Illegal use. It is a violation of this chapter for any minor
to smoke, chew, sniff, or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product, or
tobacco-related device.



   (D)   Illegal procurement.



      (1)   It is a violation of this chapter for any minor to
purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco, tobacco
product, tobacco-related device or electronic delivery devices, and it is
also a violation of this chapter for any person to purchase or otherwise
obtain such items on behalf of a minor.



      (2)   It is further a violation for any person to coerce or
attempt to coerce a minor to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use
any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device or electronic delivery
devices. This division (D) shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a
compliance check.



   (E)   Use of false identification. It is a violation of this chapter
for any minor to attempt to disguise his or her true age by the use of a
false form of identification, whether the identification is that of another
person or one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered
with to represent an age older than the actual age of the person.



(2006 Code, § 6.40)  (Ord. 114A, 3rd Series, passed 1-2-1988)  Penalty,
see § 116.99



§ 116.12  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged
violator shall be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets
forth the alleged violation and which shall inform the alleged violator of
his or her right to be heard on the accusation.



   (B)   Hearings. If a person accused of violating this chapter so
requests, a hearing shall be scheduled, the time and place of which shall be
published and provided to the accused violator.



   (C)   Hearing procedure. The Council will approve appointment of an
Appeal Board.



   (D)   Decision.



      (1)   If the hearing officer determines that a violation of
this chapter did occur, that decision, along with the hearing officer’s
reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed § 116.99,
shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the
accused violator.



      (2)   Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation
occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, such findings shall
be recorded and a copy provided to the accused violator.



   (E)   Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer
shall be filed in the District Court for the jurisdiction of the city in
which the alleged violation occurred.



(2006 Code, § 6.40)  (Ord. 114A, 3rd Series, passed 1-2-1988)  Penalty,
see § 116.99



§ 116.13  EXCEPTION AND DEFENSES.



   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the providing of
tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices or electronic delivery
devices to a minor as part of a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual, or
cultural ceremony.



   (B)   It shall be an affirmative defense to the violation of this
chapter for a person to have reasonably relied on proof of age as described
by state law.



(2006 Code, § 6.40)  (Ord. 114A, 3rd Series, passed 1-2-1988)



§ 116.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General penalties.



      (1)   Licenses. Any licensee found to have violated this
chapter, or whose employee shall have violated this chapter, shall be charged
an administrative fee as set by M.S. § 461.12, subds. 2 and 3, for a first
violation of this chapter; as set by M.S. § 461.12, subds. 2 and 3 for a
second offense at the same licensed premises within a 24-month period; and as
set by M.S. § 461.12, subds. 2 and 3 for a third or subsequent offense at
the same location within a 24-month period. In addition, after the third
offense, the license shall be suspended for not less than seven days.



      (2)   Other individuals. Other individuals, other than minors
regulated by division (A)(3) below, found to be in violation of this chapter
shall be charged an administrative fee as set by M.S. § 461.12, subds. 2 and
3.



      (3)   Minors. Minors found in unlawful possession of, or who
unlawfully purchase or attempt to purchase, tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco-related devices, shall be handled by the criminal justice system.



      (4)   Misdemeanor. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the
city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any violation of this
chapter.



   (B)   Penalties pursuant to § 116.12.



      (1)   Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this chapter shall
prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged
violation of this chapter. If the city elects to seek misdemeanor
prosecution, no administrative penalty shall be imposed.



      (2)   Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in
which a violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense,



(2006 Code, § 6.40)  (Ord. 114A, 3rd Series, passed 1-2-1988)



CHAPTER 117:  PAWNBROKERS



Section



   117.01   Definitions



   117.02   License required



   117.03   Persons disqualified



   117.04   Unemployment clearance required



   117.05   Change in ownership



   117.06   Pawn tickets



   117.07   Records; retention



   117.08   Effect of non-redemption



   117.09   Permitted charges



   117.10   Records; prohibitions



   117.11   Redemption; risk of loss



   117.12   Motor vehicle title pawn transactions; special provisions



   117.13   Transition



 



   117.99   Penalty



§ 117.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PAWN TRANSACTION. Any loan on the security of pledged goods or any
purchase of pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods are left
with the pawnbroker and may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a
fixed price within a fixed period of time.



   PAWNBROKER. A person engaged in whole or in part in the business of
lending money on the security of pledged goods left in pawn, or in the
business of purchasing tangible personal property to be left in pawn on the
condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed
price within a fixed period of time.



   PAWNSHOP. The location at which or premises in which a pawnbroker
regularly conducts business.



   PLEDGED GOODS. Tangible personal property other than a chose in action,
securities, bank drafts, or printed evidence of indebtedness, that are
purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the
possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction.



(2006 Code, § 6.43)  (Ord. 125, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)



§ 117.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business as a
pawnbroker unless the person has a valid license authorizing engagement in
the business. Any pawn transaction made without benefit of a license is void.



   (B)   A separate license is required for each place of business. The
city may issue more than one license to a person if that person complies with
this chapter for each license.



   (C)   No expiration, revocation, suspension, or surrender of any
license shall impair or affect the obligation of any pre-existing lawful
contract between the licensee and any pledgor.



   (D)   The Chief of Police shall be notified by the city of any
licensee whose license has expired or been surrendered, suspended, or revoked
as provided by this chapter.



(2006 Code, § 6.43)  (Ord. 125, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)  Penalty, see
§ 117.99



§ 117.03  PERSONS DISQUALIFIED.



   No license under this chapter may be issued or renewed to a person who:



   (A)   Is a minor;



   (B)   Has been convicted of any crime related to the occupation of
pawnbroker; or



   (C)   Is not of good moral character or repute.



(2006 Code, § 6.43)  (Ord. 125, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)  Penalty, see
§ 117.99



§ 117.04  UNEMPLOYMENT CLEARANCE REQUIRED.



   No license shall be granted, transferred, or renewed and shall be
revoked if the Commissioner notifies the city that the licensee owes the
state delinquent unemployment insurance contributions, reimbursements, or
benefit overpayments.



(2006 Code, § 6.43)  (Ord. 125, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)  Penalty, see
§ 117.99



§ 117.05  CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP.



   Any change, directly or beneficially, in the ownership of any licensed
pawnshop shall require the application for a new license and the new owner
must satisfy all current eligibility requirements.



(2006 Code, § 6.43)  (Ord. 125, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)



§ 117.06  PAWN TICKETS.



   (A)   Entries of pawn tickets. At the time of making the pawn or
purchase transaction, the pawnbroker shall immediately and legibly record in
English the following information by using ink or other indelible medium on
forms or in a computerized record approved by the city:



      (1)   A complete and accurate description of the property,
including model and serial number if indicated on the property;



      (2)   The full name, residence address, residence telephone
number, and date of birth of the pledgor or seller;



      (3)   The date and time of pawn or purchase transaction;



      (4)   The identification number and state of issue from one of
the following forms of identification of the seller or pledgor: current valid
state driver’s license; current valid state identification card; or current
valid photo identification card issued by another state or province of Canada;



      (5)   Description of the pledgor including approximate height,
sex, and race;



      (6)   Amount advanced or paid;



      (7)   The maturity date of the pawn transaction and the amount
due; and



      (8)   The monthly and annual interest rates, including all
pawn fees and charges.



   (B)   Printed pawn ticket. The following shall be printed on all
pawn tickets:



      (1)   The statement that “Any personal property pledged to a
pawnbroker within this state is subject to sale or disposal when there has
been no payment made on the account for a period of not less than 60 days
past the date of the pawn transaction, renewal, or extension; no further
notice is necessary. There is no obligation for the pledgor to redeem pledged
goods.”;



      (2)   The statement that “The pledgor of this item attests
that it is not stolen, it has no liens or encumbrances against it, and the
pledgor has the right to sell or pawn the item.”;



      (3)   The statement that “This item is redeemable only by
the pledgor to whom the receipt was issued, or any person identified in a
written and notarized authorization to redeem the property identified in the
receipt, or a person identified in writing by the pledgor at the time of the
initial transaction and signed by the pledgor. Written authorization for
release of property to persons other than the original pledgor must be
maintained along with the original transaction record”; and



      (4)   A blank line for the pledgor’s signature.



(2006 Code, § 6.43)  (Ord. 125, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)



§ 117.07  RECORDS; RETENTION.



   (A)   The pledgor or seller shall sign a pawn ticket and receive an
exact copy of the pawn ticket.



   (B)   The pawnbroker shall maintain on the premises a record of all
transactions of pledged or purchased goods for a period of three years. These
records shall be a correct copy of the entries made of the pawn transactions.
A pawnbroker shall, upon request, provide to the appropriate law enforcement
agency a complete record of pawn items.



(2006 Code, § 6.43)  (Ord. 125, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)



§ 117.08  EFFECT OF NON-REDEMPTION.



   (A)   A pledgor shall have no obligation to redeem pledged goods or
make any payment on a pawn transaction. Pledged goods not redeemed within at
least 60 days of the date of the pawn transaction, renewal, or extension
shall automatically be forfeited to the pawnbroker, and qualified right,
title, and interest in and to the goods shall automatically vest in the
pawnbroker.



   (B)   The pawnbroker’s right, title, and interest in the pledged
goods under this division (B) is qualified only by the pledgor’s right,
while the pledged goods remain in possession of the pawnbroker and not sold
to a third party, to redeem the goods by paying the loan, plus fees and/or
interest accrued up to the date of redemption.



   (C)   A pawn transaction that involves holding only the title to
property is subject to M.S. Chs. 168A or 336, as they may be amended from
time to time.



(2006 Code, § 6.43)  (Ord. 125, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)



§ 117.09  PERMITTED CHARGES.



   (A)   A pawnbroker may contract for and receive a pawnshop charge
not to exceed 3% per month of the principal amount advanced in the pawn
transaction, plus a reasonable fee for storage and services. A fee for
storage and services may not exceed as set by M.S. § 325J.09 if the property
is not in the possession of the pawnbroker.



   (B)   The pawnshop charge allowed under this division (B) shall be
deemed earned, due, and owing as of the date of the pawn transaction and a
like sum shall be deemed earned, due, and owing on the same day of the
succeeding month; however, if full payment is made more than two weeks before
the next succeeding date the pawnbroker shall remit one-half of the pawnshop
charge for that month to the pledgor.



   (C)   Interest shall not be deducted in advance, nor shall any loan
be divided or split so as to yield greater interest or fees than would be
permitted upon a single, consolidated loan or for otherwise evading any
provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   Any interest, charge, or fees contracted for or received,
directly or indirectly, in excess of the amount permitted under this chapter,
shall be uncollectible and the pawn transaction shall be void.



   (E)   A schedule of charges permitted by this chapter shall be
posted on the pawnshop premises in a place clearly visible to the general
public.



(2006 Code, § 6.43)  (Ord. 125, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)



§ 117.10  RECORDS; PROHIBITIONS.



   A pawnbroker and any clerk, agent, or employee of a pawnbroker shall
not:



   (A)   Make any false entry in the records of pawn transactions;



   (B)   Falsify, obliterate, destroy, or remove from the place of
business the records, books, or accounts relating to the licensee’s pawn
transactions;



   (C)   Refuse to allow the appropriate law enforcement agency, the
Attorney General, or any other duly authorized state or federal law
enforcement officer to inspect the pawn records or any pawn goods in the
person’s possession during the ordinary hours of business or other times
acceptable to both parties;



   (D)   Fail to maintain a record of each pawn transaction for three
years;



   (E)   Accept a pledge or purchase property from a person under the
age of 18 years;



   (F)   Make any agreement requiring the personal liability of a
pledgor or seller, or waiving any provision of this chapter, or providing for
a maturity date less than one month after the date of the pawn transaction;



   (G)   Fail to return pledged goods to a pledgor or seller, or
provide compensation as set forth in state statutes, upon payment of the full
amount due the pawnbroker, unless either the date of redemption is more than
60 days past the date of the pawn transaction, renewal, or extension and the
pawnbroker has sold the pledged goods pursuant to state statutes, or the
pledged goods have been taken into custody by a court or a law enforcement
officer or agency;



   (H)   Sell or lease, or agree to sell or lease, pledged or purchased
goods back to the pledgor or seller in the same or a related transaction;



   (I)   Sell or otherwise charge for insurance in connection with a
pawn transaction; or



   (J)   Remove pledged goods from the pawnshop premises or other
storage place approved by the city at any time before unredeemed, pledged
goods are sold pursuant to statute.



(2006 Code, § 6.43)  (Ord. 125, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)  Penalty, see
§ 117.99



§ 117.11  REDEMPTION; RISK OF LOSS.



   (A)   Any person to whom the receipt for pledged goods was issued,
or any person identified in a written and notarized authorization to redeem
the pledged goods identified in the receipt, or any person identified in
writing by the pledgor at the time of the initial transaction and signed by
the pledgor shall be entitled to redeem or repurchase the pledged goods
described on the ticket.



   (B)   (1)   In the event the goods are lost or damaged while in
possession of the pawnbroker, the pawnbroker shall compensate the pledgor, in
cash or replacement goods acceptable to the pledgor, for the fair market
value of the lost of damaged goods.



      (2)   Proof of compensation shall be a defense to any
prosecution or civil action.



(2006 Code, § 6.43)  (Ord. 125, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)



§ 117.12  MOTOR VEHICLE TITLE PAWN TRANSACTIONS; SPECIAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)    In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a
pawnbroker who holds a title to a motor vehicle as part of a pawn transaction
shall:



      (1)   Be licensed as a used motor vehicle dealer under M.S.
Ch. 168, as it may be amended from time to time, and post such license on the
pawnshop premises;



      (2)   Verify that there are no liens or encumbrances against
the motor vehicle with the Department of Public Safety; and



      (3)   Verify that the pledgor has automobile insurance on the
motor vehicle as required by law.



   (B)   A pawnbroker may not sell a motor vehicle covered by a pawn
transaction until 90 days after recovery of the motor vehicle.



(2006 Code, § 6.43)  (Ord. 125, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)



§ 117.13  TRANSITION.



   Pawnbrokers that are in business when the city adopts an ordinance
under this chapter must apply for a license and pay the required fee within
six months of adoption of the ordinance.



(2006 Code, § 6.43)  (Ord. 125, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)



§ 117.99  PENALTY.



   A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor.



(2006 Code, § 6.43)  (Ord. 125, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)



CHAPTER 118:  KENNELS



Section



   118.01   Definition



   118.02   License required



   118.03   License fee



   118.04   Conditions



   118.05   Statute and regulatory compliance



   118.06   Zoning



§ 118.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   KENNEL. Any place, building, tract of land, abode, or vehicle, wherein
or whereon three or more dogs, over six months of age, are kept, congregated,
confined, boarded, or bred, or offered for sale.



(Ord. 199, 3rd Series, passed 4-14-2015)



§ 118.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a kennel
without a license therefore from the city.



   (B)   All licenses shall be for the calendar year in which they are
issued and shall be renewable on the first business day of the following year.



(Ord. 199, 3rd Series, passed 4-14-2015)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 118.03  LICENSE FEE.



   The annual fee for a kennel license shall be established from time to
time by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 199, 3rd Series, passed 4-14-2015)



§ 118.04  CONDITIONS.



   The following conditions are included and apply to any kennel permit.



   (A)   The premises and its pens, runways, and all sanitary
conditions;



   (B)   Adequate light and ventilation must be provided to the animals;



   (C)   Fecal materials must be disposed of in an approved sanitary
manner;



   (D)   The premises must be kept vermin free;



   (E)   No public or private nuisance may be created;



   (F)   The premises must be open for inspection by city authorities
upon reasonable notice;



   (G)   Outside runways must be completely enclosed by a visual
screening fence at least five feet in height; and



   (H)   The licensee shall comply with the requirements of § 130.05.



(Ord. 199, 3rd Series, passed 4-14-2015)



§ 118.05  STATUTE AND REGULATORY COMPLIANCE.



   All kennels must conform to the statutes and regulations of any state
or county agency having jurisdiction over such matters.



(Ord. 199, 3rd Series, passed 4-14-2015)



§ 118.06  ZONING.



   No license shall be issued to a person for operation of a kennel in the
R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts of the city.



(Ord. 199, 3rd Series, passed 4-14-2015)



CHAPTER 119:  GARBAGE AND REFUSE HAULERS



Section



   119.01   Definitions



   119.02   License required



   119.03   Exception



   119.04   Hauler licensee requirements



§ 119.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARBAGE. All putrescible wastes, including animal offal and carcasses
of dead animals, but excluding human excreta, sewage, and other water-carried
wastes.



   OTHER REFUSE. Ashes, glass, crockery, cans, paper, boxes, rags, and
similar non-putrescible wastes, but excluding sand, earth, brick, stone,
concrete, trees, tree branches, and wood.



(2006 Code, § 6.50)  (Ord. 18, 3rd Series, passed 6-18-1981)



§ 119.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person to haul garbage or other refuse for hire
without a license therefor from the city, or to haul garbage or other refuse
from his or her own residence or business property other than as herein
excepted.



(2006 Code, § 6.50)  (Ord. 18, 3rd Series, passed 6-18-1981)  Penalty, see
§ 110.99



§ 119.03  EXCEPTION.



   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent persons from hauling garbage or
other refuse from their own residences or business properties provided the
following rules are observed:



   (A)   All garbage is hauled in containers that are water-tight on
all sides and the bottom and with tight-fitting covers on top;



   (B)   All other refuse is hauled in vehicles with leak-proof bodies
and completely covered or enclosed by canvas or other means or material so as
to completely eliminate the possibility of loss of cargo; and



   (C)   All garbage and other refuse shall be dumped or unloaded only
at the designated sanitary land-fill.



(2006 Code, § 6.50)  (Ord. 18, 3rd Series, passed 6-18-1981)



§ 119.04  HAULER LICENSEE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Hauler licenses shall be granted only upon the condition that
the licensee have water-tight, packer-type vehicles in good condition to
prevent loss in transit of liquid or solid cargo, that the vehicle be kept
clean and as free from offensive odors as possible and not allowed to stand
in any street longer than reasonably necessary to collect garbage or refuse,
and that the same be dumped or unloaded only at the designated sanitary
land-fill, and strictly in accordance with regulations relating thereto.



   (B)   Before a garbage and refuse hauler’s license shall be
issued, the applicant shall file with the City Administrator evidence that he
or she has provided public liability insurance on all vehicles in at least
the sum of $1,000,000 combined single limits, bodily injury and property
damages.



(2006 Code, § 6.50)  (Ord. 18, 3rd Series, passed 6-18-1981)



CHAPTER 120:  TAXICABS



Section



   120.01   Definitions



   120.02   License required



   120.03   Number of licenses



   120.04   License issuance and display; vehicle marking



   120.05   Insurance required



   120.06   Rates



   120.07   Mechanical conditions



§ 120.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DRIVER. The person driving and having physical control over a taxicab
whether he or she be the licensee or in the employ of the licensed operator.



   OPERATOR. A licensee owning or otherwise having control of one or more
taxicabs.



   TAXICAB. Any passenger conveyance being driven, on call or traversing a
scheduled or unscheduled route for public use or hire upon payment of a fare
or at regular fare rates, but not including such as are designed for mass
transportation as buses, trains, or streetcars.



(2006 Code, § 6.51)



§ 120.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a taxicab without a
license therefor from the city.



(2006 Code, § 6.51)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 120.03  NUMBER OF LICENSES.



   The maximum number of licenses that will be allowed is to one taxicab
operator per year. This one operator will be allowed to have more than one
cab as volume requires.



(2006 Code, § 6.51)  (Ord. 143, 3rd Series, passed 3-2-2001)



§ 120.04  LICENSE ISSUANCE AND DISPLAY; VEHICLE MARKING.



   All licenses shall be issued for specific conveyances, except as
otherwise herein provided. License tags, including number and year for which
issued, shall be plainly visible from the front of the conveyance. Both sides
of every licensed taxicab, when in use, shall be plainly and permanently
marked as such with a painted sign or appurtenances showing the full or
abbreviated name of the licensed operator.



(2006 Code, § 6.51)



§ 120.05  INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   Before a taxicab license is issued by the Council, and at all times
effective during such licensed period, the licensee shall have and maintain
public liability and bodily injury insurance in the amount of $1,000,000
combined single limits, bodily injury and property damage insurance. Such
insurance shall cover all passengers carried by the insured licensee and
shall be for public taxicab purposes.



(2006 Code, § 6.51)  (Ord. 18, 3rd Series, passed 6-18-1981)



§ 120.06  RATES.



   (A)   The licensee shall file with the City Administrator before a
taxicab license is issued or renewed, a schedule of proposed maximum rates to
be charged by the licensee during the licensed period for which the
application is made.



   (B)   The schedule of proposed maximum rates, or a compromise
schedule thereof, shall be approved by the Council before granting the
license. Such schedule shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the taxicab
in full view of passengers riding therein.



   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent a taxicab licensee from
petitioning the Council for review of such rates during the licensed period,
and the Council may likewise consider such petition and make new rates
effective at any time.



   (D)   No taxicab licensee shall charge rates in excess of maximum
rates approved by the Council.



(2006 Code, § 6.51)  (Ord. 143, 3rd Series, passed 3-2-2001)



§ 120.07  MECHANICAL CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Before issuing a taxicab license, the applicant shall present
to the Council a certificate signed by a competent and experienced mechanic
showing that the taxicab conveyance is in good mechanical condition, that it
is thoroughly safe for transportation of passengers, and that it is in neat
and clean condition.



   (B)   Such similar certificate may be required from time to time
during the licensed period. In lieu of such certificate, the Council may
accept the report of the Chief of Police relative thereto; provided, further,
that the Chief of Police, or his or her delegate, shall reinspect and
re-certify each such vehicle every 60 days.



(2006 Code, § 6.51)



CHAPTER 121:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section




General Provisions




   121.001   Definitions



   121.002   Renewal of licenses



   121.003   Delinquent taxes and charges



   121.004   Limitation on ownership



   121.005   Conditional licenses



   121.006   Premises licensed



   121.007   Unlawful acts



   121.008   Sale by employee



   121.009   Financial responsibility of licensees



   121.010   Insurance certificate requirements



   121.011   Fixing license fees



   121.012   Conduct on licensed premises



   121.013   Minors as defined in § 121.001



   121.014   Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages on
streets, public property, and private parking lots to which the public has
access



   121.015   Alcoholic beverages in certain buildings and grounds



   121.016   Worker’s compensation



   121.017   Municipal dispensary



   121.018   Clubs



   121.019   Nudity or obscenity prohibited




Application and License; Procedure and Administration




   121.030   Application



   121.031   False statements



   121.032   Application and investigation fees



   121.033   Action



   121.034   Duplicate licenses



   121.035   Posting



   121.036   Resident manager or agent



   121.037   Persons disqualified




Beer




   121.050   Beer license required



   121.051   Temporary beer license



   121.052   Beer license restrictions and regulations



   121.053   Hours and days of sale of beer



   121.054   Unlawful acts




Liquor Generally




   121.065   Liquor license required



   121.066   Liquor license restrictions and regulations



   121.067   Unlawful acts (liquor)



   121.068   Hours and days of liquor sales



   121.069   Sports or convention facilities license



   121.070   Temporary liquor license



   121.071   Sunday sales




Wine




   121.085   On-sale wine license required



   121.086   Hours and days of sales by on-sale wine licensees



   121.087   Number of licenses issued



   121.088   Unlawful acts (wine)




Consumption and Display




   121.100   Consumption and display license required



   121.101   Consumption and display restrictions and regulations



   121.102   License expiration



   121.103   State permit required



   121.104   Lockers



   121.105   Hours and display




Brew Pubs, Tap Rooms, and Microdistillery Cocktail Rooms




   121.120   Definition



   121.121   Brew pubs, tap rooms and microdistillery cocktail rooms



   121.122   Brew pub on-sale



   121.123   Brew pub off-sale



   121.124   Brewer tap room on-sale



   121.125   Brewer tap room off-sale



   121.126   Cocktail room on-sale license



   121.127   Microdistillery off-sale



 



   121.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 121.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any beverage containing more than one-half of 1%
alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, beer, wine, and liquor as
defined in this chapter.



   APPLICANT. Any person making an application for a license under this
chapter.



   APPLICATION. A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in and
completed by the applicant as his or her request for a license, furnished by
the city, and uniformly required as a prerequisite to the consideration of
the issuance of a license for a business.



   BEER. Malt liquor containing not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume, nor
more than 3.25% alcohol by weight. (This definition includes so-called
“malt coolers” with the alcoholic content limits stated herein.)



   BREWER. A person who manufactures beer for sale.



   CHURCH. A building which is principally used as a place where persons
of the same faith regularly assemble for the public worship of God.



   CLUB.



      (1)   An incorporated organization organized under the laws of
the state for civic, fraternal, social, or business purposes, for
intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of sports, or a
congressionally chartered veterans’ organization, which:



         (a)   Has more than 50 members;



         (b)   Has owned or rented a building or space in a
building for more than one year that is suitable and adequate for the
accommodation of its members; or



         (c)   Is directed by a board of directors, executive
committee, or other similar body chosen by the members at a meeting held for
that purpose.



      (2)   No member, officer, agent, or employee shall receive any
profit from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the club,
or their guests, beyond a reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each
year by the governing body. Such CLUB or congressionally chartered
veterans’ organization must have been in existence for at least three years.



   COMMISSIONER. The Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety.



   HOTEL. An establishment where food and lodging are regularly furnished
to transients and which has:



      (1)   A dining room serving the general public at tables and
having facilities for seating at least 30 guests at one time; and



      (2)   At least 50 guest rooms.



   LICENSE. A document, issued by the city, to an applicant permitting him
or her to carry on and transact the business stated therein.



   LICENSE FEE. The money paid to the city pursuant to an application and
prior to issuance of a license to transact and carry on the business stated
therein.



   LICENSED PREMISES. The space or structure described in the issued
license. In the case of a restaurant or a club licensed for on-sales of
alcoholic beverages and located on a golf course, LICENSED PREMISES means the
entire golf course except for areas where motor vehicles are regularly parked
or operated.



   LICENSEE. An applicant who, pursuant to his or her approved
application, holds a valid, current, unexpired license, which has neither
been revoked, nor is then under suspension from the city for carrying on the
business stated therein.



   LIQUOR. Ethyl alcohol and distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous, and
malt beverages containing in excess of 3.2% of alcohol by weight. (This
definition includes so-called “wine coolers” and “malt coolers” with
the alcoholic content limits stated herein.)



   MALT LIQUOR. Any beer, ale, or other beverage made from malt by
fermentation and containing not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume.



   MANUFACTURER. Every person who, by any process of manufacture,
fermenting, brewing, distilling, refining, rectifying, blending, or by the
combination of different materials, prepares or produces alcoholic beverages
for sale.



   MINOR. Any natural person who has not attained the age of 21 years.



   OFF-SALE. The sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for
consumption off the licensed premises only.



   ON-SALE. The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
licensed premises only.



   PACKAGE AND ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any container or receptacle holding
alcoholic beverages, which container or receptacle is corked, capped, or
sealed by a manufacturer or wholesaler.



   RESTAURANT. An establishment, other than a hotel, under the control of
a single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the
premises and served at tables to the general public, and having a minimum
seating capacity for 125 guests.



   SALE, SELL, and SOLD. All barters and all manners or means of
furnishing beer, wine, or liquor to persons, including such furnishing in
violation or evasion of law.



   WHOLESALER. Any person engaged in the business of selling alcoholic
beverages to a licensee from a stock maintained in a warehouse.



   WINE. The product made from the normal alcoholic fermentation of
grapes, including still wine, sparkling and carbonated wine, wine made from
condensed grape must, wine made from other agricultural products than sound,
ripe grapes, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider, perry,
and sake. This definition includes “wine coolers” with the alcoholic
content limits stated herein. For purposes of on-sale wine licenses, WINE may
contain up to 14% alcohol by volume for consumption with the sale of food.
For all other purposes, WINE is a product containing not less than 0.5% nor
more than 24% alcohol by volume for nonindustrial use.



(2006 Code, § 5.01)  (Ord. 58, 3rd Series, passed 4-2-1986; Ord. 124, 3rd
Series, passed 6-5-1998)



§ 121.002  RENEWAL OF LICENSES.



   Applications for renewal of an existing liquor license shall be made at
least 60 days prior to the date of expiration of the license, and shall
contain such information as is required by the city. This time requirement
may be waived by the Council for good and sufficient cause. Prior to the
first renewal of a license, the licensee shall have completed a server/vendor
training as approved by the Chief of Police.



(2006 Code, § 5.03)



§ 121.003  DELINQUENT TAXES AND CHARGES.



   No license shall be granted for operation on any premises upon which
taxes, assessments, or installments thereof, or other financial claims of the
city, are owed by the applicant and are delinquent and unpaid.



(2006 Code, § 5.04)  Penalty, see § 121.999



§ 121.004  LIMITATION ON OWNERSHIP.



   No person shall be granted beer, wine or liquor licenses at more than
one location. For the purpose of this chapter, any person owning an interest
of 5% or more of the entity to which the license is issued, or such ownership
by a member of his or her immediate family, shall be deemed to be a licensee.



(2006 Code, § 5.05)  (Ord. 50, 3rd Series, passed 3-1-1985)  Penalty, see
§ 121.999



§ 121.005  CONDITIONAL LICENSES.



   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Council may,
upon a finding of the necessity therefor, place such conditions and
restrictions upon a license as it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and
justified.



(2006 Code, § 5.06)



§ 121.006  PREMISES LICENSED.



   A license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid
only for the premises described in the license, and all transactions relating
to a sale under such license must take place within such space or structure.



(2006 Code, § 5.07)  (Ord. 124, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)



§ 121.007  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   Consumption. It is unlawful for any person to consume, or any
on-sale licensee to permit consumption of, beer, wine, or liquor on licensed
premises more than 30 minutes after the hour when a sale thereof can legally
be made.



   (B)   Removal of containers. It is unlawful for any on-sale licensee
to permit any glass, bottle, or other container, containing beer, wine, or
liquor in any quantity, to remain upon any table, bar, stool, or other place
where customers are served, more than 30 minutes after the hour when a sale
thereof can legally be made.



   (C)   Closing. It is unlawful for any person, other than an on-sale
licensee’s bona fide employee actually engaged in the performance of his or
her duties, to be on premises licensed under this chapter more than 30
minutes after the legal time for making licensed sales; provided, however,
that this division (C) shall not apply to licensees, employees of licensees,
and patrons on licensed premises for the sole purpose of preparing, serving
or consuming food or beverages other than beer, wine, or liquor.



(2006 Code, § 5.08)  (Ord. 36, 3rd Series, passed 5-30-1984; Ord. 50, 3rd
Series, passed 3-1-1985)



Penalty, see § 121.999



§ 121.008  SALE BY EMPLOYEE.



   Any sale of beer, wine, or liquor in or from any premises licensed
under this chapter by any employee authorized to make such sale in or from
such place is the act of the employer as well as of the person actually
making the sale; and every such employer is liable to all of the penalties
provided by law for such sale, equally with the person actually making the
sale.



(2006 Code, § 5.10)  (Ord. 50, 3rd Series, passed 3-1-1985)



§ 121.009  FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEES.



   (A)   Proof. No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued or
renewed unless and until the applicant has provided proof of financial
responsibility imposed by state statutes by filing with the city:



      (1)   A certificate that there is in effect an insurance
policy or pool providing minimum coverages as set by M.S. § 340A.409, as it
may be amended from time to time, because of bodily injury to any one person
in any one occurrence, and, subject to the limit for one person, in the
amount as set by M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time,
because of bodily injury to two or more persons in any one occurrence, and in
the amount as set by M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to
time, because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one
occurrence, and as set by M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to
time, for loss of means of support of any one person in any one occurrence,
and, subject to the limit for one person, as set by M.S. § 340A.409, as it
may be amended from time to time, for loss of means of support of two or more
persons in any one occurrence;



      (2)   A bond of a surety company with minimum coverages as
provided in division (A)(1) above; or



      (3)   A certificate of the State Treasurer that the licensee
has deposited with him or her as set by M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be
amended from time to time, in cash or securities which may legally be
purchased by savings banks or for trust funds having a market value of as set
by M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Exception. This chapter does not apply to on-sale beer
licensees with sales of beer of less than as set by M.S. § 340A.409, as it
may be amended from time to time, for the preceding year, nor to off-sale
beer licensees with sales of beer of less than as set by M.S. § 340A.409, as
it may be amended from time to time, for the preceding year, nor does it
apply to holders of on-sale wine licenses with sales of wine of less than as
set by M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time, for the
preceding year. An affidavit of the licensee shall be required to establish
the exemption under this division (B).



   (C)   Documents submitted to commissioner. All proofs of financial
responsibility and exemption affidavits filed with the city under this
section shall be submitted by the city to the State Commissioner of Public
Safety.



(2006 Code, § 5.11) (Ord. 36, 3rd Series, passed 5-30-1984; Ord. 50, 3rd
Series, passed 3-1-1985; Ord. 58, 3rd Series, passed 4-2-1986)



§ 121.010  INSURANCE CERTIFICATE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Whenever an insurance certificate is required by this chapter,
the applicant shall file with the City Administrator a certificate of
insurance showing:



      (1)   The limits are at least as high as required; and



      (2)   Coverage is effective for at least the license term
approved.



   (B)   Such insurance will not be cancelled or terminated without
30-days’ written notice served upon the City Administrator. Cancellation or
termination of such coverage shall be grounds for license revocation.



(2006 Code, § 5.13)  (Ord. 36, 3rd Series, passed 5-30-1984)



§ 121.011  FIXING LICENSE FEES.



   All license fees provided for in this chapter, including, but not by
way of limitation, license fees for on-sale and off-sale of beer, temporary
on-sale of beer, on-sale of liquor, and on-sale of liquor by clubs, shall be
fixed and determined by the Council, adopted by resolution, and uniformly
enforced. Such license fees may, from time to time, be amended by the Council
by resolution; provided, however, that before any such fee shall be
increased, a 30-day notice shall be mailed to all affected licensees and a
hearing held thereon. A copy of the resolution shall be kept on file in the
office of the City Administrator, and open to inspection during regular
business hours.



(2006 Code, § 5.14)  (Ord. 90, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 121.012  CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES.



   Except as herein provided, every licensee under this chapter shall be
responsible for the conduct of his or her place of business and shall
maintain conditions of sobriety and order therein.



(2006 Code, § 5.15)



§ 121.013  MINORS AS DEFINED IN § 121.001.



   (A)   Consumption.



      (1)   Licensee to permit any minor to consume alcoholic
beverages on licensed premises.



      (2)   Minor to consume alcoholic beverages except in the
household of the minor’s parent or guardian, and then only with the consent
of such parent or guardian.



   (B)   Purchasing. It is unlawful for any person:



      (1)   To sell, barter, furnish, or give alcoholic beverages to
a minor unless such person is the parent or guardian of the minor, and then
only for consumption in the household of such parent or guardian;



      (2)   Minor to purchase or attempt to purchase any alcoholic
beverage; or



      (3)   To induce a minor to purchase or procure any alcoholic
beverage.



   (C)   Possession.



      (1)   It is unlawful for a minor to possess any alcoholic
beverage with the intent to consume it at a place other than the household of
the minor’s parent or guardian.



      (2)   Possession of an alcoholic beverage by a minor at a
place other than the household of the parent or guardian is prima facie
evidence of intent to consume it at a place other than the household of his
or her parent or guardian.



   (D)   Entering licensed premises.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any minor, as defined in this
chapter, to enter licensed premises or the municipal dispensary for the
purpose of purchasing or consuming any alcoholic beverage.



      (2)   It is not unlawful for any person who has attained the
age of 18 years to enter licensed premises for the following purposes:



         (a)   To perform work for the establishment, including
the serving of alcoholic beverages, unless otherwise prohibited by statute;



         (b)   To consume meals; and



         (c)   To attend social functions that are held in a
portion of the establishment where liquor is not sold. It is unlawful for a
licensee to permit a person under the age of 18 years to enter licensed
premises unless attending a social event at which alcoholic beverages are not
served, or in the company of a parent or guardian.



   (E)   Misrepresentation of age. It is unlawful for a minor to
misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing an alcoholic
beverage.



   (F)   Proof of age. Proof of age for purchasing or consuming
alcoholic beverages may be established only by a valid driver’s license or
identification card issued by the state, another state, or a province of
Canada, and including the photograph and date of birth of the licensed
person; or by a valid military identification card issued by the U.S.
Department of Defense; or, in the case of a foreign national, from a nation
other than Canada, by a valid passport.



   (G)   Qualification for license. No minor shall qualify for a
license.



(2006 Code, § 5.16)  (Ord. 58, 3rd Series, passed 4-2-1986; Ord. 67, 3rd
Series, passed 4-22-1987; Ord. 124, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)  Penalty,
see § 121.999



§ 121.014  CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON STREETS,
PUBLIC PROPERTY, AND PRIVATE PARKING LOTS TO WHICH THE PUBLIC HAS ACCESS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to consume, or possess in an
unsealed container, any alcoholic beverage on any city park, street, public
property, or  private parking lot to which the public has access, except on
such premises when and where permission has been specifically granted or
licensed by the Council; provided, that this section shall not apply to the
possession of an unsealed container in a motor vehicle when the container is
kept in the trunk of such vehicle if it is equipped with a trunk, or kept in
some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or
passengers, if the motor vehicle is not equipped with a trunk.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, a utility or glove
compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver or
passengers; provided further, that alcoholic beverages may be consumed
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. in Sunnybrook Park and in
Black’s Grove Park without a permit as herein required.



(2006 Code, § 5.17)



Cross-reference:



   Rules and regulations governing Sunnybrook Park, see § 130.13



§ 121.015  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN CERTAIN BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS.



   It is unlawful for any person to introduce upon, or have in his or her
possession upon, or in, any school ground, or any schoolhouse or school
building, any alcoholic beverage, except for experiments in laboratories and
except for those organizations who have been issued temporary licenses to
sell beer, and for any person to possess beer as a result of a purchase from
those organizations holding temporary licenses.



(2006 Code, § 5.18)  (Ord. 67, 3rd Series, passed 4-22-1987)  Penalty, see
§ 121.999



§ 121.016  WORKER’S COMPENSATION.



   No license to operate a business shall be issued by the city until the
applicant presents his or her employer’s tax identification number and
acceptable evidence of compliance with the worker’s compensation insurance
coverage requirement of state statutes by providing the name of the insurance
company, the policy number, and dates of coverage, or the permit to
self-insure.



(2006 Code, § 5.19)  (Ord. 90, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)



§ 121.017  MUNICIPAL DISPENSARY.



   (A)   Establishment. A municipal dispensary is hereby established to
be operated within the city for the off-sale of liquor potable as a beverage
and containing more than 3.2% alcohol by weight. Such dispensary shall be at
such place or places as the Council shall determine and may be either leased
or owned by the city. It shall be in the charge of a person known as the
manager who shall have such assistants as may be necessary. All employees,
including the manager, shall hold their positions at the pleasure of the
Council.



   (B)   Dispensary Fund. A Liquor Dispensary Fund is hereby created
into which all revenues received from the operation of the dispensary shall
be paid, and from which all operating expenses shall be paid. Any surplus
accumulating in this Fund may, from time to time, be transferred to the
General Fund by resolution of the Council, and expended for any municipal
purpose.



(2006 Code, § 5.60)  (Ord. 17, 3rd Series, passed 6-18-1981)



§ 121.018  CLUBS.



   (A)   Club license required. It is unlawful for any club to sell or
keep or offer for sale any liquor without a license therefor from the city.



   (B)   Club license restrictions and regulations.



      (1)   No club shall sell liquor to persons other than its
members and their bona fide guests.



      (2)   All liquor license restrictions, liquor sale regulations
and hours and days of liquor sales, as stated in this chapter and relating to
the on-sale of liquor, shall be binding upon all club licensees.



(2006 Code, § 5.61)  Penalty, see § 121.999



§ 121.019  NUDITY OR OBSCENITY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      NUDITY. Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal
human genitals, pubic areas, the post-pubertal human female breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this definition, a
female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and
the areola only are covered.



      OBSCENE PERFORMANCE. A play, motion picture, dance, show, or
other presentation, whether pictured, animated or live, performed before an
audience and which in whole or in part depicts or reveals nudity, sexual
conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-masochistic abuse, or which includes
obscenities or explicit verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual
conduct.



      OBSCENITIES. Those slang words currently generally rejected for
regular use in mixed society, that are used to refer to genitals, female
breasts, sexual conduct or excretory functions or products, either that have
no other meaning or that in context are clearly used for their bodily,
sexual, or excretory meaning.



      SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a
person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in revealing or bizarre
costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically
restrained on the part of one so clothed.



      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or any
touching of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or
female, or the breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the
same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent
sexual stimulation or gratification.



      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals
or the breasts of the female when in a state of sexual stimulation, or the
sensual experiences of humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct or
nudity.



   (B)   Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person issued a license
provided for in this chapter to permit upon licensed premises any nudity,
obscene performance, or continued use of obscenities by any agent, employee,
patron, or other person.



(2006 Code, § 5.90)  Penalty, see § 121.999




APPLICATION AND LICENSE; PROCEDURE AND ADMINISTRATION




§ 121.030  APPLICATION.



   All applications shall be made at the office of the City Administrator
upon forms prescribed by the proper agency of the state together with such
additional information as the Council may desire. All questions asked or
information required by the application forms shall be answered fully and
completely by the applicant.



(2006 Code, § 5.02)



§ 121.031  FALSE STATEMENTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false
statement or omission upon any application form.



   (B)   Any false statement in such application, or any willful
omission to state any information called for on such application form shall,
upon discovery of such falsehood, work an automatic refusal of license, or if
already issued, shall render any license issued pursuant thereto void and of
no effect to protect the applicant from prosecution for violation of this
chapter, or any part thereof.



(2006 Code, § 5.02)  Penalty, see § 121.999



§ 121.032  APPLICATION AND INVESTIGATION FEES.



   At the time of the initial application, an applicant for an on-sale
liquor license shall pay to the city the sum as set by M.S. § 340.408, as it
may be amended from time to time, an applicant for an on-sale wine license
shall pay to the city the sum as set by M.S. § 340.408, as it may be amended
from time to time, and the applicant for an on-sale beer license shall pay to
the city the sum as set by M.S. § 340.408, as it may be amended from time to
time, which fee shall be considered an application and investigation fee, not
refundable to applicant, to cover the costs of the city in processing the
application and the investigation thereof.



(2006 Code, § 5.02)  (Ord. 47, 3rd Series, passed 11-24-1984)



§ 121.033  ACTION.



   (A)   Granting. The Council may approve any application for the
period of the remainder of the then current license year or for the entire
ensuing license year. All applications including proposed license periods
must be consistent with this chapter.



   (B)   Issuing. If an application is approved, the City Administrator
shall forthwith issue a license pursuant thereto in the form prescribed by
the city or the proper agency of the state, as the case may be, and upon
payment of the license fee. All licenses shall be on a calendar-year basis
unless otherwise specified herein. For licenses issued and which are to
become effective other than on the first day of the licensed year, the fee to
be paid with the application shall be a pro rata share of the annual license
fee. Licenses shall be valid only at one location and on the premises therein
described.



   (C)   License refundment in certain cases. In the event that, during
the license year, the licensed premises shall be destroyed or so damaged by
fire, or otherwise, that the licensee shall cease to carry on the licensed
business, or in case the business of the licensee shall cease by reason of
his or her illness or death, or if it shall become unlawful for the licensee
to carry on the licensed business under his or her license, except when such
license is revoked, the city shall, upon the happening of any such event,
refund to the licensee, or to his or her estate, such part of the license fee
paid by him or her as corresponds to the time such license had yet to run. In
the event of death of the licensee, his or her personal representative is
hereby authorized to continue operation of said business for not more than 90
days after the death of such licensee.



   (D)   Transfer. No license shall be transferable between persons or
to a different location without prior consent of the Council and the filing
of a new application. It is unlawful to make any transfer in violation of
this division (D).



   (E)   Refusal and termination. The Council may, in its sole
discretion and for any reasonable cause, refuse to grant any application. No
license shall be granted to a person of questionable moral character or
business reputation. Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or
revocation.



(2006 Code, § 5.02)  (Ord. 36, 3rd Series, passed 5-30-1984; Ord. 47, 3rd
Series, passed 11-24-1984; Ord. 124, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)



Penalty, see § 121.999



§ 121.034  DUPLICATE LICENSES.



   (A)   Duplicates of all original licenses may be issued by the City
Administrator without action by the Council, upon licensee’s affidavit that
the original has been lost, and upon payment of a fee as set by City Council
resolution for issuance of the duplicate.



   (B)   All duplicate licenses shall be clearly marked “Duplicate”.



(2006 Code, § 5.02)



§ 121.035  POSTING.



   All licensees shall post their licenses in their places of business.



(2006 Code, § 5.02)



§ 121.036  RESIDENT MANAGER OR AGENT.



   (A)   Before a license is issued to an individual who is a
nonresident of the city, to more than one individual whether or not they are
residents of the city, or to a corporation, partnership, or association, the
applicant or applicants shall appoint in writing an individual person who is
a resident of the city as its manager or agent.



   (B)   (1)   Such resident manager or agent shall, by the terms of
his or her written consent:



         (a)   Take full responsibility for the conduct of the
licensed premises; and



         (b)   Serve as agent for service of notices and other
process relating to the license.



      (2)   (a)   Such manager or agent must be a person who, by
reason of age, character, reputation, and other attributes, could qualify
individually as a licensee.



         (b)   If such manager or agent ceases to be a resident
of the city or ceases to act in such capacity for the licensee without
appointment of a successor, the license issued pursuant to such appointment
shall be subject to revocation or suspension.



(2006 Code, § 5.02)



§ 121.037  PERSONS DISQUALIFIED.



   (A)   No license under this chapter may be issued, or renewed, to:



      (1)   A person who within five years of the license
application has been convicted of any felony or a willful violation of a
federal or state law, or local ordinance governing the manufacture, sale,
distribution, or possession for sale or distribution, of alcoholic beverages;



      (2)   A person who has had an alcoholic beverage license
revoked within five years of the license application, or to any person who at
the time of the violation owns any interest, whether as a holder of more than
5% of the capital stock of a corporate licensee, as a partner or otherwise,
in the premises or in the business conducted thereon, or to a corporation,
partnership, association, enterprise, business, or firm in which any such
person is in any manner interested;



      (3)   A person under the age of 21 years; or



      (4)   A person not of good moral character and repute.



   (B)   No person holding a license from the Commissioner as a
manufacturer, brewer (except as provided by statute), wholesaler, or
importer, may have a direct or indirect interest, in whole or in part, in a
business holding an alcoholic beverage license from the city.



(2006 Code, § 5.02)  (Ord. 124, passed 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998) 
Penalty, see § 121.999




BEER




§ 121.050  BEER LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any
pretense or by any device, to sell, barter, keep for sale, or otherwise
dispose of beer, as part of a commercial transaction, without a license
therefor from the city.



   (B)   (1)   This section shall not apply to sales by
manufacturers to wholesalers or to sales by wholesalers to persons holding
beer licenses from the city. Annual on-sale beer licenses may be issued only
to drug stores, restaurants, hotels, clubs, and establishments used
exclusively for the sale of beer with the incidental sale of tobacco and soft
drinks.



      (2)   Any person licensed to sell liquor at on-sale shall not
be required to obtain an on-sale beer license, and may sell beer on-sale
without an additional license.



(2006 Code, § 5.30)  (Ord. 58, 3rd Series, passed 4-2-1986)  Penalty, see
§ 121.999



§ 121.051  TEMPORARY BEER LICENSE.



   (A)   Applicant. A club or charitable, religious, or nonprofit
organization, duly incorporated as a nonprofit or religious corporation under
the laws of the state, and having its registered office and principal place
of activity within the city, shall qualify for a temporary on-sale beer
license.



   (B)   Conditions.



      (1)   An application for a temporary license shall state the
exact dates and place of proposed temporary sale.



      (2)   If the premises proposed to be licensed are city-owned
property, the Council may, as a condition to issuance of the license, require
insurance coverage.



      (3)   The applicant shall comply with all other restrictions,
limitations, and regulations for the sale of beer under the this code of
ordinances or statutes.



(2006 Code, § 5.32)



§ 121.052  BEER LICENSE RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Age limit, on sale and establishments serving food. No person
who has not attained the age of 18 years shall be employed to sell or serve
beer in any on-sale establishment; provided, however, that a person who has
attained the age of 17 years may be employed in any restaurant licensed to
sell beer in which the principal part of said business is the serving of food.



   (B)   Age limit, off sale. No person who has not attained the age of
18 years shall be employed to sell beer in any off-sale establishment except
in the capacity of a cashier at a check-out counter.



   (C)   Church structure. No license shall be granted for any building
within 300 feet of any public elementary or secondary school structure, or
within 100 feet of any church structure. This provision shall not be
applicable to a temporary beer license.



   (D)   Licenses based on population increments. No more than one
on-sale beer license shall be issued for each increment of 750 population
based on the last census of the city.



(2006 Code, § 5.33)  (Ord. 58, 3rd Series, passed 4-2-1986; Ord. 67, 3rd
Series, passed 4-22-1987)



Penalty, see § 121.999



§ 121.053  HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE OF BEER.



   No sale of beer shall be made between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00
a.m. on any weekday, Monday through Saturday inclusive, nor on any Sunday
between the hours of 1:00  a.m. and 12:00 p.m, nor after 8:00 p.m. on
December 24.



(2006 Code, § 5.34)  (Ord. 50, 3rd Series, passed 3-1-1985)  Penalty, see
§ 121.999



§ 121.054  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   It is unlawful for any:



   (A)   Person to knowingly induce another to make an illegal sale or
purchase of beer;



   (B)   Licensee to sell or serve beer to any person who is obviously
intoxicated;



   (C)   Licensee to fail, where doubt could exist, to require adequate
proof of age of a person upon licensed premises;



   (D)   Licensee to sell beer on any day, or during any hour, when
such sales are not permitted by law;



   (E)   Licensee to allow consumption of beer on licensed premises on
any day when sales of beer are not permitted by law; or



   (F)   Person to purchase beer on any day, or during any hour, when
sales of beer are not permitted by law.



(2006 Code, § 5.35)  (Ord. 58, 3rd Series, passed 4-2-1986)  Penalty, see
§ 121.999




LIQUOR GENERALLY




§ 121.065  LIQUOR LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any
pretense or by any device, to sell, barter, keep for sale, or otherwise
dispose of liquor, as part of a commercial transaction, without a license
therefor from the city.



   (B)   This section shall not apply:



      (1)   To such potable liquors as are intended for therapeutic
purposes and not as a beverage;



      (2)   To industrial alcohol and its compounds not prepared or
used for beverage purposes;



      (3)   To wine in the possession of a person duly licensed
under this chapter as an on-sale wine licensee;



      (4)   To sales by manufacturers to wholesalers duly licensed
as such by the Commissioner;



      (5)   To sales by wholesalers to persons holding liquor
licenses from the city; or



      (6)   To the municipal liquor store. Any person licensed to
sell liquor at on-sale shall not be required to obtain an on-sale beer
license, and may sell beer on-sale without an additional license.



   (C)   The city may issue annual on-sale liquor licenses only to the
following:



      (1)   Hotels;



      (2)   Restaurants; or



      (3)   Clubs or congressionally chartered veterans’
organizations; provided, that liquor sales will be made only to members and
bona fide guests.



(2006 Code, § 5.50)  (Ord. 58, 3rd Series, passed 4-2-1986)  Penalty, see
§ 121.999



§ 121.066  LIQUOR LICENSE RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.



   The following are the conditions of license:



   (A)   Every license shall be granted subject to the provisions of
this chapter and all other applicable provisions of this code of ordinances
and other laws relating to the operation of his or her business.



   (B)   No gambling shall be permitted on licensed premises except
such as are licensed by or under the control of the Charitable Gambling
Control Board, nor shall any prostitute or person of known immoral character
or any disorderly person be permitted on such premises.



   (C)   No licensee shall sell, offer for sale, or keep for sale,
liquor in any original package which has been refilled or partly refilled.



   (D)   No licensee shall display liquor to the public during hours
when the sale of liquor is prohibited.



   (E)   Changes in the corporate or association officers, corporate
charter, articles of incorporation, by-laws, or partnership agreement, as the
case may be, shall be submitted to the City Administrator within 30 days
after such changes are made.



(2006 Code, § 5.52)  (Ord. 58, 3rd Series, passed 4-2-1986)  Penalty, see
§ 121.999



§ 121.067  UNLAWFUL ACTS (LIQUOR).



   It is unlawful for any:



   (A)   Inducing another to make illegal sale or purchase. Person to
knowingly induce another to make an illegal sale or purchase of liquor;



   (B)   Sales on days or times not permitted by law. Licensee, or an
employee of a licensee, to sell or serve liquor on any day, or during any
hour, when sales of liquor are not permitted by law;



   (C)   Purchase or consumption at times not permitted by law. Person
to purchase or consume liquor on licensed premises on any day, or during any
hour, when sales of liquor are not permitted by law;



   (D)   Sale to intoxicated persons. Licensee, or employee of a
licensee, to sell or serve liquor to any person who is obviously intoxicated;
and



   (E)   Failure to require adequate proof of age. licensee to fail,
where doubt could exist, to require adequate proof of age of a person upon
licensed premises.



(2006 Code, § 5.53)  (Ord. 58, 3rd Series, passed 4-2-1986)  Penalty, see
§ 121.999



§ 121.068  HOURS AND DAYS OF LIQUOR SALES.



   The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by M.S. §
340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time, except that the City
Council may, by resolution or ordinance, provide for more restrictive days or
hours than state law allows.



(2006 Code, § 5.54)  (Ord. 90, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991; Ord. 216, 3rd
Series, passed 6-6-2017)  Penalty, see § 121.999



§ 121.069  SPORTS OR CONVENTION FACILITIES LICENSE.



   The Council may authorize any holder of an on-sale liquor license
issued by the city or by an adjacent municipality to sell liquor at any
convention, banquet, conference, meeting, or social affair conducted on the
premises of a sports or convention facility owned by the city, or
instrumentality thereof having independent policy-making and appropriating
authority and located within the city. The licensee must be engaged to sell
liquor at such an event by the person or organization permitted to use the
premises, and may sell liquor only to persons attending the event. The
licensee shall not sell liquor to any person attending or participating in
any amateur athletic event. Such sales may be limited to designated areas of
the facility. All such sales shall be subject to all laws relating thereto.



(2006 Code, § 5.55)  (Ord. 36, 3rd Series, passed 5-30-1984)  Penalty, see
§ 121.999



§ 121.070  TEMPORARY LIQUOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Licensed authorized. Notwithstanding any provisions of this
code of ordinances to the contrary, the Council may issue a license for the
temporary on-sale of liquor in connection with a social event sponsored by
the licensee. Such license may provide that the licensee may contract with
the holder of a full-year on-sale license, issued by the city, for liquor
catering services.



   (B)   Applicant. The applicant for a license under this section must
be a club or charitable, religious, or other nonprofit organization in
existence for at least three years.



   (C)   Terms and conditions of license.



      (1)   No license is valid until approved by the Commissioner.



      (2)   No license shall be issued for more than four
consecutive days.



      (3)   No temporary license shall issue until the city is
furnished with written proof that the licensee has dram shop coverage in the
amount provided for in this chapter, and that such coverage is in force on
the premises where liquor is to be served.



      (4)   All licenses and licensees are subject to all provisions
of statutes and this code of ordinances relating to liquor sale and licensing
except those relating to financial responsibility and insurance, and except
those which by their nature are not applicable.



      (5)   Licenses may authorize sales on premises other than
those owned or permanently occupied by the licensee.



      (6)   No more than three four-day, four three-day, or six
two-day licenses in any combination not to exceed 12 days per year may be
issued to any one organization, or for any one location within a 12-month
period.



      (7)   No more than one temporary license may be issued to any
one organization or registered political committee or for any one location
within any 30-day period.



   (D)   Insurance required. The Council may, but at no time shall it
be under any obligation whatsoever to, grant a temporary liquor license on
premises owned or controlled by the city. Any such license may be
conditioned, qualified, or restricted as the Council sees fit. If the
premises to be licensed are owned or under the control of the city, the
applicant shall file with the city, prior to issuance of the license, a
certificate of liability insurance coverage in at least the sum of $1,000,000
combined single limits, bodily injury and property damage, naming the city as
an insured during the license period.



(2006 Code, § 5.56)  (Ord. 58, 3rd Series, passed 4-2-1986; Ord. 124, 3rd
Series, passed 6-5-1998) Penalty, see § 121.999



§ 121.071  SUNDAY SALES.



   (A)   License required. The electorate of the city having heretofore
authorized the same at a general or special election, a Sunday on-sale liquor
license may be issued to hotels, restaurants, or clubs, in conjunction with
the sale of food, which have on-sale liquor licenses and which also have
seating capacity for not less than 125 guests at one time. Prior to issuance
of such license, the applicant shall provide the city with proof of financial
responsibility for Sunday sales.



   (B)   Special clerk’s permit required for on-sale club license.



      (1)   By authorizing Sunday on-sales, it is anticipated that a
Sunday on-sale liquor licensee will make such sales only on those certain
Sundays for which a special clerk’s permit has been issued. Permits for
certain Sunday sales shall not exceed 12 permits per calendar year.



      (2)   A Sunday on-sale liquor licensee may obtain a special
clerk’s permit by applying to the City Administrator at least five business
days prior to the Sunday on which the licensee desires to make such sales.
Upon receipt, the City Administrator shall refer the application to the Chief
of Police for his or her information and endorsement, and, upon return of the
application, the City Administrator shall issue the permit. No fee shall be
charged for the permit.



   (C)   Hours of sale. The hours of Sunday on-sale liquor sales shall
be from 12:00 p.m. on Sunday to 1:00 a.m. on Monday.



   (D)   Unlawful acts. It is unlawful to sell liquor on Sunday unless
such sales are:



      (1)   Licensed in accordance with this section;



      (2)   For a club on a Sunday for which a special clerk’s
permit has been issued;



      (3)   In conjunction with the sale of food; and



      (4)   During hours of permitted sales.



   (E)   License fee. All fees for Sunday on-sale liquor licenses shall
be set by resolution of the Council.



(2006 Code, § 5.57)  (Ord. 75, 3rd Series, passed 12-18-1987; Ord. 90, 3rd
Series, passed 11-28-1991) Penalty, see § 121.999




WINE




§ 121.085  ON-SALE WINE LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   On-sale wine license required.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, or keep or offer
for sale, any wine without a license therefor from the city.



      (2)   This section shall not apply:



         (a)   To possession or handling for sale or otherwise of
sacramental wine or any representative of any religious order or for use in
connection with a legitimate religious ceremony;



         (b)   To sales by manufacturers to wholesalers duly
licensed as such by the state;



         (c)   To sales by wholesalers to persons holding on-sale
or off-sale liquor licenses from the city; or



      (4)   To sales by wholesalers to persons holding on-safe wine
licenses from the city.



   (B)   On-sale wine license restrictions and regulations.



      (1)   No license shall be granted to a wholesaler or
manufacturer of wine, or to anyone holding a financial interest in such
manufacture or wholesaling.



      (2)   No gambling or gambling device shall be permitted on any
licensed premises, except such as are licensed by the Charitable Gambling
Control Board.



      (3)   No licensee shall display wine to the public on days or
during hours when the sale of wine is prohibited.



      (4)   On-sale wine licenses shall be granted only to
restaurants as defined in this chapter; provided, however, for purposes of
this section, such restaurant shall have appropriate facilities for seating
not less than 50 guests at one time.



      (5)   Every license shall be granted subject to the provisions
of this chapter and all other applicable provisions of this code of
ordinances other laws relating to the operation of the licensed business.



(2006 Code, § 5.70)  (Ord. 46, 3rd Series, passed 11-24-1984)  Penalty,
see § 121.999



§ 121.086  HOURS AND DAYS OF SALES BY ON-SALE WINE LICENSEES.



   No on-sale of wine shall be made between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
12:00 p.m. on Sunday, nor between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the
days of Monday through Saturday, nor between the hours of 8:00 p.m. on
December 24 and 8:00 a.m. on December 25.



(2006 Code, § 5.71)  (Ord. 90, 3rd Series, passed 11-28-1991)  Penalty,
see § 121.999



§ 121.087  NUMBER OF LICENSES ISSUED.



   No more than one on-sale wine license shall be issued for each
increment of 900 population based on the last census of the city.



(2006 Code, § 5.72)  (Ord. 46, 3rd Series, passed 11-24-1984)  Penalty,
see § 121.999



§ 121.088  UNLAWFUL ACTS (WINE).



   It is unlawful:



   (A)   For any person to knowingly induce another to make an illegal
sale or purchase of wine;



   (B)   For any licensee to sell wine on any day, or during any hour,
when sales of wine are not permitted by law;



   (C)   For any person to purchase wine on any day, or during any
hour, when sales of wine are not permitted by law;



   (D)   For any licensee to sell or serve wine to any person who is
obviously intoxicated;



   (E)   For any licensee to fail, where doubt could exist, to require
adequate proof of age of a person upon licensed premises; or



   (F)   For any licensee to sell wine except in conjunction with the
sale of food.



(2006 Code, § 5.73)  (Ord. 58, 3rd Series, passed 4-2-1986)  Penalty, see
§ 121.999




CONSUMPTION AND DISPLAY




§ 121.100  CONSUMPTION AND DISPLAY LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any business establishment or club, not holding an
on-sale liquor license to directly or indirectly, or on any pretense or by
any device, to sell, barter, keep for sale, or otherwise dispose of any
liquid for the purpose of mixing the same with liquor, or permit its members
to bring and keep a personal supply of liquor in lockers assigned to such
members, without a license therefor from the city.



(2006 Code, § 5.80)  Penalty, see § 121.999



§ 121.101  CONSUMPTION AND DISPLAY RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Eligible licensees. If the applicant is otherwise eligible,
licenses may be issued only to:



      (1)   Persons who have not, within five years prior to
application, been convicted of a felony or of violating provisions of this
chapter or other law relating to the sale or furnishing of alcoholic
beverages;



      (2)   A restaurant;



      (3)   A hotel;



      (4)   A beer licensee;



      (5)   A resort as defined by statute; or



      (6)   A club or an unincorporated club otherwise meeting the
definition of a club; provided, that no license may be issued to a club
holding an on-sale liquor license.



   (B)   Unlawful act. It is unlawful to sell liquor on licensed
premises.



(2006 Code, § 5.80)  (Ord. 67, 3rd Series, passed 4-22-1987)  Penalty, see
§ 121.999



§ 121.102  LICENSE EXPIRATION.



   In order to coordinate the expiration of a consumption and display
license with a state permit, all licenses shall expire on March 31 of each
year.



(2006 Code, § 5.80)  (Ord. 124, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)



§ 121.103  STATE PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Licenses shall be issued only to holders of a consumption and display
permit from the Commissioner.



(2006 Code, § 5.80)



§ 121.104  LOCKERS.



   A club to which a license is issued under this section may allow
members to bring and keep a personal supply of liquor in lockers on the
club’s premises. All bottles kept on the premises must have attached labels
signed by the member. No minor may keep a supply of liquor on club premises.



(2006 Code, § 5.80)



§ 121.105  HOURS AND DISPLAY.



   No licensee may permit a person to consume or display liquor, and no
person may consume or display liquor, between 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on
Sundays, and between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday.



(2006 Code, § 5.80)  (Ord. 67, 3rd Series, passed 4-22-1987)



BREW PUBS, TAP ROOMS, AND MICRODISTILLERY COCKTAIL ROOMS



§ 121.120  DEFINITION.



   The following definition shall apply for this subchapter unless context
requires or indicates a different meaning:



   BREWER. A person who manufactures malt liquor for sale.



(Ord. 208, 3rd Series, passed 8-8-2016)



§ 121.121  BREW PUBS, TAP ROOMS AND MICRODISTILLERY COCKTAIL ROOMS.



   The City Council is authorized to issue the following liquor licenses
in connection with the operation of breweries or micordistilleries duly
licensed by the Commissioner of Public Safety under M.S. § 340A.301 as
amended.



(Ord. 208, 3rd Series, passed 8-8-2016)



§ 121.122  BREW PUB ON-SALE.



   A brew pub on-sale license may be issued upon the following conditions:



   (A)   The applicant must be the holder of a valid brewers license
under M.S. § 340A.301.



   (B)   A validity licensed restaurant as defined by this chapter must
operate on the brew pub premises.



   (C)   The brew pub must demonstrate compliance with all zoning
ordinance standards pertaining to restaurants and brew pubs.



   (D)   Total retail sales may not exceed 3,500 barrels of malt liquor
per year of which off-sale sales may not exceed 500 barrels per year.



   (E)   All other provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to
such licenses and licensees unless inconsistent with the provisions of this
section.



   (F)   The applicant shall pay the appropriate license fee as
established annually by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 208, 3rd Series, passed 8-8-2016)



§ 121.123  BREW PUB OFF-SALE.



   A brew pub off-sale license may be issued upon the following conditions:



   (A)   The applicant must be the holder of a valid brewers license
under M.S. § 340A.301.



   (B)   A validly licensed restaurant as defined by this chapter must
operate on the brew pub premises.



   (C)   The brew pub must demonstrate compliance with all zoning
ordinance standards pertaining to restaurants and brew pubs.



   (D)   Sales under this license may not exceed 500 barrels per year.



   (E)   All other provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to
such licenses and licensees unless inconsistent with the provisions of this
section.



   (F)   All malt liquor sold under this license shall be packaged in a
manner compliant with M.S. § 340A.285 as amended.



   (G)   The applicant shall pay the appropriate license fee as
established annually by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 208, 3rd Series, passed 8-8-2016)



§ 121.124  BREWER TAP ROOM ON-SALE.



   (A)   A brewer tap room on-sale license may be issued upon the
following conditions:



      (1)   The applicant must be the holder of a valid brewers
license under M.S. § 340A.301.



      (2)   The location of sale shall be on the premises of or
adjacent to one brewery location owned by the brewer.



      (3)   The brewery may only have one tap room license and it
may not have an ownership interest in a brew pub.



      (4)   The brewer tap room must demonstrate compliance with all
zoning ordinance standards pertaining to brewer tap rooms.



      (5)   Total retail sales may not exceed 3,500 barrels of malt
liquor per year of which off-sale sales may not exceed 500 barrels per year.



      (6)   All other provisions of this chapter shall be applicable
to such licenses and licensees unless inconsistent with the provisions of
this section.



      (7)   The applicant shall pay the appropriate license fee as
established annually be resolution of the City Council.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall preclude the holder of a brewer
tap room license from also holding a license to operate a restaurant in the
tap room location.



(Ord. 208, 3rd Series, passed 8-8-2016)



§ 121.125  BREWER TAP ROOM OFF-SALE.



   A brewer tap room off-sale license may be issued upon the following
conditions:



   (A)   The applicant must be the holder of a valid brewers license
under M.S.§ 340A.301.



   (B)   The location of sale shall be on the premises of or adjacent
to one brewery location owned by the brewer.



   (C)   The brewery may only have on tap room license and it may not
have an ownership interest in a brew pub.



   (D)   All other provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to
such licenses and licensees unless inconsistent with the provisions of this
section.



   (E)   All malt liquor sold under this licenses shall be packaged in
a manner compliant with M.S. § 340A.285 as amended.



   (F)   The applicant shall pay the appropriate license fee as
established annually by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 208, 3rd Series, passed 8-8-2016)



§ 121.126  COCKTAIL ROOM ON-SALE LICENSE.



   (A)   A cocktail room on-sale license may be issued upon the
following conditions:



      (1)   The applicant must be the holder of a valid
manufacturer's license under M.S. § 340A.301 and must be a MICRODISTILLERY
as defined in M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 17A.



      (2)   The location of sale shall be on the premises of or
adjacent to the distillery location owned by the distiller.



      (3)   A microdistillery may only have one cocktail room
license and may not hold a cocktail room and a tap room license. A cocktail
room and tap room may not be co-located.



      (4)   The microdistillery must demonstrate compliance with all
zoning ordinance standards pertaining to microdistilleries.



      (5)   All other provisions of this chapter shall be applicable
to such licenses and licensees unless inconsistent with the provisions of
this section.



      (6)   The applicant shall pay the appropriate license fee as
established annually by resolution of the City Council.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall preclude the holder of a
cocktail room license from also holding a license to operate a restaurant in
the cocktail room location.



(Ord. 208, 3rd Series, passed 8-8-2016)



§ 121.127  MICRODISTILLERY OFF-SALE.



   A microdistillery off-sale license may be issued upon the following
conditions:



   (A)   The location of sale shall be on the premises of or adjacent
to the distillery location owned by the distiller.



   (B)   The microdistillery must demonstrate compliance with all
zoning ordinance standards pertaining to microdistilleries.



   (C)   The licensee may not sell more than one 375 milliliter bottle
of off-sale distilled spirits per customer per day.



   (D)   Off-sale hours and sales must conform to the hours of sale for
municipal retail off-sale in the city.



   (E)   No brand of distilled spirits may be sold off-sale at the
microdistillery unless it is also available for distribution by wholesalers.



   (F)   All other provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to
such licenses and licensees unless inconsistent with the provisions of this
section.



   (G)   The applicant shall pay the appropriate license fee as
established annually be resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 208, 3rd Series, passed 8-8-2016)



§ 121.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or
provision of this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a
misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.



   (B)   Revocation or suspension.



      (1)   For any license granted under the provisions of §
121.033, the Council may revoke, suspend for a period not to exceed 60 days,
impose penalties not to exceed $2,000, or any combination of these sanctions,
for each violation on a finding that the licensee has failed to comply with a
statute, regulations, or provisions of this code of ordinances relating to
alcoholic beverages.



      (2)   Presumptive penalties shall be as follows:



         (a)   First violation. Civil penalty of $250 and
mandatory server training class attendance by owner/manager of licensee
within one year of the violation;



         (b)   Second violation within 36 months of prior
violation. Civil penalty of $500, one-day license suspension, and mandatory
attendance of server training class by owner/manager of licensee within one
year of the violation;



         (c)   Third violation within 36 months of two prior
violations. Civil penalty of $1,000, three -day license suspension, and
mandatory attendance of server training class by owner/manager of licensee
within one year of the violation; and



         (d)   Fourth or more violation within 36 months of three
prior violations. License revocation.



      (3)   Prior violations shall be considered for penalty
enhancement purposes after the date of adoption of these penalty presumptions.



      (4)   (a)   No suspension or revocation shall take effect
until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the
Council, a committee of the Council, or a hearing under the Administrative
Procedures Act, being M.S. Ch. 14, as it may be amended from time to time, as
may be determined by the Council in action calling the hearing. Such hearing
shall be called by the Council upon written notice to the licensee served in
person or by certified mail not less than 15 nor more than 30 days prior to
the hearing date, stating the time, place, and purpose thereof.



         (b)   As additional restrictions or regulations on
licensees under this chapter, and in addition to grounds for revocation or
suspension stated in this code of ordinances or statute, the following shall
also be grounds for such action:



            1.   The licensee suffered or permitted illegal
acts upon licensed premises unrelated to the sale of beer, wine, or liquor;



            2.   The licensee had knowledge of such illegal
acts upon licensed premises, but failed to report the same to police;



            3.   The licensee failed or refused to cooperate
fully with police in investigating such alleged illegal acts upon licensed
premises; or



            4.   The activities of the licensee created a
serious danger to public health, safety, or welfare.



(2006 Code, § 5.99)  (Ord. 197, 3rd Series, passed 4-14-2015)



CHAPTER 122:  TATTOOING, BODY PIERCING, AND THE LIKE



Section



   122.01   Purpose



   122.02   Definitions



   122.03   License requirements and procedures



   122.04   License application



   122.05   Application review and investigation



   122.06   Local restrictions



   122.07   Persons not eligible for license



   122.08   Conditions of license



   122.09   Inspections



   122.10   Health and sanitation requirements



 



   122.99   Penalty



§ 122.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the business of tattooing,
body piercing (excluding ear piercing), body branding, and body scarification
to protect the health and welfare of the general public. The adoption of M.S.
§§ 146B.01 et seq., as they may be amended from time to time, has
established comprehensive state regulation of these practices. M.S. §
146B.09, as it may be amended from time to time, specifically allows
continued municipal licensing of commercial enterprises. The City Council
finds that the local licensing in addition to the state regulation will
provide a broader and desirable protection of the general health and welfare
of the community.



(Ord. 173, 3rd Series, passed 5-13-2008; Ord. 181, 3rd Series, passed
2-8-2011)



§ 122.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BODY BRANDING. The use of heat, cold, or any chemical compound to
imprint permanent markings on human skin by means other than tattooing.



   BODY PIERCING. A method of puncturing the skin of a person by the aid
of needles, or any other instrument designed or used to puncture the skin,
for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other objects in or through the human
body. BODY PIERCING shall not refer to any medical procedure performed by a
licensed physician or medical specialist.



   BODY SCARIFICATION. Any method by which a scar is applied to, or left
on the human body for the purpose of creating a permanent mark or design on
the skin. BODY SCARIFICATION shall not refer to any medical procedure
performed by a licensed physician or medical specialist.



   EAR PIERCING. The puncturing of the non-cartilaginous perimeter of lobe
of the ear with a pie-sterilized single-use stud-and-clasp ear piercing
system following manufacturer’s instructions.



   PERSON. An individual, any form of business or social organization or
any other non-governmental legal entity, including, but not limited to, a
corporation, a partnership, a limited liability company, a trust, or an
unincorporated organization.



   TATTOOING. The marking of the skin of a person by insertion of
permanent colors by introducing the colors through puncture of the skin.



(Ord. 173, 3rd Series, passed 5-13-2008)



§ 122.03  LICENSE REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES.



   (A)   No person or entity shall operate any establishment where
tattooing, body piercing, body branding, or body scarification is practiced,
nor engage in such practice, without being licensed pursuant to this chapter.
A license is required for both the person and the premises. A licensed
medical physician or medical specialist who engages in these activities shall
be exempt from these license requirements. Ear piercing as defined in this
chapter does not require a license.



   (B)   All licenses shall be issued for one calendar year. If a
portion of a year has elapsed when an application is made, a license may be
issued for the remainder of that year at a prorated fee. Once a license has
been granted, no part of the fee paid by the licensee shall be refunded in
the event of the complete closure of the business and secession of business
activities.



   (C)   Each license shall be issued to the named applicant only and
shall not be transferable to another holder. If the licensee is a partnership
or corporation, a change in the identity of any of the principles of the
partnership or corporation shall be deemed a transfer of the license. Each
license shall be issued only for the premises described in the application.
Transfer of a license to another premises cannot occur without specific
approval of the City Council.



   (D)   A license from the city shall only be issued upon proof of the
applicant’s licensure for the activities pursuant to M.S. §§ 146B.01 et
seq., as they may be amended from time to time.



   (E)   If the license application is denied, the applicant may
request a hearing before the City Council by filing a written request with
the City Administrator within 15 days after the applicant has received
written notice of the denial. The hearing shall be conducted by the City
Council within 30 days after receipt of the written request for a hearing.



(Ord. 173, 3rd Series, passed 5-13-2008; Ord. 181, 3rd Series, passed
2-8-2011)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.04  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   Every application for a license under this chapter shall be
made on a form supplied by the city Administrator’s Office.



   (B)   The license application shall include:



      (1)   (a)   If the applicant is an individual, the name,
address, telephone number, and birth date of the applicant;



         (b)   If the applicant is a partnership, the name,
address, telephone number, and birth date of each general and limited
partner; or



         (c)   If the applicant is a corporation, the name,
address, telephone number, and birth date of all persons holding more than 5%
of the issued and outstanding stock of the corporation.



      (2)   The name, address, telephone number, and birth date of
the manager of said business, if different from the owner(s);



      (3)   The address and legal description of the premises where
the business is to be located;



      (4)   (a)   A statement detailing any conviction relating
to tattooing, body piercing, body branding, or body scarification, or the
operation of a tattoo, body piercing, body branding, or body scarification
establishment by the applicant or manager, and whether or not the applicant
or manager has ever applied for or held a license to operate a similar type
of business in other communities.



         (b)   In the case of a corporation, a statement
detailing any felony convictions by the owners of more than 5% of the issued
and outstanding stock of the corporation and whether or not those owners have
ever applied for or held a license to operate a similar type of business in
other communities;



      (5)   The types of activities to be conducted;



      (6)   The hours and days of operation;



      (7)   A building plan of the premises detailing all internal
operations and activities;



      (8)   Whether the applicant has previously been denied a
license of this type by any governmental entity;



      (9)   All license applications shall be signed by the person
applying for the license if any individual, by an officer of the corporation,
or by one of the general partners for a partnership;



      (10)   License fee, investigation fee, and Health Department
fee, and other required fees, as set by the city; and



      (11)   Such other information as the city may require.



   (C)   Any falsification on the license application shall result in
the denial of the license.



(Ord. 173, 3rd Series, passed 5-13-2008)



§ 122.05  APPLICATION REVIEW AND INVESTIGATION.



   All application information shall be verified and investigated by the
city/Chief of Police or his or her designee, including any necessary criminal
background checks to assure compliance.



   (A)   No license application shall be reviewed by the city until the
application fee, as set by the city, is paid in full.



   (B)   Upon receipt of an application and the prescribed license fee,
the city shall inspect the premises identified in the application as the
place or location at which the business is to be conducted to determine
whether it is in clean and sanitary condition.



(Ord. 173, 3rd Series, passed 5-13-2008)



§ 122.06  LOCAL RESTRICTIONS.



   No person shall engage in the practice of tattooing, body piercing,
body branding or body scarification at any place other than the place or
location identified and described in the application and license.



   (A)   No license shall be granted or renewed if the property on
which the business is to be located is not properly zoned or does not have a
valid conditional use permit or variance granted by the city.



   (B)   No location used for the practice of tattooing, body piercing,
body branding, or body scarification shall be used or occupied for living or
sleeping quarters or for any purpose other than tattooing, body piercing,
body branding, or body scarification.



   (C)   No license shall be granted or renewed if the premises to be
used for the business is licensed for the furnishing of alcoholic beverages
or is an adult use or sexually-oriented business establishment as defined in
§ 115.03.



(Ord. 173, 3rd Series, passed 5-13-2008; Ord. 181, 3rd Series, passed
2-8-2011)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.07  PERSONS NOT ELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.



   No license under this chapter shall be issued to an applicant who is a
natural person, general, or managing partner of a partnership, or manager,
proprietor, or agent of a corporation or other organization if such applicant:



   (A)   Is under 18 years of age at the time the application is filed
with the city;



   (B)   Has been convicted of a felony or any crime directly related
to the occupation licensed as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, subd. 2, as it
may be amended from time to time, and has not shown competent evidence of
sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of the
licensed occupation as prescribed in M.S. § 364.03, subd. 3, as it may be
amended from time to time;



   (C)   Who has been denied a license by the city, or any other state
government entity, to operate a tattoo, body piercing, body branding, and/or
body scarification business or whose license for said business has been
suspended or revoked within the preceding 12 months; or



   (D)   Who has not paid the license and/or investigation fees
required by this chapter.



(Ord. 173, 3rd Series, passed 5-13-2008)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.08  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Any license issued under this provision is subject to the
applicable sections of this code of ordinances regarding zoning, building
code, fire code, county health regulations, and all provisions of state and
federal law.



   (B)   Any licensee shall at all times hold a valid license form the
state for the activities undertaken and be in compliance with all
requirements thereof.



   (C)   All licensed premises shall have the license issued by the
city posted in a conspicuous place where any customer can easily view and
read the license at all times.



   (D)   No establishment licensed under these provisions shall operate
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



   (E)   (1)   All licensees shall at all times have a valid
certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to do
business in the state with minimum liability coverage of $200,000 for each
claim and $500,000 for each aggregate claim.



      (2)   Said certificate of insurance shall be filed with the
city as a condition of approval of the license by the City Council, with the
city listed as an additional insured.



(Ord. 173, 3rd Series, passed 5-13-2008; Ord. 181, 3rd Series, passed
2-8-2011)



§ 122.09  INSPECTIONS.



   The city/Police Department through its designated staff or contract
agent shall conduct random inspections of each licensed premises at least
annually to verify compliance with city requirements.



(Ord. 173, 3rd Series, passed 5-13-2008)



§ 122.10  HEALTH AND SANITATION REQUIREMENTS.



   No person shall engage in the practice of tattooing, body piercing,
body branding, and/or body scarification at any place in the city without
complying with health requirements, including, but not limited to, the
following provisions.



   (A)   Every premises shall have covered state-approved receptacles
for the disposal of needles.



   (B)   Every premises shall have appropriate procedures and equipment
for the storage and disposal of waste materials.



   (C)   No person having any communicable blood or skin infection or
other communicable disease of the blood or skin shall practice tattooing,
body piercing, body branding, or body scarification.



   (D)   (1)   All disposable needles, razor blades, sharps, or
other equipment utilized for penetrating the skin shall be individually
prepackaged and pre-sterilized and stored in a self-sealing sterilizing pouch.



      (2)   No such equipment shall be used for more than one
customer.



   (E)   All biohazard waste shall be disposed of in accordance with
state and federal law.



   (F)   All bandages and surgical dressings used in connection with
tattooing, body piercing, body branding, and/or body scarification of any
person shall be individually prepackaged, pre-sterilized, and disposable.



   (G)   Anyone performing tattooing, body piercing, body branding,
and/or body scarification procedures shall use protective disposable gloves
at all times during the procedures,



   (H)   Pigments used in tattooing shall be pre-made and commercially
prepared and free from bacteria and noxious agents and substances, including
mercury.



   (I)   Any jewelry shall be pre-sterilized and in individually sealed
packages.



   (J)   No person shall practice tattooing, body piercing, body
branding, and/or body scarification while under the influence of alcoholic
beverages or illegal drugs.



   (K)   The person performing the tattooing, body piercing, body
branding, or body scarification shall provide the individual with printed
instructions on the approved care of the skin during the healing process.



(Ord. 173, 3rd Series, passed 5-13-2008)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, shall be punished according to the penalties proscribed
for a misdemeanor by law.



   (B)   The City Council may revoke or suspend a license for any
violation of these code provisions including the submission of false
information on the license application, and for any violation of state or
federal law, which adversely affects the ability of the licensee to safely,
and lawfully conduct business.



      (1)   The Police Chief through the City Administrator shall
advise the licensee of the revocation or suspension in writing. The licensee
may request a hearing on the revocation or suspension by notifying the City
Administrator within ten days of the notice of revocation or suspension that
the licensee is requesting a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by the
City Council within 30 days of the receipt of the hearing request.



      (2)   No revocation or suspension shall become effective until:



         (a)   The completion of a hearing and a decision by the
City Council to proceed with revocation or suspension; or



         (b)   The expiration of ten days from the date of the
written notification to the licensee without receipt of a written request for
a hearing.



(Ord. 173, 3rd Series, passed 5-13-2008)



CHAPTER 123:  FRANCHISES



Section



   123.01   Definition



   123.02   Franchises ordinances



   123.03   Power of regulation reserved



   123.04   Conditions in every franchise



   123.05   Further provisions of franchise



§ 123.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FRANCHISE. Any special privileges granted to any person in, over, upon,
or under any of the streets or public places of the city, whether such
privilege has heretofore been granted by it or by the State of Minnesota, or
shall hereafter be granted by the city or by the State of Minnesota.



(2006 Code, § 2.71)



§ 123.02  FRANCHISES ORDINANCES.



   (A)   The Council may grant franchises by ordinance.



   (B)   Franchise rights shall always be subject to the superior right
of the public to the use of streets and public places.



   (C)   All persons desiring to make any burdensome use of the streets
or public places, inconsistent with the public’s right in such places, or
desiring the privilege of placing in, over, upon, or under any street or
public place any permanent or semi-permanent fixtures for the purpose of
constructing or operating railways, telegraphing, or transmitting
electricity, or transporting by pneumatic tubes, or for furnishing to the
city or its inhabitants or any portion thereof, transportation facilities,
water, light, heat, power, gas, or any other such utility, or for any other
purpose, shall be required to obtain a franchise before proceeding to make
such use of the streets or public places or before proceeding to place such
fixtures in such places.



(2006 Code, § 2.71)



§ 123.03  POWER OF REGULATION RESERVED.



   The city shall have the right and power to regulate and control the
exercise by any person, of any franchise however acquired, and whether such
franchise has been heretofore granted by it or by the state.



(2006 Code, § 2.71)



§ 123.04  CONDITIONS IN EVERY FRANCHISE.



   All conditions specified in this chapter shall be a part of every
franchise even though they may not be expressly contained in the franchise.



   (A)   The grantee shall be subject to and will perform on its part
all the terms of this chapter and will comply with all pertinent provisions
of this code of ordinances, as the same may from time to time be amended.



   (B)   The grantee shall in no case claim or pretend to exercise any
power to fix fares, rates, and charges; but that such fares, rates, and
charges shall at all times be just, fair, and reasonable for the services
rendered and shall in all cases be fixed and from time to time changed,
unless regulated by an agency of the state, in the manner following:



      (1)   A reasonable rate shall be construed to be one which
will, with efficient management, normally yield above all operating expenses
and depreciation, a fair return upon all money invested;



      (2)   If possible, maximum rates and charges shall be arrived
at by direct negotiation with the Council; and



      (3)   (a)   If direct negotiations fail to produce
agreement, the Council shall, not less than 30 days before the expiration of
any existing rate schedule or agreement, appoint an expert as its
representative, the franchisee shall likewise appoint an expert as its
representative and the two of them shall appoint a third person, preferably
an expert, and the three of them shall constitute a Board of Arbitration.



         (b)   The Board shall report its findings as soon as
possible and the rates and charges it shall agree upon by majority vote shall
be legal and binding, subject only to review by a court of competent
jurisdiction upon application of one of the parties.



   (C)   The Council shall have the right to require reasonable
extensions of any public service system from time to time, and to make such
rules and regulations as may be required to secure adequate and proper
service and to provide sufficient accommodations for the public.



   (D)   The grantee shall not issue any capital stock on account of
the franchise or the value thereof, and that the grantee shall have no right
to receive upon condemnation proceedings brought by the city to acquire the
public utility exercising such franchise, any return on account of the
franchise or its value.



   (E)   No sale or lease of said franchise shall be effective until
the assignee or lessee shall have filed with the city an instrument, duly
executed, reciting the facts of such sale or lease, accepting the terms of
the franchise, and agreeing to perform all the conditions required of the
grantee thereunder.



   (F)   Every grant in said franchise contained of permission for the
erection of poles, masts, or other fixtures in the streets and for the
attachment of wires thereto, or for the laying of tracks in, or of pipes or
conduits under the streets or public places, or for the placing in the
streets or other public places any permanent or semi-permanent fixtures
whatsoever, shall be subject to the conditions that the Council shall have
the power to require such alterations therein, or relocation or rerouting
thereof, as the Council may at any time deem necessary, for the safety,
health, or convenience of the public, and particularly that it shall have the
power to require the removal of poles, masts, and other fixtures bearing
wires and the placing underground all facilities for whatsoever purpose used.



   (G)   Every franchise shall contain a provision granting the city
the right to acquire the same in accordance with statute.



   (H)   The franchisee may be obligated by the city to pay the city
fees to raise revenue or defray increased costs accruing as a result of
utility operations, or both, including, but not limited to, a sum of money
based upon gross operating revenues or gross earnings from its operations in
the city.



(2006 Code, § 2.71)



§ 123.05  FURTHER PROVISIONS OF FRANCHISE.



   The enumeration and specification of particular matters which must be
included in every franchise or renewal or extension thereof, shall not be
construed as impairing the right of the city to insert in any such franchise
or renewal or extension thereof such other and further conditions and
restrictions as the Council may deem proper to protect the city’s
interests, nor shall anything contained in this chapter limit any right or
power possessed by the city over existing franchises.



(2006 Code, § 2.71)



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   PUBLIC PROTECTION, CRIMES, AND OFFENSES



CHAPTER 130:  PUBLIC PROTECTION, CRIMES, AND OFFENSES



Section




Public Protection




   130.01   Storage, deposit, and disposal of refuse



   130.02   Toilet installation required



   130.03   Water and sewer connection required



   130.04   Dangerous weapons and articles



   130.05   Dog regulations



   130.06   Animals and fowl; keeping, transporting, treatment, and
housing



   130.07   Exotic animal regulation



   130.08   Public nuisance



   130.09   Owner or occupant permitting a public nuisance



   130.10   Shade tree disease control and prevention



   130.11   State Uniform Fire Code



   130.12   Air pollution control



   130.13   Rules and regulations governing Sunnybrook Park



   130.14   Rules and regulations governing parks generally



   130.15   Junk cars, household furnishings, and appliances stored on
public or private property



   130.16   Abandoning a motor vehicle



   130.17   Prohibited use and parking of mobile homes and recreational
camping vehicles



   130.18   Maintenance of private property



   130.19   Open pits, basements, and other excavations



   130.20   Barbed wire fences



   130.21   Radio and television interference



   130.22   Storage of wood



   130.23   Prohibited noises, noisy gatherings, and permits




Crimes and Offenses




   130.35   Unlawful use and furnishing of tobacco



   130.36   Unlawful assembly; presence at unlawful assembly



   130.37   Disorderly conduct



   130.38   Falsely reporting a crime



   130.39   Falsely reporting a fire



   130.40   Concealing identity



   130.41   Curfew



   130.42   Conspiracy



   130.43   Coercion



   130.44   Interfering with religious observation



   130.45   Disorderly house or place of public resort



   130.46   Bomb threats or obscene or annoying calls



   130.47   Obstructing legal process or arrest



   130.48   Window peeping



   130.49   Lurking or loitering



   130.50   Social host regulations



 



   130.99   Penalty




PUBLIC PROTECTION




§ 130.01  STORAGE, DEPOSIT, AND DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any premises where a commercial or
industrial enterprise of any kind is carried on, and shall include
restaurants, clubs, churches, and schools where food is prepared or served.



      MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any building used for residential purposes
consisting of more than four dwelling units with individual kitchen
facilities for each.



      REFUSE. Includes all organic material resulting from the
manufacture, preparation, or serving of food or food products, and spoiled,
decayed, or waste foods from any source, bottles, cans, glassware, paper, or
paper products, crockery, ashes, rags, and discarded clothing, tree or lawn
clippings, leaves, weeds, and other waste products, except human waste or
waste resulting from building construction or demolition; provided, however,
that the term REFUSE shall not include lawn clippings or leaves if they are
neat, orderly, and contained for the purpose of creating organic matter.



      RESIDENTIAL DWELLING. Any single building consisting of one-
through four-dwelling units with individual kitchen facilities for each.



   (B)   Storage.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to store refuse on
residential dwelling premises for more than one week. All such storage shall
be in five- to 30-gallon metal or plastic containers with tight-fitting
covers, which shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition;
provided, that tree leaves, weeds, and grass clippings may be stored in
plastic bags and tree limbs must be stored in bundles weighing no more than
75 pounds and no longer than four feet.



      (2)   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to store refuse
on multiple dwelling premises for more than one week.



         (b)   Such storage shall be in containers as for
residential dwelling premises, except that so-called “dumpsters” with
close-fitting covers may be substituted.



      (3)   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to store refuse
on commercial establishment for more than 48 hours.



         (b)   Such storage shall be in containers as for
residential dwelling premises, except that so-called “dumpers” with
close-fitting covers may be substituted.



      (4)   It is unlawful to store organic refuse unless it is
drained and wrapped.



   (C)   Deposit. It is unlawful for any person to deposit refuse from
any source, rubbish, offal, or the body of a dead animal, in any place other
than a sanitary landfill.



   (D)   Disposal.



      (1)   The Council may, by resolution, adopt, and from time to
time amend, adjust, and revise such rules, regulations, rates, and charges as
it deems necessary or proper for the operation and management of the sanitary
landfill.



      (2)   It may give notice of any such action as it deems
necessary.



(2006 Code, § 10.01)  (Ord. 23, 3rd Series, passed 6-18-1981)  Penalty,
see § 130.99



§ 130.02  TOILET INSTALLATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   (1)   It is the duty of every owner or occupant of any
property within the city, having a dwelling house or business building
situated thereon, which property is within 100 feet of any municipal water
and sewer mains, to install a toilet in such dwelling or business building
and make connection thereof with such water and sewer mains.



      (2)   The city shall serve written notice upon said owner or
occupant requiring the installation of toilet facilities upon premises
described in said notice, and connection thereof with the sewer and water
mains, all of which shall be done within 30 days after service of such
written notice.



   (B)   (1)   Whenever any owner or occupant shall default in
compliance with such written notice, the Council may by resolution direct
that a toilet be installed and connection made with the water and sewer mains
and that the actual cost of such installation be paid in the first instance
out of the General Revenue Fund, and assessed against the property so
benefitted.



      (2)   (a)   After such installation and connection is
completed by order of the Council, the city shall serve a written notice of
intention to make an assessment therefor.



         (b)   If such assessment is not paid within ten days,
the city shall certify the amount thereof to the County Auditor in the same
manner as with other special assessments; provided, that the Council may by
resolution provide that the assessment be spread over a term of five years
upon written request by the owner of the property.



(2006 Code, § 10.03)



§ 130.03  WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The city is situated in an area having a water table
unusually close to the surface.



      (2)   Recognizing this, the Council has an obligation to be
particularly concerned with minimizing the hazard of pollution by private
sewerage disposal systems and maximizing protection against consumption of
unhealthy or polluted water.



      (3)   This section is adopted in the interest of maintaining
and preserving the public health, by limiting private sewerage disposal and
consumption of untreated water from private wells.



   (B)   Sewer and water connection required. All premises upon which
there is a business building or dwelling or multiple dwelling, and which
premises become within 100 feet of city water and sanitary sewer mains, shall
be connected thereto no later than one year after construction of such mains
is completed.



   (C)   Unlawful act. It is unlawful for the owner of any premises to
fail to comply with this section within the time limited.



   (D)   Other remedies.



      (1)   No land use and zoning permit for construction or
improvement of premises covered by this section shall be issued unless
connections with water and sewer mains have previously been made, or, as part
of such construction or improvement, connections are to be made with city
water and sewer mains.



      (2)   The city may enforce this section by civil action in a
court of competent jurisdiction.



   (E)   Exceptions.



      (1)   All premises on which a business building, such as a
cold storage warehouse is located, and where there are no facilities therein
using water and sewer system, shall not be required to connect to city water
and sanitary sewer mains.



      (2)   All premises upon which there is a dwelling with an
existing well as of the effective date of this division (E), and which
dwelling is located within 100 feet of an existing city water main, shall not
be required to connect to a city water main.



(2006 Code, § 10.04)  (Ord. 27, 3rd Series, passed 8-12-1982; Ord. 43, 3rd
Series, passed 10-3-1984)



Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Connection requirements; prohibitions, see § 51.01



§ 130.04  DANGEROUS WEAPONS AND ARTICLES.



   (A)   Acts prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Recklessly handle or use a gun or other dangerous weapon
or explosive so as to endanger the safety of another;



      (2)   Intentionally point a gun of any kind, capable of
injuring or killing a human being and whether loaded or unloaded, at or
toward another;



      (3)   Manufacture or sell for any lawful purpose any weapon
known as a slingshot or sand club;



      (4)   Manufacture, transfer, or possess metal knuckles or a
switch blade knife opening automatically;



      (5)   Possess any other dangerous article or substance for the
purpose of being used unlawfully as a weapon against another;



      (6)   Sell or have in his or her possession any device
designed to silence or muffle the discharge of a firearm;



      (7)   Permit, as a parent or guardian, any child under 14
years of age to handle or use, outside of the parent’s or guardian’s
presence, a firearm or air gun of any kind, or any ammunition or explosive;



      (8)   Furnish a minor under 18 years of age with a firearm,
air gun, ammunition, or explosive without the written consent of his or her
parent or guardian or of the Police Department;



      (9)   (a)   Possess, sell, transfer, or have in possession
for sale or transfer, any weapon commonly known as a throwing star, nun
chuck, or sharp stud.



         (b)   For the purpose of this division (A)(9), the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:



            NUN CHUCK. A pair of wood sticks or metallic rods
separated by chain links attached to one end of each such stick or rod.



            SHARP STUD. A circular piece of metal attached to a
wrist band, glove, belt, or other material which protrudes one-fourth inch,
or more, from the material to which it is attached, and with the protruding
portion pyramidal in shape, sharp, or pointed; provided, however, that the
Council may, upon a showing of special circumstances, issue a written permit
for such possession, sale, or transfer of nun chucks.



            THROWING STAR. A circular metallic device with any
number of points projecting from the edge.



   (B)   Exception. Nothing in division (A) above shall prohibit the
possession of the articles therein mentioned if the purpose of such
possession is for public exhibition by museums or collectors of art.



   (C)   Discharge of firearms and explosives. It is unlawful for any
person to fire or discharge any cannon, gun, pistol or other firearm,
firecracker, sky rocket or other fireworks, air gun, air rifle, or other
similar device commonly referred to as a B-B gun.



   (E)   Exception. Nothing in division (C) above shall apply to a
display of fireworks by an organization or group of organizations authorized
in writing by the Council, or to a peace officer in the discharge of his or
her duty, or to a person in the lawful defense of his or her person or
family. This section shall not apply to the discharge of firearms in a range
authorized in writing by the Council.



   (E)   Restrictions on the discharge of fireworks.



      (1)   The use, display, possession, discharge, or sale of any
fireworks not expressly permitted by M.S. § 624.20, subd. 1(c), as it may be
amended from time to time, is strictly prohibited.



      (2)   All use, display, or discharge of those non-explosive,
non-aerial pyrotechnic entertainment devices only containing the limited
amounts of pyrotechnic chemical compositions described in and permitted by
M.S. § 624.20, subd. 1(c), as it may be amended from time to time,
hereinafter “permitted consumer fireworks”, is strictly prohibited in the
area on, below, above or within or in close proximity to:



         (a)   Parks, recreational areas, roadways, streets,
highways, bicycle lanes, pedestrian paths, sidewalks, rights-of-way, streams,
waterways, and all other property owned or leased by: The city, County of
Wadena, state, or federal government and located in whole or in part within
the city limits;



         (b)   Private property within the city limits without
expressed consent of the property owner or person in control of the property,
or the property owner has conspicuously posted written sign or notice that no
fireworks discharge is allowed;



         (c)   Within 300 feet of any consumer fireworks retail
sales facility or storage area that has properly posted a written sign or
notice that no fireworks discharge is allowed;



         (d)   Any property, area, structure, or material that by
its physical condition or the physical conditions in which it is set would
constitute a fire or personal safety hazard; or



         (e)   All other use, display, or discharge of permitted
consumer fireworks must be conducted in a manner that minimizes the risk of
fire or injury to other persons or property.



   (F)   Exposure of unused container. It is unlawful for any person,
being the owner or in possession or control thereof, to permit an unused
refrigerator, ice box, or other container, sufficiently large to retain any
child and with doors which fasten automatically when closed, to expose the
same accessible to children, without removing the doors, lids, hinges, or
latches.



   (G)   Use of bow and arrow. It is unlawful for any person to shoot a
bow and arrow except in a physical education program in a school supervised
by a member of its faculty, a community-wide supervised class, or event
specifically authorized by the Chief of Police, or a bow and arrow range
authorized by the Council.



(2006 Code, § 10.20)  (Ord. 60, 3rd Series, passed 4-2-1986; Ord. 149, 3rd
Series, passed 12-10-2003)



Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.05  DOG REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CONTROL.  Use of a leash, one end of which is securely fastened
to a collar or other harness on a dog, and the other end of which is held
securely or fastened to a person of sufficient age and discretion, unless
otherwise specified, to maintain CONTROL.



      LEASH.  A cord, thong, rope, or chain not exceeding six feet in
length.



      OWNER.  Any person who owns, harbors, feeds, boards, keeps, or
otherwise possesses a dog, and who is the head of the household of the
residence, or the owner or manager in charge of the establishment or premises
at which a dog remains, or to which it returns.



      RUNNING AT LARGE.  Off or away from the premises of the owner
and not on a leash and under the control of the owner, or a member of his or
her immediate family.



      VICIOUS DOG.  A dog with a propensity to attack or bite human
beings or other animals, which propensity is known or ought reasonably to be
known to the owner.



   (B)   Impounding and release.



      (1)   (a)   Any dog found in the city running at large or
in violation of any other provision of this section or required to be
impounded hereunder shall be placed in the dog pound, and an accurate record
of the time of such placement shall be kept on each dog. Every dog so placed
in the pound shall be held for redemption by the owner for a period of not
less than five regular business days. A REGULAR BUSINESS DAY is one during
which the pound is open for business to the public for at least four hours
between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.



         (b)   Impoundment records shall be preserved for a
minimum of six months and shall show;



            1.   The description of the dog by specie, breed,
sex, approximate age, and other distinguishing traits;



            2.   The location at which the dog was seized;



            3.   The date of seizure;



            4.   The name and address of the person from whom
any dog three months of age or over was received; and



            5.   The name and address of the person to whom
any dog three months of age or over was transferred.



      (2)   Dogs shall be released to their owners, or persons
previously in possession of them, upon a sworn statement of ownership and
payment of impounding fees as established by the Council by resolution;
provided, however, that if the owner of an impounded dog does not redeem such
dog during the five-regular business day period, any other person may, upon
complying with the provisions of this section, redeem such dog from the pound
and be the lawful owner thereof.



      (3)   Any impounded dog shall not be released from the pound
to a person until such dog has been vaccinated against rabies; provided,
however, that no dog so impounded shall be vaccinated if the owner can
present a certificate of current vaccination.



      (4)   If unclaimed the dog shall be destroyed in a proper and
humane manner and remains thereof properly disposed of.



   (C)   Exception. Any dog seized under M.S. §§ 343.22
(investigation of cruelty) or 343.29 (exposure of animals), as they may be
amended from time to time, shall be held for ten days. A person claiming an
interest in a dog in custody under this section may prevent disposition of
the dog by posting security in an amount sufficient to provide for the dog's
actual costs of care and keeping. The security must be posted within ten days
of the seizure inclusive of the date of the seizure.



   (D)   Notice of impounding.



      (1)   Upon impounding a dog under this section, notice shall
be given the owner or person claiming interest in the dog by delivering or
mailing it to a person claiming an interest in the dog or by posting a copy
of it at the place where the dog is taken into custody or by delivering it to
a person residing on the property, and telephoning, if possible.



      (2)   The notice shall include:



         (a)   A description of the dog seized; the authority and
purpose for the seizure; the time, place, and circumstances under which the
dog was seized; and the location, address, telephone number, and contact
person where the dog is kept;



         (b)   A statement that a person claiming an interest in
the dog may post security to prevent disposition of the dog and may request a
hearing concerning the seizure or impoundment and that failure to do so
within five days of the date of the notice will result in disposition of the
dog;



         (c)   A statement that all actual costs of the care,
keeping, and disposal of the dog are the responsibility of the person
claiming an interest in the dog, except to the extent that a court or hearing
officer finds that the seizure or impoundment was not substantially justified
by law; and



         (d)   When a dog has been impounded under M.S. §§
343.22 (investigation of cruelty) or 343.29 (exposure of animals), as they
may be amended from time to time, a form that can be used by a person
claiming an interest in the dog for requesting a hearing under this section.



   (E)   Right to hearing and release from dog pound.



      (1)   Upon request of a person claiming interest in the dog,
pursuant to division (D)(2)(d), above, which request must be made within ten
days of the date of seizure, a hearing shall be held within five business
days of the request to determine the validity of the seizure and impoundment.
If the seizure was done pursuant to a warrant under M.S. § 343.22
(investigation of cruelty), as it may be amended from time to time, the
hearing must be conducted by the judge who issued the warrant.



      (2)   If the seizure was done under M.S. § 343.29 (exposure
of animals), as it may be amended from time to time, the city may either:



         (a)   Authorize a licensed veterinarian with no
financial interest in the matter or professional association with either
party; or



         (b)   Use the services of a hearing officer to conduct
the hearing. A person claiming interest in the dog who is aggrieved by a
decision of a hearing officer under this section may seek a court order
governing the seizure or impoundment within five days of the notice of the
order.



            1.   The judge or hearing officer may authorize
the return of the dog, if the judge or hearing officer finds that:



               a.   The dog is physically fit; and



               b.   The person claiming an interest in the
dog can and will provide the care required by law for the dog.



            2.   The person claiming an interest in the dog is
liable for all actual costs of the care, keeping, and disposal of the dog,
except if a court or hearing officer finds that the seizure or impoundment
was not substantially justified by law. The costs shall be paid in full or a
mutually satisfactory arrangement for payment must be made between the city
and the person claiming an interest in the dog before return of the dog to
the person.



   (F)   Killing of dogs. All city police officers are hereby
authorized and empowered to destroy any dog in violation of this section
whenever such dog cannot be safely taken up and impounded. No impounding or
destruction of any dog shall exempt the owner or keeper of such dog from the
penalties and fees provided by this section.



   (G)   Enforcement. It is unlawful for any owner or other person to
refuse to allow a police officer to examine a dog or the rabies tag on a dog
under the control of said owner or other person. Each day that said owner or
other person refuses to permit a police officer to examine said dog or rabies
tag on a dog shall be a separate offense of this section.



   (H)   Interference with officers. It is unlawful for any
unauthorized person to break open the pound or to attempt to do so, or to
take or let out any dog therefrom, or to take or attempt to take from any
officer any dog taken up by him or her in compliance with this section, or in
any manner to interfere with or hinder such officer in the discharge of his
or her duties under this section.



   (I)   Offenses involving tags. It is unlawful to counterfeit or
attempt to counterfeit the tags provided for herein, or to take from any dog
a tag legally placed upon it by its owners with the intention of placing it
upon another dog, or to place such tag upon another dog.



   (J)   Vaccinations.



      (1)   Rabies.



         (a)   Every dog 16 weeks of age and older shall be
vaccinated with a live modified vaccine.



         (b)   Every dog shall receive a rabies booster one year
after initial vaccination or after a possible exposure to the rabid animal.



         (c)   All dogs shall receive a scheduled rabies booster
at not more than 36 months intervals.



      (2)   DAPP (distemper-Adenovirus-Parvovirus-Parainfluenza).
Each dog shall be vaccinated with the DAPP vaccination according to accepted
licensed veterinary vaccination protocol.



   (K)   Duties of veterinarian.



      (1)   It is the duty of each veterinarian at time of
vaccinating any dog, to complete a certificate of rabies vaccination (in
triplicate) which includes the following information:



         (a)   Owner's name and address;



         (b)   Description of dog (breed, sex, markings, age and
name);



         (c)   Date of vaccination;



         (d)   Rabies vaccination tag number;



         (e)   Type of rabies vaccine administered; and



         (f)   Manufacturer's serial number of vaccine.



      (2)   Distribution of copies of certificate shall be: first
copy to owner; and the second copy retained by the issuing veterinarian. The
veterinarian and the owner shall retain their copies for the interval between
vaccinations specified in division (J) above. A metal or durable plastic tag,
serially numbered, shall be securely attached to the collar or harness of the
dog. Whenever the dog is out-of-doors, whether on or off the owner's
premises, the collar or harness with the vaccination tag shall be worn.



   (L)   Vaccination cost. The cost of rabies vaccination shall be
borne by the owner of the dog.



   (M)   Exception of vaccination requirement; transient dogs.



      (1)   Divisions (J), (K), and (L) above shall not apply to any
dog owned by a person temporarily remaining within the city for less than 30
days, or any dog brought into the city for the field trial or show purposes,
nor for hunting dogs in the city for less than 30 days.



      (2)   Such dogs shall be kept under strict supervision of the
owner; however, it is unlawful to bring any dog into the city which does not
comply with the animal health laws and import regulations of the state, which
are applicable to dogs.



   (N)   Rabies control.



      (1)   (a)   When any owner of a dog has been notified that
such dog has, or is suspected to have, bitten or attacked any person, he or
she shall immediately place the dog under the care and observation of the
city or a licensed veterinarian for a period of not less than ten days except
in those cases when a dog has bitten or attacked while on the premises of the
owner and the owner has a current rabies vaccination for said dog, in which
case, the city may, if it feels the facilities are adequate and if the owner
is a responsible person, quarantine the dog on the owner's premises.



         (b)   In this case, the owner must sign a statement and
understand the responsibility and assume the liability that is involved with
the quarantine of a dog that has bitten. The quarantined dog must at all
times be available for inspection during the quarantine. At the end of the
ten days' observation period, the dog shall be examined by the city and, if
cleared, may be reclaimed by the owner and the owner must pay the expense
incurred incident thereto.



         (c)   Any dog impounded or placed for observation,
showing active signs of rabies, suspected of having rabies or known to have
been exposed to rabies, shall be confined under competent observation for
such time as may be deemed necessary to determine a diagnosis. Any dog that
has bitten or attacked that cannot be captured may be destroyed in such a
manner that the head is not damaged and can be submitted for a rabies
examination to a laboratory.



      (2)   Any person who shall suspect that a dog in the city is
infected with rabies shall report said dog to the Police Department or a
veterinarian upon written authorization of a licensed veterinarian.



   (O)   Unlawful acts and remedies therefor.



      (1)   It is unlawful for the owner of a dog to permit such dog
to run at large in the city. Whenever a dog is found running at large, the
same shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner permitted it to run
at large.



      (2)   (a)   It is unlawful for the owner of any vicious dog
to allow such dog off his or her premises unless it is muzzled, on a leash,
and under the control of the owner or a member of his or her immediate family
over 16 years of age.



         (b)   Any vicious dog which is found off the premises of
its owner other than as provided herein, may be seized and impounded;
provided, that if the dog cannot be captured, it may be destroyed; provided,
further, that if the dog has been seen running at large or bites a person,
the owner shall forthwith deliver the dog to the pound and he or she may be
ordered to appear in court to show cause why such dog should not be destroyed.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a
dog which habitually barks or cries. HABITUAL BARKING shall be defined as
barking for repeated intervals of at least three minutes with less than
one-minute interruption. Such barking must also be audible off the owner's or
caretaker's premises.



      (4)   It is unlawful for any person to maltreat, abuse, or
neglect, in a cruel or inhumane manner, any dog.



      (5)   It is unlawful for any person to harbor or keep any
stray dog. Dogs known to be strays shall be immediately reported to the
Police Department.



      (6)   It is unlawful for any person, not acting under
instructions from the owner or the city, to willfully or maliciously
administer or cause to be administered, poison of any sort whatsoever to any
dog, with the intent to injure or destroy such dog, or to willfully or
maliciously place any poison or poisoned food where the same is accessible to
any such dog.



      (7)   (a)   It is unlawful for the owner, caretaker, or
attendant of any dog to allow it to defecate on public or private property
other than his or her own.



         (b)   If such dog does defecate on public or private
property other than his or her own it shall not be a violation of this
provision if such owner, caretaker, or attendant shall immediately and
thoroughly clean the fecal material from such property, and properly dispose
thereof.



      (8)   It is unlawful for any person to abandon a dog owned by
htm or her.



      (9)   It is unlawful for any person to give any false
statement or information concerning the owner, keeper, or attendant of any
dog, or concerning any dog brought into the pound or impounded therein.



   (P)   Injured dogs.



      (1)   (a)   When a dog without identification is injured
and the owner cannot be found, it is the duty of the Police Department to
determine, in consultation with a veterinarian, if the dog for humane reasons
and due to the extent of the injury and suffering should be destroyed.



         (b)   If the dog is destroyed, neither the city nor its
agent shall be held liable for its humane act.



         (c)   If the owner of such dog is subsequently
identified, such owner shall pay all expenses of the city and veterinarian's
fees and charges.



      (2)   When a dog with identification is injured, it shall be
delivered to a licensed veterinarian and the owner notified. All expenses of
the city and veterinarian's fees and charges shall be paid by the owner.



   (Q)   Enforcing Officer. The City Council is authorized to appoint
an animal control officer to enforce the provisions of section. The officer's
duty of enforcing the provision of this section, he or she may from time to
time, with the consent of the Council, designate assistants.



   (R)   Pound.  The Council shall designate an official pound to
which animals found in violation of this chapter shall be taken for safe
treatment and if necessary, for destruction.



(2006 Code, § 10.21)  (Ord. 23, 3rd Series, passed 6-18-1981; Ord. 128, 3rd
Series, passed 6-5-1998; Ord. 142, 3rd Series, passed 6-14-2000; Ord. 184,
3rd Series, passed 8-9-2011; Ord. 198, 3rd Series, passed 4-14-2015; Ord.
217, 3rd Series, passed 6-6-2017)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.06  ANIMALS AND FOWL; KEEPING, TRANSPORTING, TREATMENT, AND HOUSING.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ANIMALS. Includes farm animals and all other animals, reptiles,
and feathered birds or fowl except dogs, cats, gerbils, pigeons, hamsters,
and caged household birds.



      FARM ANIMALS. Cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats, swine, ponies,
ducks, geese, turkeys, chicken, guinea hens, honey bees, and rabbits.



      TAKING. Pursuing, shooting, killing, capturing, trapping,
snaring, angling, spearing, or netting wild animals, or placing, setting,
drawing, or using a net, trap, or other device to take animals. TAKING
includes attempting to take wild animals, and assisting another person in
taking wild animals.



      WILD ANIMALS. All living creatures, not human, wild by nature,
endowed with sensation and power of voluntary motion, and includes mammals,
birds, amphibians, reptiles, crustaceans, and mollusks.



   (B)   Keeping. It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any
animal, not in transit, except:



      (1)   Farm animals kept in that portion of the city zoned to
permit agricultural purposes;



      (2)   Animals kept as part of an exhibition sponsored by a
local organization;



      (3)   Animals used in a parade;



      (4)   Animals kept in a laboratory for scientific or
experimental purposes;



      (5)   Animals kept in an animal hospital or clinic for
treatment by a licensed veterinarian; or



      (6)   Animals kept in a city-owned zoo.



   (C)   Animals in transit. It is unlawful for any person to transport
animals unless they are:



      (1)   Confined within a vehicle, cage, or other means of
conveyance;



      (2)   Farm animals being transported in a portion of the city
zoned for agricultural purposes; or



      (3)   Restrained by means of bridles, halters, ropes, or other
means of individual restraint.



   (D)   Treatment. It is unlawful for any person to treat an animal in
a cruel or inhumane manner.



   (E)   Housing. It is unlawful for any person to keep any animal in
any structure infested by rodents, vermin, flies, or insects.



   (F)   Trespasses. It is unlawful for any person to herd, drive or
ride any animal over and upon any grass, turf, boulevard, city park,
cemetery, garden, or lot without specific permission therefor from the owner.



   (G)   Taking of wild animals in the city limits. It is unlawful for
any person to take wild animals within the city limits and other city
property, except these restrictions:



      (1)   Does not apply to taking of fish during open season;



      (2)   Permits to take wild animals will be granted with a
permit from the Chief of Police and local conservation officer annually; or



      (3)   Permits in permit areas will be assigned by a random
drawing.



(2006 Code, § 10.28)  (Ord. 23, 3rd Series, passed 6-18-1981; Ord. 104, 3rd
Series, passed 3-17-1994; Ord. 108, 3rd Series, passed 1-26-1995; Ord. 110,
3rd Series, passed 3-2-1995; Ord. 141, 3rd Series, passed 6-14-2000) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.07  EXOTIC ANIMAL REGULATION.



   (A)   Purpose. This section is adopted for the purpose of protecting
the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city.



   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         EXOTIC ANIMAL. Includes any animal, not of the traditional
domesticated species, which is inherently dangerous and presents a potential
risk to the public.



   (C)   Running at large prohibited.



      (1)   It is unlawful for the owner of any exotic animal to
permit such animal to run at large.



      (2)   Any animal shall be deemed to be running at large with
the permission of the owner, unless it is effectively confined within a motor
vehicle, building, or enclosure.



   (D)   Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to keep,
shelter, or harbor any exotic animal without a permit therefor from the city.



   (E)   Permit term and fees. All permits shall be issued for a term
of two years and the fee for such permits shall be fixed and determined by
the Council, adopted by resolution, and uniformly enforced. Such fee may from
time to time be amended by the Council by resolution.



   (F)   Conditions of permit. No permit for the keeping of exotic
animals shall be issued until the applicant has met the following criteria
for the keeping and housing of exotic animals:



      (1)   A plan is approved by the Council which establishes the
nature and size of the cage or enclosure to house the animal considering the
animal’s size, weight, strength, and relative danger to the public;
specifying all protective devices to be maintained to restrain the animal and
discourage tampering by humans and other animals; providing for suitable
exercise facilities; and an emergency response plan to be on file with the
city;



      (2)   Erection and maintenance of suitable fencing for the
protection of adjoining property owners and the general public;



      (3)   Providing suitable sanitation controls so as not to
create a public or private nuisance; or



      (4)   Proof of insurance for medical expense and liability.



   (G)   Inspection.



      (1)   Prior to the issuance of the permit, the city shall
require an inspection be made to determine that the facilities are suitable
for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the public.



      (2)   Such inspection shall be made by a person approved by
the city and the cost of such inspection shall be borne by the applicant.



   (H)   Suspension or revocation of permit.



      (1)   The Council may, for any violation or other reasonable
cause:



         (a)   Refuse to grant any renewal application;



         (b)   Suspend for a period of 60 days; or



         (c)   Revoke any permit issued under this section.



      (2)   (a)   Such action shall be made only upon a finding
that the permittee has failed to comply with the provisions of this section.
The Council shall take such immediate action as it deems necessary for the
public protection to remedy any potentially dangerous situation.



         (b)   The owner of such animal shall be responsible for
any expense incurred as the result of such action. Before revocation of any
permit, the Council shall give notice to the permittee and grant such
permittee opportunity to be heard.



         (c)   The permittee shall have 30 days following a
revocation hearing to correct any violations of this section found to be the
basis for revocation, during which time period the revocation shall be
suspended.



(2006 Code, § 10.29)  (Ord. 128, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)  Penalty,
see § 130.99



§ 130.08  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   (A)   Public nuisance defined. Whoever by his or her act or failure
to perform a legal duty intentionally permits or does any of the following is
guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is a misdemeanor:



      (1)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably
annoys, injures, or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort, or repose
of the public or a considerable number of members of the public;



      (2)   Interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for
passage, any public highway or right-of-way, or water used by the public; or



      (3)   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law
or this section to be a public nuisance and for which no sentence is
specifically provided.



   (B)   Public nuisances affecting health. The following are hereby
declared to be nuisances affecting health:



      (1)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or
vegetable matter;



      (2)   All diseased animals running at large;



      (3)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water;



      (4)   Carcasses of fish or animals not disposed of within 24
hours after death;



      (5)   Accumulations of manure, refuse, or other debris;



      (6)   Privy vaults and garbage cans or dumpers which are not
rodent-free or fly-tight or which are so maintained as to constitute a health
hazard or to emit foul and disagreeable odors;



      (7)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, steam or
lake, canal, or body of water by sewage, industrial waste, or other
substances;



      (8)   Any noxious/poisonous vegetation; poison ivy, poison
oak, ragweed, or other noxious/poisonous plants; or any weeds, brush, or
plants or any accumulations of grass, leaves, or tree branches which are a
fire hazard or otherwise detrimental to the health or appearance of a
neighborhood, located on public or private property; provided; however, grass
or leaves if they are neat, orderly, and kept contained for the purpose of
creating organic matter;



      (9)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in
unreasonable quantities.



      (10)   All public exposure of persons having a contagious
disease;



      (11)   Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute
not operating under provisions of this code of ordinances; or



      (12)   All other conditions or things which are likely to
cause injury to or endanger the health of the public.



   (C)   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety. The following are
declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety:



      (1)   All trees, hedges, or other obstructions which prevent
people from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection;
in any residential zone on any corner lot, no fence or accessory structure or
planting shall rise over two and one-half feet in height above the level of
the public sidewalk within 20 feet of any corner, so as to interfere with
traffic visibility across the corner;



      (2)   All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the
surface of a sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or
vehicles;



      (3)   All buildings, walls, and other structures which have
been damaged by fire, decay, or otherwise to an extent exceeding one-half
their market value, and which are so situated as to endanger the safety of
the public;



      (4)   All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations;



      (5)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary
public use of streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public grounds except under such
conditions as are permitted by this section or other applicable law;



      (6)   Any “snowbird”, a vehicle parked within 50 feet of
an unplowed snow windrow that has not been plowed to the curb;



      (7)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery, all junked,
abandoned, or unlicensed automobiles in any public place, or so situated or
operated on private property as to attract and endanger the public;



      (8)   The burning of rubbish or other material in home trash
burner, fireplace, or other type furnace in garage or basement and on any
private, public property, parks, public street, alley, or sidewalk within the
city limits;



      (9)   The casting of paper from billboards on the ground and
allowing the same to blow across any public street, alley, or sidewalk;



      (10)   Any dirt, paper, or filth, the sweepings of any house,
store, shop, or office; or any ashes, nails, glass, metal, or plastic
containers, garbage, leaves, grass, or tree branches, filthy water, offal,
straw, wood, stone, earth, manure; or rubbish of any kind thrown, deposited
or permitted to be thrown, deposited, or allowed to remain on any street,
sidewalk, alley, or public ground;



      (11)   The accumulations of any discarded or disused
machinery, junked vehicles, automobile bodies or parts, household furnishings
or appliances, cut and uncut scrap lumber, pipes, brick, concrete block or
other material, junk or debris, on public or private property in a manner
conducive to the harboring of rats, mice, snakes, or vermin, or the rank
growth of vegetation among the items so accumulated, or in a manner which may
be creating a fire, health, or safety hazard from such accumulation, or
otherwise detrimental to the appearance of a neighborhood.



         (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



            JUNKED VEHICLE. One which is inoperative because it
lacks vital component parts essential to the mechanical functioning of the
vehicle, including, but not limited to, the motor, drive train, wheels and
battery. A JUNKED VEHICLE shall also include any vehicle which, although not
lacking any vital component parts, cannot be operated on public roadways due
to such things as defective parts of any type and shall also include a
vehicle which is not currently licensed for use on public ways in the state.



         (b)   The storing on private property of an inoperative
vehicle, for the purpose of repairing or restoring such vehicle, may be
authorized by the Chief of Police for periods of up to 90 days. The owner of
said vehicle must procure a permit from the Chief of Police and the permit
must be conspicuously displayed on or about the vehicle. No more than four
consecutive 90-day permits may be granted by the Chief of Police for any
vehicle.



      (12)   Radio aerials or television antennae erected or
maintained in a dangerous manner;



      (13)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or
sidewalk or any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds
of people to gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or
sidewalk without permission from the city;



      (14)   All hanging signs, awnings, and other similar
structures over streets and sidewalks, or so situated so as to endanger
public safety, or not constructed and maintained as provided by provisions of
this code of ordinances;



      (15)   Any well, hole, or similar excavation which is left
uncovered or in such other condition as to constitute a hazard to any child
or other person coming on the premises where it is located;



      (16)   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural
waterway or a public street drain, gutter, or ditch with trash, grass, leaf,
or other materials;



      (17)   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk, or
other public property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles, or other substance
which may injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when
passing over such substance;



      (18)   The depositing of garbage or refuse on a right-of-way
or on adjacent private property; other than within 24 hours for a scheduled
garbage pickup;



      (19)   All interference and disturbance of telephone, radios,
or television sets caused by electrical appliances and equipment or improper
operation of improper electrical connections;



      (20)   All other conditions or things which are likely to
cause injury to the person or property of anyone;



      (21)   Any “jake-braking” in city limits;



      (22)   Any device, display, goods, or merchandise, sign, or
offer for sale; that is placed or maintained upon, any electric pole, light
pole, street sign, traffic sign, boulevard tree, or upon, over, across any
traveled or untraveled portion of any street or other public property without
written Council approval.



   (D)   Enforcement and inspection. The Public Works Director shall
provide an annual inspection of properties within the city yearly between the
months of April and May to complete a list of public nuisances; this list
will then be given to the Police Department for their reviewal of the
properties in question.



   (E)   Duties of city officers. The Police Department shall enforce
provisions of this section relating to nuisances affecting public safety and
shall assist the Public Works Director in the enforcement of additional
provisions relating to nuisances. Such officers shall have the power to
inspect private premises and take all reasonable precaution to prevent the
commission and maintenance of public nuisances.



(2006 Code, § 10.40)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.09  OWNER OR OCCUPANT PERMITTING A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   (A)   Unlawful acts. It is unlawful for any person to permit real
property under his or her control to be used to maintain a public nuisance,
or let the same to another knowing it is to be so used.



   (B)   Abatement.



      (1)   Notice and abatement procedure. Any public nuisance as
described in § 130.08, unless otherwise provided for in this section, shall
be abated in accordance with the following procedure.



         (a)   Any peace officer or designated official, upon
complaint or after investigation, may order a public nuisance abated by
written notice to the owner of record as determined by the County Auditor and
any known tenants.



         (b)   Such written notice shall specify 48 hours or such
longer time as is reasonable for the abatement of such nuisance.



         (c)   Such written notice shall be served upon the owner
and lessee and occupant of the premises and shall be served either personally
or by certified mail.



         (d)   The owner shall have until the date and time
specified on the written notice to abate the nuisance or appeal the written
notice in writing to the City Council.



         (e)   In the event the owner appeals the written notice,
abatement shall be stayed until the City Council rules on the appeal.



         (f)   In the event the City Council rules against the
owner, the City Council may stay enforcement of the written notice for such
period of time as determined by the City Council.



         (g)   In the event the owner shall not abate the public
nuisance in accordance with the written notice or appeal the written notice
to the City Council in writing, the peace officer or designated official may
order such nuisance abated by the city, its agents or employees.



         (h)   Any personal property removed from the abated
property shall be held by the city for a period of 14 days. The city shall
provide written notice to the owner, lessee, and occupant of the abated
property of the fact that personal property is being held by the city. Upon
payment of all storage costs, the owner of the personal property may retrieve
the personal property; provided, that the personal property is not returned
in such a manner to any location within the city limits so as to constitute a
nuisance as defined in this section. If the owner of the personal property
fails to reclaim the personal property within two weeks as provided for
herein, the city may sell or dispose of the personal property. Any proceeds
obtained from the sale of the personal property shall be used to offset the
abatement costs. The city shall be under no obligation to sell the personal
property.



      (2)   Immediate abatement. Nothing in this section shall
prevent the city, without notice or other process, from immediately abating
any condition that poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or
safety.



   (C)   Recovery of cost.



      (1)   Personal liability. The owner of premises on which a
nuisance has been abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost
to the city of the abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the
work has been completed and the cost determined, the City Administrator shall
prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon the amount
shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the City Administrator.



      (2)   Assessment.



         (a)   If the nuisance is a public health or safety
hazard on private property, the accumulation of snow and ice on public
sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or outside the traveled
portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infected trees, the City
Administrator shall, on or before September 1 next following abatement of the
nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with all other such charges as
well as other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S. §
429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, against each separate lot or
parcel to which the charges are attributable.



         (b)   The Council may then spread the charges against
such property under that statute and other pertinent statutes for
certification to the County Auditor and collection along with current taxes
the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten, as the
Council may determine in each case.



(2006 Code, § 10.41)  (Ord. 131, 3rd Series, passed 7-24-1998; Ord. 200,
3rd Series, passed 4-14-2005)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.10  SHADE TREE DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION.



   (A)   Declaration of policy.



      (1)   The City Council determines that the health of the elm,
oak, and ash trees within the city is threatened by fatal diseases known as
Dutch Elm, Oak Wilt, and Emerald Ash Bore diseases, and other trees may be
threatened by other diseases of shade trees.



      (2)   The City Council further determines that the loss of
elm, oak, and other trees growing upon public and private property would
substantially depreciate the value of property within the city and impair the
safety, good order, general welfare, and convenience of the public. It is
declared to be the intention of the City Council to control and prevent the
spread of those diseases, and provide for the removal of dead or diseased
trees, as nuisances, and this section is enacted for that purpose.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      NUISANCE.



         (a)   Any living or standing tree infected to any degree
with a shade tree disease; or



         (b)   Ay logs, branches, stumps, or other parts of any
dead or dying tree, so infected, unless such parts have been fully burned or
treated under the direction of the Public Works Director or other designated
officer.



      SHADE TREE DISEASE. Dutch Elm disease, Oak Wilt disease, Emerald
Ash bore, or other diseases that may threaten shade trees.



   (C)   Designated enforcement officer. It shall be the duty of the
Public Works Director or other officer designated by the City Council to
coordinate, under the direction and control of the City Council, all
activities of the city relating to the control and prevention of Dutch Elm
disease, Oak Wilt disease, Emerald Ash bore, and other epidemic diseases of
shade trees. The officer shall recommend to the City Council the details of a
program for the control of diseases, and perform the duties incident to a
program adopted by the City Council.



   (D)   Trees constituting nuisance declared. The following are public
nuisances whenever they may be found within the city:



      (1)   Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected
to any degree with the Dutch Elm disease fungus Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman)
Moreau or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus Multisthatus
(Eichh) or Hylungopinus Rufipes (Marsh);



      (2)   Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including branches,
stumps, firewood, or other material from which the bark has not been removed
and burned or sprayed with an affective elm bark beetle insecticide;



      (3)   Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected
to any degree with the Oak Wilt fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum;



      (4)   Any dead oak tree or part thereof which in the opinion
of the designated officer constitutes a hazard, including, but not limited
to, logs, branches, stumps, roots, firewood, or other oak material which has
not been stripped of its bark and burned or sprayed with an effective
fungicide;



      (5)   Any living or standing ash tree or part thereof infected
to any degree with emerald ash bore, Agrilus planipennis; must be disposed of
in accordance with Department of Natural Resources or State Department of
Agriculture procedures; and



      (6)   Any other shade tree with an epidemic disease.



   (E)   Inspection and investigation. As often as practical, the
Public Works Director shall inspect all public and private premises within
the city which might harbor any plant pest as defined in state statutes as it
may be amended from time to time, to determine whether any condition
described in division (D) above exists thereon. The designated officer shall
investigate all reported incidents of infestation of Dutch Elm fungus,
Emerald Ash bore, Elm bark beetles, Oak Wilt fungus, or any other epidemic
disease of shade trees.



   (F)   Unlawful act. It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to
keep, maintain, or permit upon premises owned by him or her or upon public
property where he or she has the duty of tree maintenance, any nuisance
herein defined.



   (G)   Enforcement. The Public Works Director shall have the power to
take all reasonable precautions to prevent the maintenance of public
nuisances and may enforce the provisions related to abatement in this
section. Diagnosis of shade tree pests may be made by the presence of
commonly recognized symptoms or by tests as may be recommended by the State
Department of Agriculture or the State Department of Natural Resources.



   (H)   Entry on private premises. The designated officer or his or
her duly authorized agents may enter upon private premises at any reasonable
time for the purpose of carrying out any of the duties assigned under this
section.



   (I)   Diseased trees in streets. The rights, duties, and
responsibilities of property owners set forth in this section shall be
equally applicable to, and binding upon abutting property owners with tree
maintenance responsibilities under § 90.05, “regulation of grass, weeds,
and trees in streets”.



   (J)   Abatement of nuisance.



      (1)   It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to permit any
public nuisance as defined in division (D) above to remain on any premises
the person owns or controls within the city. The nuisances may be abated in
the manner prescribed by this section. In abating a nuisance defined in
division (D) above, the Public Works Director shall cause the infected tree
or wood to be sprayed, removed, burned, or otherwise effectively treated so
as to destroy and prevent as fully as possible the spread of epidemic
diseases such as Dutch Elm disease, Emerald Ash Bore, and Oak Wilt disease.



      (2)   The Public Works Director shall also take other steps as
are necessary to prevent root graft transmission of the diseases. The
abatement procedures shall be carried out in accordance with current
technical and expert opinions and plans as may be designated by the State
Department of Natural Resources or the State Department of Agriculture.



   (K)   Stockpiling of bark-bearing elm wood. The stockpiling of
bark-bearing elm wood shall be permitted during the period from September 15
through April 1 of any given year. Any such wood not utilized by April 1 of
any year must be removed and disposed of as provided by this section and the
regulations incorporated therein.



   (L)   Procedure for the removal of infected trees and wood.



      (1)   Action by the designated officer



         (a)   Whenever the Public Works Director finds with
reasonable certainty that the infestation in division (D) above exists in any
trees or wood in any public or private place in the city, the Public Works
Director shall, in writing, notify the owner of the existence of a nuisance,
which notice shall state that the owner has 30 days to abate the nuisance and
avoid city action.



         (b)   If within the 30-day period the property owner has
not abated the nuisance, the Public Works Director shall take action to
remove and dispose of the nuisance at the owner’s expense. (See division
(D) above.)



      (2)   Record. The Public Works Director shall keep a record of
the costs of abatement done under this section and shall report to the City
Administrator all work done for which assessments are to be made, stating and
certifying the description of the land, lots, parcels involved, and the
amount chargeable to each.



      (3)   Assessment On or before September 1 of each year, the
City Administrator shall list the total unpaid charges for each abatement
against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this
section. The City Council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof
against the property involved as a special assessment under M.S. § 429.101,
as it may be amended from time to time, and other pertinent statues for
certification to the County Auditor and collection the following year along
with the current taxes.



   (M)   Interference prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to
prevent, delay, or interfere with the Public Works Director or his or her
agents while they are engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this
section; however, it is a defense to prosecution under division (I) above
that the interference alleged consisted of constitutionally protected speech
only.



(Ord. 23, 3rd Series, passed 6-18-1981; Ord. 179, Third Series, passed
6-8-2010)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.11  STATE UNIFORM FIRE CODE.



   (A)   Adoption. The State Uniform Fire Code, most current 2007
edition or the most current edition, is hereby adopted and incorporated as
part of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein. One
copy of said Code shall be marked “City of Wadena - Official Copy” and
kept on file in the office of the City Administrator and open to inspection
and use by the public.



   (B)   Storage of flammable and explosives material. Present
installations for the purpose of storage of flammable liquid, liquefied
petroleum gas, and explosives and blasting agents may continue in the
Agricultural District; provided, however, that such installation shall not be
expanded, nor shall new installations for such purpose be permitted without a
special permit from the Council. Prior to issuance of any such permit, an
application therefor shall be investigated by the Chief of the Fire
Department, and a hearing held thereon before the Council.



   (C)   Recreational fires.



      (1)   Recreational fires shall be as regulated by the Uniform
Fire Code (Article II - General Safety Precautions, § 1102.4), most current
2007 edition or the most current edition.



      (2)   Recreational fire means a fire set for recreational,
cooking, warming, or ceremonial purposes producing little detectable smoke,
odor, or soot beyond the property line. Such recreational fires do not
require a permit.



      (3)    All recreational fires will be in a fireplace or device
designed and manufactured for such recreational fires or equivalent. Such
devices shall raise the combustion area above the ground level and not be a
below ground fire pit. Prohibited are recreational fires on ground contained
by “tire rims”, non-mortared rocks, brick, or concrete blocks. The
burning of flammable liquids, refuse, garbage, lawn clippings, and leaves is
prohibited.



      (4)   “Burning barrels” are not considered a recreational
fire and are prohibited.



      (5)   Firewood used in recreational fires shall not exceed 24
inches in length and shall be untreated, unfinished wood. Starter fuels shall
be dry, untreated, unpainted wood, kindling, branches, cardboard, or charcoal
starter. Propane gas torches or other clean gas-burning devices causing
minimum pollution may be used to start the fire.



      (6)   All recreational fires are limited to a size of three
feet high and three feet wide including the combustible materials and flame.



      (7)   The Fire Department or Police Department are authorized
to require that recreational fires be immediately discontinued if such fires
are determined to be a safety hazard or a public nuisance.



      (8)   All recreational fires shall not be within 25 feet of a
structure or combustible material. Conditions that could cause a fire to
spread must be removed prior to ignition.



      (9)   This distance can be reduced to 15 feet with an approved
appliance. An approved appliance shall be permanent in nature and have a
contained fire box, chimney, and be similar to an indoor fireplace.



      (10)   Fire extinguishing equipment shall be readily available
for use at recreational fires. This includes buckets, shovels, garden hoses,
or a fire extinguisher with a minimum of a 4-A rating.



      (11)   A person knowledgeable in the use of fire extinguishing
equipment shall attend a recreational fire. An attendant shall supervise a
recreational fire until such fire is extinguished.



      (12)   Open fires or open burning is prohibited. Open fires or
open binning is a fire burning in material which is not contained within a
fully enclosed firebox or structure and the products of combustion are
emitted directly into open atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct,
or chimney. Note: open burning for a government agency or public utility is
permissible with written permission of the DNR and the Fire Department.



      (13)   This section does not apply to charcoal or gas-fired
grills.



      (14)   The definition of a FIREPLACE is a fixed or portable
containment device for a fire. The combustion material and flame is raised
from the ground and all combustible materials are contained in this structure.



   (D)   Large bonfires.



      (1)   Bonfires are permissible upon obtaining a permit issued
by the City Administrator or his or her designee department and signed by the
Police Department and Fire Department. The party responsible for the property
where the fire is to take place must sign the permit application.



      (2)   Permits must be applied for and obtained at least 48
hours prior to ignition.



      (3)   Permits will be issued to groups and organizations for
the purpose of group recreation. The permit must be in the possession of an
adult who is attending the fire. The Fire Department or the Police Department
must inspect all burn sites and burn piles prior to issuing the permit.



      (4)   Materials to be burned must be untreated or unfinished
wood. Other materials such as flammable liquids, refuse, plastic, paper, lawn
clippings, and leaves are prohibited.



      (5)   The Fire Department and Police Department are authorized
to require that bonfires be immediately discontinued if such fires are
determined to be a safety hazard or a public nuisance.



      (6)   Fire extinguishing equipment shall be readily available
for use at recreational fires and bonfires. This includes buckets, shovels,
garden hoses, or a fire extinguisher with a minimum of a 4-A rating.



      (7)   The bonfire must be located at least 25 feet from any
structure or combustibles.



      (8)   Fees for bonfire permits will be set by the Council and
may be revised on a periodic basis.



   (E)   External heating systems.



      (1)   External heating systems using fossil fuels or other
bio-mass material as a source of energy, if constructed in sufficient numbers
in the city, may create a pollution nuisance affecting the public health and
welfare and quality of life of residents of the city.



      (2)   Use of external heating systems located in a shelter or
building other than the residence or standing on its own, is prohibited
within the city.



(2006 Code, § 10.61)  (Ord. 40, 3rd Series, passed 5-30-1984; Ord. 153, 3rd
Series, passed 3-19-2004) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.12  AIR POLLUTION CONTROL.



   It is unlawful for any person to burn or permit burning of any grass,
weeds, leaves, rubbish or other substance upon premises owned or occupied by
him or her.



(2006 Code, § 10.62)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.13  RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING SUNNYBROOK PARK.



   (A)   Application. The provisions hereinafter contained shall apply
to all city parks located inside and outside of the city limits, and includes
special provisions for Sunnybrook Park as the same is presently located and
situated within the city, and to any area which may hereafter be included
within the limits of said parks, by act of the Council.



   (B)   General purposes regarding Sunnybrook Park.



      (1)   The general purpose of the city in establishing
Sunnybrook Park is to provide an area to help meet the recreation needs of
the community and surrounding rural area; and to provide overnight camping
facilities in a designated area, for the public, including persons traveling
through the city.



      (2)   In furthering these broad general purposes, the Council
deems it necessary and in the best interest of the public to regulate the use
of the premises and such facilities as have been heretofore established and
which may be established hereafter.



   (C)   Regulations. All laws of the state and the city and subsequent
amendments thereto, shall apply within the limits of all city parks, and said
Sunnybrook Park except as the same are inconsistent with the following
provisions.



      (1)   Speed. No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any
driveway or street within Sunnybrook Park at a speed in excess of 15 mph.



      (2)   Hours open. It is unlawful for any person to park, be in
or remain in, or leave any vehicle in Sunnybrook Park between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and sunrise the following day unless special permission has been
granted by the City Administrator or his or her designee, except authorized
overnight campers.



      (3)   Weapons. No person shall discharge or use any rifle,
pistol, air rifle, pellet gun, bow and arrow or slingshot in the park.



        (4)   Pets. No person shall take or allow any dog or other
domestic pets upon park premises, park waters, or in a park building unless
restricted at all times by suitable leash, or under control of owner or
custodian.



      (5)   Bathing. No person shall bathe in or enter the waters of
Whiskey Creek within the park.



      (6)   Throwing stones. No person shall throw or cast any stone
or any other missile within the park.



      (7)   Teasing animals, etc. No person shall tease, annoy,
disturb, or interfere with any bird or animal within the park.



      (8)   Waste. No person shall allow rubbish, trash, or waste to
accumulate, but the same shall be removed or placed in receptacles provided
therefor.



      (9)   Fires. No person shall start a fire at any time except
in fireplaces or stoves provided for that purpose.



         (a)   The Sunnybrook Park Campground is allowed one
“campfire” location. The location is to be permanently designated by
campground management and available for use only by campground patrons and
guests.



         (b)   A second campfire location may be located in a
Sunnybrook Park. This is a permanent campfire location and can be reserved as
with the Sunnybrook Shelters.



         (c)   All rules pertaining to recreational fires are
applicable to these campfires.



      (10)   Picking flowers, and the like. No person not an
employee of the city shall pick or cut any wild or cultivated flower, or cut,
break, or injure any shrub or plant within said park, nor carry within or out
of said park any wild flower, tree, shrub, plant, or any newly plucked branch
or portion thereof, or any soil or material of any kind.



      (11)   Overnight camping. No person shall park a camp trailer,
tent, or sleep overnight within said park unless said person shall have
registered with park attendant and paid the charge for each night, at the
rate prescribed by resolution of the Council. Said park shall be open to bona
fide overnight camping, notwithstanding closing of park for other purposes,
unless the Council, by resolution and posted notice, shall close same.



(Ord. 110, passed 6-23-1965; Ord. 190, Third Series, passed 10-9-2012; Ord.
205, 3rd Series, passed 5-10-2016)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.14  RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING PARKS GENERALLY.



   (A)   Traffic prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to drive a
self-propelled or motorized vehicle, except an electrically propelled
wheelchair, in any park, playground, recreational area, or athletic field
owned or maintained by the city except upon a street or other public
thoroughfare therein; provided, that this division (A) shall not apply to
construction or maintenance equipment operated by, or under a contract with,
the city and within the scope of such operation or contract.



   (B)   Other traffic rules and regulations. The Council may, by
resolution, adopt additional restrictions on traffic, together with rules and
regulations for the use of public parks and sign-post the same upon such
parks, playgrounds, recreational areas, or athletic fields as they apply, and
it is unlawful for any person to violate the same when so sign-posted.



   (C)   Hours. It is unlawful for any person to park, be in or remain
in any park, playground, recreational area or athletic field owned or
maintained by the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and sunrise the
following day unless special permission has been granted by the City
Administrator or his or her designee.



(2006 Code, § 10.64) (Ord. 138, 3rd Series, passed 6-5-1998)  Penalty, see
§ 130.99



§ 130.15  JUNK CARS, HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS, AND APPLIANCES STORED ON PUBLIC
OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   It is unlawful to park or store any unlicensed, unregistered, or
inoperable motor vehicle, household furnishings, or appliances on public or
private property in a residence district, unless housed within a lawfully
erected building in the residence district. Any violation of this section is
hereby declared to be a nuisance and, upon seven days’ written notice to
the owner, as shown by the records in the office of the County Auditor, of
private premises on which such material is found, the city may remove the
same and certify the cost of such removal as any other special assessment.



(2006 Code, § 10.65)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.16  ABANDONING A MOTOR VEHICLE.



   It is unlawful for any person to abandon a motor vehicle on any public
or private property without the consent of the person in control of such
property. For the purpose of this section, a “motor vehicle” is as
defined in M.S. Ch. 169, as it may be amended from time to time.



(2006 Code, § 10.66)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.17  PROHIBITED USE AND PARKING OF MOBILE HOMES AND RECREATIONAL
CAMPING VEHICLES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      MOBILE HOME and RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLE. Includes the
following definitions.



         (a)   CAMPING TRAILER. A folding structure, mounted on
wheels, and designed for travel, recreation and vacation uses.



         (b)   MOTOR HOME. A portable, temporary dwelling to be
used for travel, recreation, and vacation, constructed as an integral part of
a self-propelled vehicle.



         (c)   PICKUP COACH. A structure designed to be mounted
on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation,
and vacation.



         (d)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure
built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel,
recreational, and vacation uses, permanently identified TRAVEL TRAILER by the
manufacturer of the trailer.



   (B)   Unlawful acts.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to park a mobile home or
recreational camping vehicle upon public or private property for human
habitation except in a licensed manufactured home park.



      (2)   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to park or store
a mobile home or recreational vehicle in the setback area of any property in
a residence district for more than 72 hours.



         (b)   For the purpose of this provision “setback”
has the meaning given it in § 152.02 and refers only to the front yard.



(2006 Code, § 10.67)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.18  MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   Owner or occupant. It is the primary responsibility of any
owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of land to maintain any weeds or grass
growing thereon at a height of not more than eight inches; to remove all
public health or safety hazards therefrom; to install or repair water service
lines thereon; and to treat or remove insect-infested or diseased trees
thereon.



   (B)   Noncompliance.



      (1)   If any such owner or occupant fails to assume the
primary responsibility described in division (A) above, and after notice
given by the City Administrator has not within seven days of such notice
complied, the city may cause such work to be done and the expenses thus
incurred shall be a lien upon such real estate.



      (2)   The City Administrator shall certify to the County
Auditor a statement of the amount of the cost incurred by the city.



      (3)   Such amount together with interest shall be entered as a
special assessment against such lot or parcel of land and be collected in the
same manner as real estate taxes.



(2006 Code, § 10.69)  (Ord. 23, 3rd Series, passed 6-18-1981)  Penalty,
see § 130.99



§ 130.19  OPEN PITS, BASEMENTS, AND OTHER EXCAVATIONS.



   It is unlawful for any person owning or in control of real estate to
have any pit, basement, well, septic tank, cesspool, or other excavation on
said premises open and without protection for the public.



   (A)   Excavation open 72 hours or less. If such excavation is open
for 72 hours or less, it shall be protected by use of flares or lights at
night and a railing or other temporary protection during the day.



   (B)   Permanent excavation. If it shall be permanently installed, it
shall be protected with a chain link fence at least 48 inches high, night and
day.



(2006 Code, § 10.70)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.20  BARBED WIRE FENCES.



   It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain a barbed wire fence
upon his or her property, which fence abuts upon any street or within ten
feet of his or her property line with an abutting property owner, without a
showing of need and a permit from the Council.



(2006 Code, § 10.71)  (Ord. 40, 3rd Series, passed 5-30-1984)  Penalty,
see § 130.99



§ 130.21  RADIO AND TELEVISION INTERFERENCE.



   It is unlawful for any person to maintain, use, or operate any
apparatus or device whether electrical, mechanical, or of any other type, so
as to cause interference with radio or television reception. This section
shall not apply to electro-medical devices; provided, that they are equipped
so far as reasonably possible with apparatus tending to reduce such
interference.



(2006 Code, § 10.72)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.22  STORAGE OF WOOD.



   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      WOOD. Wood kept for use as a heating fuel.



   (B)   Unlawful acts.



      (1)   (a)   It is unlawful for the occupant of any
premises, or if the premises are vacant and unoccupied, then the owner to
maintain on his or her premises any wood pile or structure in which wood is
stored, infested with rats, rodents, or vermin.



         (b)   If there is an infestation, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner or occupant to eliminate said rats, rodents or
vermin.



      (2)   (a)   It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any
property to keep or store wood outside of a building for more than 30 days
which has not been cut to stove length and stacked in a neat and orderly
manner.



         (b)   This division (B) shall be enforced 30 days after
publication.



(2006 Code, § 10.73)  (Ord. 23, 3rd Series, passed 6-18-1981) Penalty, see
§ 130.99



§ 130.23  PROHIBITED NOISES, NOISY GATHERINGS, AND PERMITS.



   (A)   General prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to make or
cause to be made any distinctly and loudly audible noise that unreasonably
annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace,
safety, or welfare of any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or
affects their property’s value. This general prohibition is not limited by
the specific restriction of the divisions (B) through (J) below.



   (B)   Horns and audible signaling devices. It is unlawful for any
person to sound any audible signaling device on any vehicle except as a
warning of danger.



   (C)   Radios, phonographs, and paging systems.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to use or operate or
permit the use or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, paging system, machine, or other device for the production of
sound in a distinct and loudly audible manner as to disturb the peace, quiet,
and comfort of any person beyond the boundaries of the property on which it
is located between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



      (2)   For the purpose of this division (C), the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         BOUNDARIES OF THE PROPERTY ON WHICH IT IS LOCATED. In the
case of a single occupant of real estate, the perimeter thereof, and in the
case of multiple occupancy, the compact and contiguous area under the
exclusive control of the occupant.



   (D)   Noisy gatherings; participants and owners. It is unlawful for
any person or persons to congregate on any private lands because of, or
participate in, any party or gathering of people from which noise emanates of
a sufficient volume or of such nature as to disturb the peace, quiet, or
repose of other persons. Any owner or person in lawful possession or control
of such private lands who has knowledge of the disturbance and fails to
immediately abate said disturbance shall be guilty of a violation of this
section.



   (E)   Gatherings; permission required.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person or persons to congregate
on any private lands of another because of, or participate in, any party or
gathering of people in the absence of the owner of said private lands,
without first having obtained written permission from said landowner. Such
written permission shall at all times be in the possession of one or more
persons at the site of such congregation. The document containing the written
permission must bear the signature of the landowner and date of the permitted
use.



      (2)   Failure to display written permission upon request shall
be considered prima facie evidence of an absence of permission from the owner.



   (F)   Police authority. A violation of divisions (D) or (E) above
shall give a police officer the authority to order all persons present, other
than persons identifying themselves as the owner or person in lawful
possession or control of such land to immediately disperse. Any person who
shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall
be guilty of a violation of this section.



   (G)   Loudspeakers or amplifiers for advertising.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to operate or permit the
use or operation of any loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other device for the
production or reproduction of sound on a street or other public property for
the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the
public to any commercial establishment or vehicle, except as may be allowed
by permit.



      (2)   A permit for the use or operation of such a loudspeaker,
sound amplifier or other device for the production or reproduction of sound
on a street or other public property for the purpose of commercial
advertising or attracting attention of the public to any commercial
establishment between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. may be obtained
from the City Administrator. Such a permit will be granted only if the City
Administrator is satisfied such use will not unreasonably annoy or disturb
any person or persons in any adjacent residential areas.



   (H)   Schools, churches, hospitals or nursing homes. It is unlawful
for any person to create any excessive noise on a street or public property
adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, hospital, or nursing
home when the noise unreasonably interferes with the working of the
institution or disturbs or unduly annoys its occupants or residents or when
conspicuous signs indicate the presence of such institution.



   (I)   Hourly restriction on certain operations; domestic power
equipment.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a power lawn
mower, power hedge clipper, chain saw, mulcher, garden tiller, edger, drill,
or other similar domestic power maintenance equipment except between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on any Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.



      (2)   Snow removal equipment is exempt from this provision.



   (J)   Noise impact statements.



      (1)   The Council may require any person applying for a change
in zoning classification or a permit or license for any structure, operation,
process, installation, or alteration, or project that may be considered a
potential noise source to submit a noise impact statement on a form
prescribed by the Council.



      (2)   It shall evaluate each such statement and take its
evaluation into account in approving or disapproving the license or permit
applied for or the zoning change requested.



(2006 Code, § 10.74)  (Ord. 40, 3rd Series, passed 5-30-1984)  Penalty,
see § 130.99




CRIMES AND OFFENSES




§ 130.35  UNLAWFUL USE AND FURNISHING OF TOBACCO.



   (A)   Use. It is unlawful for any person, under the age of 18 years,
to use tobacco in any form.



   (B)   Furnishing. It is unlawful for any person to furnish tobacco,
by any manner or means and in any form, to any person under the age of 18
years.



(2006 Code, § 10.02)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.36  UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY; PRESENCE AT UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.



   (A)   Unlawful assembly. It is unlawful for three or more persons to
assemble, and each participant shall be guilty of unlawful assembly, if the
assembly is:



      (1)   With intent to commit any unlawful act by force;



      (2)   With intent to carry out any purpose in such manner as
will disturb or threaten the public peace; and/or



      (3)   Without unlawful purpose but the participants to conduct
themselves in a disorderly manner as to disturb or threaten the public peace.



   (B)   Presence at unlawful assembly. It is unlawful for any person
to be present at the place of an unlawful assembly and refuse to leave when
so directed by a law enforcement officer.



(2006 Code, § 10.22)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.37  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   It is unlawful for any person, in a public or private place, knowing,
or having reasonable grounds to know, that it will, or will tend to, alarm,
anger, or disturb others or provoke any assault or breach of the peace, to do
or permit upon premises owned or controlled by him or her, the following:



   (A)   Engage in brawling or fighting;



   (B)   Disturb an assembly or meeting, not unlawful in its character;



   (C)   Engage in offensive, obscene, or abusive language or in
boisterous and noisy conduct tending reasonably to arouse alarm, anger, or
resentment in others;



   (D)   Willfully and lewdly expose his or her person or the private
parts thereof, or procure another to so expose himself or herself; and any
open or gross lewdness or lascivious behavior, or any act of public indecency;



   (E)   Voluntarily enter the waters of any lake, river, or city
public swimming pool between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except
with specific permission; or, enters such water without being garbed in a
bathing suit sufficient to cover his or her person and equal to the standards
generally adopted and accepted by the public;



   (F)   Causes the making or production of an unnecessary noise by
shouting or by any other means or mechanism including the blowing of any
automobile or other vehicle horn;



   (G)   Use a flash or spotlight in a manner so as to annoy or
endanger others;



   (H)   Drinks or displays any intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating
malt liquor in or about any premises where such drinking or display is
prohibited by law;



   (I)   Causes defacement, destruction, or otherwise damage to any
premises or any property located thereon;



   (J)   Strews, scatters, litters, throws, disposes of or deposits any
refuse, garbage, or rubbish unto any premises except into receptacles
provided for such purpose;



   (K)   Enters any motor vehicle of another without the consent of the
owner or operator; or



   (L)   Fails or refuses to vacate or leave any premises after being
requested or ordered, whether orally or in writing, to do so, by the owner,
or person in charge thereof, or by any law enforcement agent or official;
provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any person who is
owner or tenant of the premises involved nor to any law enforcement or other
government official who may be present thereon at that time as part of his or
her official duty, nor shall it include the spouse, children, employee, or
tenant of such owner or occupier.



(2006 Code, § 10.23)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.38  FALSELY REPORTING A CRIME.



   It is unlawful for any person to inform a law office that a crime has
been committed, knowing that it is false and intending that the officer shall
act in reliance upon it.



(2006 Code, § 10.24)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.39  FALSELY REPORTING A FIRE.



   It is unlawful for any person to inform the Fire Department that a fire
is in progress, knowing that it is false and intending that the Fire
Department shall act in reliance upon it.



(2006 Code, § 10.25)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.40  CONCEALING IDENTITY.



   It is unlawful for any person to conceal his or her identity in a
public place by means of a robe, mask, or other disguise, unless incidental
to amusement or entertainment.



(2006 Code, § 10.26)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.41  CURFEW.



   (A)   Purpose.  The curfew for minors established by this section
is maintained for four primary reasons:



      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors
committed during the curfew hours;



      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail
during the curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;



      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs
during the curfew hours; and



      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      EMERGENCY ERRAND.  A task that if not completed promptly
threatens the health, safety, or comfort of the minor or a member of the
minor’s household.  The term shall include, but shall not be limited to,
seeking urgent medical treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law
enforcement or fire department personnel, and seeking shelter from the
elements or urgent assistance from a utility company due to a natural or
human-made calamity.



      OFFICIAL CITY TIME.  The time of day as determined by reference
to the master clock used by the Police Department.



      PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT, OR REFRESHMENT.  Those
places that include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades,
shopping malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants, and pool halls.



      PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY.  The person who is responsible
for providing food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the
minor.  The person providing primary care or custody to the minor shall not
be another minor.



      SCHOOL ACTIVITY.  An event which has been placed on a school
calendar by public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned
event.



   (C)   Hours.



      (1)   Minors under the age of 16 years.  No minor under the
age of 16 years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks,
playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in
or upon places of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment; nor in or upon
any vacant lot, between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following
day, official city time.



      (2)   Minors ages 16 years to 18 years.  No minor of the ages
of 16 or 17 years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks,
playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in
or upon places of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment; nor in or upon
any vacant lot, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. the
following day, official city time.



   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor.  Nothing in
this section shall be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until
the curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a
parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody
of the minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or impair the
control of the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.



   (E)   Exceptions.  The provisions of this section shall not apply
in the following situations:



      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian,
or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;



      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the
direction of his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor;



      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this
section if in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a
lawful business, trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor traveling
directly to or from the location of the business, trade, profession, or
occupation and the minor’s residence.  Minors who fall within the scope of
this exception shall carry written proof of employment and proof of the hours
the employer requires the minor’s presence at work.



      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an event which has been officially designated as a school activity
by public or parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or
traveling directly to or from an official activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization, school, religious institution,
or similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor and with the
permission of the minor’s parent, guardian, or other adult person having
the primary care and custody of the minor.



      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course
of interstate travel during the hours of curfew.



      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or
from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free
speech, freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion.



      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence
or abutting the residence of a next- door neighbor if the neighbor does not
complain to the city’s designated law enforcement provider about the
minor’s presence.



      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is
otherwise legally emancipated.



   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor.  No parent,
guardian, or other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor
shall permit any violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.



   (G)   Duties of other persons.  No person operating or in charge of
any place of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor
to enter or remain in his or her place of business during the hours
prohibited by this section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her
parent, guardian, or other adult person having primary care or custody of the
minor, or unless one of the exceptions to this section applies.



   (H)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this
section that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly
notified the city’s designated law enforcement provider that a minor was
present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused
to leave.



Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.42  CONSPIRACY.



   (A)   To cause arrest or prosecution. It is unlawful for any person
to conspire with another to cause a third person to be arrested or prosecuted
on a criminal charge knowing the charge to be false.



   (B)   To commit a crime. It is unlawful for any person to conspire
with another to commit a crime.



(2006 Code, § 10.42)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.43  COERCION.



   It is unlawful for any person to orally or in writing make any of the
following threats and thereby cause another against his or her will to do any
act or forbear doing a lawful act:



   (A)   A threat to unlawfully inflict bodily harm upon, or hold in
confinement, the person threatened or another;



   (B)   A threat to unlawfully inflict damage to the property of the
person threatened or another;



   (C)   A threat to unlawfully injure a trade, business, profession,
or calling;



   (D)   A threat to expose a secret or deformity, publish a defamatory
statement, or otherwise to expose any person to disgrace or ridicule; or



   (E)   A threat to make or cause to be made a criminal charge whether
true or false; provided, that a warning of the consequences of a future
violation of law given in good faith by a magistrate, peace officer, or
prosecuting attorney to any person shall not be deemed a threat for the
purpose of this section.



(2006 Code, § 10.43)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.44  INTERFERING WITH RELIGIOUS OBSERVATION.



   It is unlawful for any person, by threats or violence, intentionally to
prevent another person from performing any lawful act enjoined upon him or
her or recommended to him or her by the religion which he or she professes.



(2006 Code, § 10.44)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.45  DISORDERLY HOUSE OR PLACE OF PUBLIC RESORT.



   It is unlawful for any person:



   (A)   To keep a disorderly house or place of public resort, whereby
the peace, comfort, or decency of a neighborhood is habitually disturbed; or



   (B)   Being the owner or in control of any premises, intentionally
permit them to be so used.



(2006 Code, § 10.45)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.46  BOMB THREATS OR OBSCENE OR ANNOYING CALLS.



   (A)   Bomb threat. It is unlawful for any person to make or cause to
be made a telephone call to threaten a bombing or threaten that a bomb or
other explosive device or devices have been placed in any location.



   (B)   Annoying, threatening or harassing phone calls. It is unlawful
for any person to make a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues,
without disclosing his or her identity and with intent to annoy, abuse,
threaten, or harass any person at the number called; or to make the telephone
of another repeatedly or continuously to ring, with intent to harass any
person at the number called; or by means of a telephone to make any comment,
request, suggestion, or proposal which is obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy,
or indecent.



   (C)   Control of telephone used for unlawful purpose. It is unlawful
for any person knowingly to permit any telephone under his or her control to
be used for any unlawful purpose described in this section.



(2006 Code, § 10.46)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.47  OBSTRUCTING LEGAL PROCESS OR ARREST.



   It is unlawful for anyone to intentionally obstruct, hinder, or prevent
the lawful execution of any legal process, civil or criminal, or apprehension
of another on a charge or conviction of a criminal offense.



(2006 Code, § 10.47)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.48  WINDOW PEEPING.



   It is unlawful for any person to go upon the private premises of
another, and in a surreptitious manner look, gaze, stare, or peep into any
window, door, or other opening in any building located thereon which is
occupied by a person or persons as a place of abode with intent to intrude
upon the privacy of a member of the household thereof.



(2006 Code, § 10.48)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.49  LURKING OR LOITERING.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      LURKING/LOITERING. Includes:



         (a)   The obstruction of free and unhampered passage of
pedestrians or vehicles on the public streets, sidewalks, and public places
within the city;



         (b)   Interfering with any person lawfully on the
premises by obstructing passage; or



         (c)   Refusing to move on when so requested by a peace
officer when such peace officer reasonably makes such request to preserve or
to promote public peace and order.



      PREMISES. Any land, lot, parcel, sidewalk, boulevard, street,
highway, alley, thoroughfare, park, playground, restaurant, café, church,
school, car, or parking lot or parking space, drive-in; any building used for
business purposes, commercial or industrial purposes, or any other place,
washroom or toilet, apartment hallway, or other location whether public or
private in the city.



   (B)   Unlawful acts. Lurking, loitering, or being concealed in,
upon, or near the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks,
playgrounds, sidewalks, or other public grounds, in public buildings, places
of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment, vacant lots, parking lots and
spaces, or other unsupervised places or any property, whether public or
private, not his or her own, is prohibited:



      (1)   When such conduct results in the making of any noise,
riot, disturbance, or improper diversion to the annoyance or disturbance of
another;



      (2)   When such conduct tends reasonably to or is likely to
arouse alarm, anger, fear, or resentment in another;



      (3)   When such conduct is with intent to do any mischief or
to commit any crime or unlawful act;



      (4)   When such persons shall collect in groups or crowds in,
upon, or near any street, sidewalk or public place in said city so as to
interfere with or obstruct public travel or movement or parking;



      (5)   When such conduct results in the defacement or
destruction of or causes any damage to any part of the premises or any
property located thereon;



      (6)   When such person scatters, litters, throws, or otherwise
disposes or deposits any refuse, garbage, or rubbish onto the premises except
into receptacles provided for such purpose;



      (7)   When such persons shall use profane, abusive, indecent,
or threatening language towards any person or persons, including peace
officers;



      (8)   When such persons shall conduct singly or in groups at
or about a business premise which is closed;



      (9)   When such person or persons shall stand or linger about
the doorway of any building in such a manner as to obstruct or partially
obstruct the free and uninterrupted ingress or egress to or from such
building or in such a manner as to annoy the owner or occupant of such
building or the owner or occupant of any adjacent premises; and



      (10)   (a)   Further, it is unlawful for any adult, parent,
or guardian to knowingly or negligently permit their juvenile child to
violate this section.



         (b)   The second violation of this section by a juvenile
shall be prima facie evidence that the adult, parent, or guardian knowingly
or negligently permitted the juvenile to violate this section.



   (C)   Responsibility of parents.



      (1)   It is unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other adult
person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 16 years to
knowingly permit such minor to loiter or lurk on any premises as described in
this section.



      (2)   This restriction shall not apply to a minor who is
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
care and custody of the minor or where the minor is upon a legitimate
business activity or errand directed by his or her parent, guardian, or
custodian.



(2006 Code, § 10.49)  (Ord. 117, 3rd Series, passed 4-3-1998)  Penalty,
see § 130.99



§ 130.50  SOCIAL HOST REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   This section prohibits, and establishes penalties for,
any person hosting an event or gathering where alcohol is present and
possessed or consumed by persons under 21 years of age.



      (2)   Be it enacted by the City Council, as follows.



   (B)   Purpose and findings.



      (1)   The City Council intends to discourage underage
possession and consumption of alcohol, even if done within the confines of a
private residence, and intends to hold persons criminally responsible who
host events or gatherings where persons under 21 years of age possess or
consume alcohol regardless of whether the person hosting the event or
gathering supplied the alcohol.



      (2)   The City Council finds the following.



         (a)   Events and gatherings held on private or public
property where alcohol is possessed or consumed by persons under the age of
21 are harmful to those persons and constitute a potential threat to public
health requiring prevention or abatement.



         (b)   Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect
underage persons, as well as the general public, from injuries related to
alcohol consumption, such as alcohol overdose or alcohol-related traffic
collisions.



         (c)   Alcohol is an addictive drug which, if used
irresponsibly, could have drastic effects on those who use it as well as
those who are affected by the actions of an irresponsible user.



         (d)   Often, events, or gatherings involving underage
possession and consumption occur outside the presence of parents; however,
there are times when the parent is present and, condones the activity, and in
some circumstances provides the alcohol.



         (e)   Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an
underage person is a crime, it is difficult to prove, and an ordinance is
necessary to help further combat underage consumption.



         (f)   A deterrent effect will be created by holding a
person criminally responsible for hosting an event or gathering where
underage possession or consumption occurs.



         (g)   There are times when a legal adult or responsible
party is under 21 and is/are present, and condone the activity and in some
circumstances provide the alcohol.



   (C)   Authority. This section is enacted pursuant to M.S. §
412.221, subd. 32, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (D)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of
wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including
dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process
produced.



      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and
every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which
contains 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume, and which is fit for beverage
purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances.



      EVENT or GATHERING. Any group of three or more persons who have
assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.



      HOST. To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise,
control, or permit a gathering or event.



      PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:



         (1)   As natural, adoptive parent, or step-parent;



         (2)   As a legal guardian; or



         (3)   As a person to whom legal custody has been given
by order of the court.



      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation,
or any association of one or more individuals.



      RESIDENCE or PREMISES. Any home, yard, field, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or
meeting room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private,
whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis whether occupied as a
dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether
owned, leased, rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.



      UNDERAGE PERSON. Any individual under 21 years of age.



   (E)   Prohibited acts.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person(s) to:



         (a)   Host or allow an event or gathering;



         (b)   At any residence, premises, or on any other
private or public property;



         (c)   Where alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present;



         (d)   When the person knows or reasonably should know
that an underage person will or does:



            1.   Consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage;



            2.   Possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage
with the intent to consume it; and



            3.   The person fails to take reasonable steps to
prevent possession or consumption by the underage person(s).



      (2)   A person is criminally responsible for violating
division (D)(1) above if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires,
counsels, or conspires with or otherwise procures another to commit the
prohibited act; or



      (3)   A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have
to be present at the event or gathering to be criminally responsible.



   (F)   Exceptions.



      (1)   This section does not apply to conduct solely between an
underage person and his or her parents while present in the parent’s
household.



      (2)   This section does not apply to legally protected
religious observances.



      (3)   This section does not apply to retail intoxicating
liquor or 3.2% malt liquor licenses, municipal liquor stores, or bottle club
permit holders who are regulated by M.S. § 340A.503, subd. 1(a)(1), as it
may be amended from time to time.



      (4)   This section does not apply to situations where underage
persons are lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during
the course and scope of employment.



      (5)   This section does not apply to enforcement activities
supervised by a law enforcement agency.



   (G)   Enforcement. This section can be enforced by any licensed
police officer in the city.



   (H)   Effective date. This section shall take effect 30 days
following its final passage and adoption.



(Ord. 185, 3rd Series, passed 9-13-2011)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Alcoholic Beverages, see Ch. 121



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Violation of §§ 130.01 through 130.23 and 130.35 through
130.49. Every person violates a section, division, paragraph, or provision of
§§ 130.01 through 130.23 and 130.35 through 130.49 when he or she performs
an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such
failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or performs an act
prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure is
prohibited or declared unlawful by a code adopted by reference by §§ 130.01
through 130.23 and 130.35 through 130.49, and upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific
provisions hereof.



(2006 Code, § 10.99)



   (C)   Penalties for social host regulations. Violation of §
130.50(D) is a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 185, 3rd Series, passed 9-13-2011)



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



      151.   PLATTING



      152.   ZONING



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



   150.01   Buildings use permits



   150.02   Plans and specifications



   150.03   Fees, charges, and requirements



   150.04   Permits and requirements for moving buildings



   150.05   Unsafe buildings



   150.06   Underground utility construction



   150.07   Special requirements in new construction



   150.08   Private sewage disposal systems and water



   150.09   Building maintenance regulations



 



   150.99   Penalty



§ 150.01  BUILDINGS USE PERMITS.



   (A)   Generally. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall
construct, erect, alter, wreck, or move any building or structure or parts
thereof without first securing a land use and zoning permit from the city. It
shall not be necessary to secure a land use and zoning permit in order to
alter, repair, or otherwise change the interior of any residential building,
provided, the proposed alteration, repair, or change will not affect the
exterior dimension of such building or change the existing use and occupancy
thereof.



   (B)   Application. Application for a land use and zoning permit
shall be made to the Zoning Administrator on blank forms to be furnished by
the city. Each application for a permit to construct or alter a building
shall be accompanied by a plan drawn to scale showing the dimensions of the
lot to be built upon and the size and location of the building and accessory
buildings to be erected. Applications shall contain such other information as
may be deemed necessary for the proper enforcement of this code of ordinances.



   (C)   Fees. The fee for a land use and zoning permit shall be
determined by the Council.



   (D)   Issuance. The Zoning Administrator shall determine that the
building plans, together with the application, comply with all the terms of
this code of ordinances, in which event, he or she shall execute a
certificate of approval and file same with the Planning Department. Upon the
filing of such certificate and payment by the applicant or permit fee
established by the Council, the Planning Director shall issue the land use
and zoning permit.



   (E)   Certificate of zoning compliance.



      (1)   A certificate of zoning compliance shall be obtained
before any building hereafter erected or structurally altered is occupied or
the use of any such building is altered.



      (2)   Application for a certificate of zoning compliance for a
new building or for existing building which has been altered shall be made to
the Zoning Administrator as part of the application for a land use and zoning
permit as required in division (B) above.



      (3)   Every certificate of zoning compliance shall state that
the building or proposed use of a building or land complies with all
provisions of law and this code of ordinances. A record of all certificates
of zoning compliance shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning
Administrator, and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having
a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected.



(2006 Code, § 4.03)  (Ord. 130, passed 12-23-1971)



§ 150.02  PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Requirement. With each application for a land use and zoning
permit, and when required by the Building Inspector for enforcement of any
provisions of this code of ordinances, two sets of plans and specifications
shall be submitted. The Building Inspector may require plans and
specifications to be prepared and designed by an engineer or architect
licensed to practice as such in the state.



   (B)   Not required. When authorized by the Building Inspector, plans
and specifications need not be submitted for the following:



      (1)   One-story buildings of Type V conventional woodstud
construction with an area not exceeding 600 square feet;



      (2)   Group J, Division 1, Occupancies of Type V conventional
woodstud construction; and



      (3)   Small and unimportant work.



   (C)   Information on plans and specifications.



      (1)   Plans and specifications shall be drawn to scale upon
substantial paper or cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the
nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will
conform to the provisions of this code of ordinances and all relevant laws,
rules, and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give the
street address of the work and the name and address of the owner and person
who prepared them.



      (2)   Plans shall include a plot plan showing the location of
the proposed building and every existing building on the property. In lieu of
detailed specifications, the Building Inspector may approve references on the
plans to a specific section or part of the this code of ordinances or other
laws. Computations, stress diagrams, and other data sufficient to show the
correctness of the plans, shall be submitted when required by the Building
Inspector.



   (D)   Retention of plans. One set of approved plans, specifications,
and computations may be retained by the Building Inspector for a period of
not less than 90 days from the date of completion of the work covered
therein, and one set of approved plans and specifications shall be returned
to the applicant, which set shall be kept on such building or work at all
times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress. Plans
submitted for checking, for which no permit is issued, and on which no action
is taken by the applicant for 90 days, shall be returned to the last known
address of the applicant; to renew action on such plans, a payment of a new
plan-check fee shall be required.



   (E)   Validity. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of
plans and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an
approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code of
ordinances. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the
provisions of this code of ordinances shall be valid, except insofar as the
work or use which it authorizes is lawful.



   (F)   Corrections. The issuance of a permit based upon plans and
specifications shall not prevent the Building Inspector from thereafter
requiring the correction of errors in said plans and specifications or from
preventing building or construction operations being carried on thereunder
when in violation of this code of ordinances.



(2006 Code, § 4.04)



§ 150.03  FEES, CHARGES, AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Basic fee. Basic fees for land use and zoning permits and
inspections shall be adopted by resolution of the Council and may be amended
from time to time in the same manner; provided, that a schedule of such fees,
together with the effective date or dates thereof, shall be kept on file in
the office of the Building Inspector, available for distribution upon request
therefor, and uniformly enforced as the same become effective. If such fees
are based upon a determination of value or size of the project, a
determination thereof shall be made by the Building Inspector. Such fee
schedule may provide for a separate building or electrical permit and
inspection fee where the work to be done is so confined.



   (B)   Start without permit. Where work for which a permit is
required is started or pursued prior to issuance of a permit, the fees shall
be doubled, or the fee will be set by the Council by a resolution for the
appropriate permit. But the payment of such increased fee shall not relieve
any persons from fully complying with the requirements of the law in the
execution of the work, nor from any penalties prescribed therein.



(2006 Code, § 4.05)  (Ord. 151, 3rd Series, passed 1-23-2004)



§ 150.04  PERMITS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR MOVING BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      COMBINED MOVING PERMIT. A permit to move a building on both a
street and a highway.



      HIGHWAY. A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic which is a
state trunk highway, county state-aid highway, or county road.



      HIGHWAY MOVING PERMIT. A permit to move a building on a highway
for which a fee is charged which does not include route approval, but does
include regulation of activities which do not involve the use of the highway;
which activities include, but are not limited to, repairs, or alterations to
a municipal utility required by reason of such movement.



      MOVING PERMIT. A document allowing the use of a street or highway
for the purpose of moving a building.



      STREET. A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic which is not
a state trunk highway, county state-aid highway or county road.



      STREET MOVING PERMIT. A permit to move a building on a street for
which a fee is charged which does include route approval, together with use
of the  street and activities including, but not limited to, repairs or
alterations to a municipal utility required by reason of such movement.



   (B)   Application. The application for a moving permit shall state
the dimensions, weight, and approximate loaded height of the structure or
building proposed to be moved, the places from which and to which it is to be
moved, the route to be followed, the dates and times of moving and parking,
the name and address of the mover, and the municipal utility and public
property repairs or alterations that will be required by reason of such
movement. In the case of a street moving permit or combined moving permit,
the application shall also state the size and weight of the structure or
building proposed to be moved and the street alterations or repairs that will
be required by reason of such movement.



   (C)   Permit and fee.



      (1)   The moving permit shall state date or dates of moving,
hours, routing, movement, and parking. Permits shall be issued only for
moving buildings by building movers licensed by the state, except that a
permit may be issued to a person moving his or her own building, or a person
moving a building which does not exceed 16 feet in width, 20 feet in length,
or 14 feet in loaded height. Nor shall a license be required of farmers
moving their own farm buildings, nor of persons moving manufactured or
modular homes.



      (2)   Fees to be charged shall be separate for each of the
following:



         (a)   A moving permit fee to cover use of streets and
route approval; and



         (b)   A fee equal to the anticipated amount required to
compensate the city for any municipal utility and public property (other than
streets) repairs or alterations occasioned by such movement. All permit fees
shall be paid in advance of issuance.



   (D)   Unlawful acts.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to move a building on any
street without a moving permit from the city.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to move a building on any
highway without a highway moving permit from the city.



      (3)   It is unlawful to move any building (including a
manufactured home) if the point of origin or destination (or both) is within
the city, and regardless of the route of movement, without having paid in
full all real and personal property taxes, special assessments, and municipal
utility charges due on the premises of origin and filing written proof of
such payment with the city.



(2006 Code, § 4.06) (Ord. 89, 3rd Series, passed 12-20-1991)  Penalty, see
§ 150.99



§ 150.05  UNSAFE BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Definition and abatement. All buildings or structures which
are structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or which
constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which
in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, or
public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation,
obsolescence, fire hazard, or abandonment, as specified in the this code of
ordinances or any other law, are, for the purpose of this section, unsafe
buildings. All such unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public
nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or
removal, in accordance with the procedure specified herein.



   (B)   Powers of Building Inspector.



      (1)   The Building Inspector shall examine every building or
structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and, if found
to be an unsafe building, the Building Inspector shall give the owner of the
building written notice stating the defects therein. The notice may require
the owner or person in charge of the premises, within 48 hours, to commence
either the required repairs or improvements or demolition and removal of the
building, structure, or portions thereof. All such work shall be completed
within 90 days from the date of notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the
Building Inspector.



      (2)   If necessary, the notice shall also require the
building, structure, or a portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not
reoccupied until the required repairs and improvements are completed,
inspected, and approved by the Building Inspector. Upon certification by the
Building Inspector that a building or structure presents an immediate danger
to the health and safety of persons in the community, the city may take
immediate action to provide for the emergency evacuation and securing of a
building, with notice to the owner or person in charge of the premises as set
forth in this chapter.



   (C)   Service of notice to owner. Proper service of the required
notice shall be by personal service upon the owner of record, if he or she
shall be found within the city. If he or she is not found therein, service
may be made upon the owner of record by registered mail or certified mail;
provided, that if the notice is by registered mail or certified mail, the
designated period within which the owner or person in charge is required to
comply with the order of the Building Inspector shall begin as of the date of
delivery shown upon the return receipt.



   (D)   Posting of signs. The Building Inspector shall cause to be
posted at each entrance to such building a notice to read: “Do Not Enter,
Unsafe to Occupy”. Building Department, City of Wadena”. Such notice
shall remain posted until the required repairs, demolition, or removal are
completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written permission of the
Building Inspector and no person shall enter the building except for the
purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the building.



   (E)   Right to demolish. In case the owner shall fail, neglect, or
refuse to comply with the notice to repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and
remove said building or structure or portion thereof, the Council may order
the owner of the building prosecuted as a violator of the provisions of this
section and may order the Building Inspector to proceed with the work
specified in such notice. A statement of the cost of such work shall be
transmitted to the Council, who shall cause the same to be paid and levied as
a special assessment against the property.



   (F)   Costs. Costs incurred under division (E) above shall be paid
out of the Treasury. Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises
involved as a special assessment on the land on which the building or
structure is located, and shall be collected in the manner provided for
special assessments.



   (G)   Unlawful act. It is unlawful for the owner of any property to
offer or permit an unsafe building as defined herein to remain thereon.



(2006 Code, § 4.10)  (Ord. 123, Second Series, passed 6-5-1998)  Penalty,
see § 150.99



§ 150.06  UNDERGROUND UTILITY CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Underground construction required.



      (1)   All utility lines hereafter installed, constructed, or
otherwise placed within the city for electric, telephone, television cable,
or other like or similar services to serve residential, commercial, and
industrial customers in newly platted areas, and which utilize metallic
conductors or fiber optic to carry electric current, data or communications
installed, or constructed by the supplier, consumer, or any party, shall be
installed and placed underground, subject only to the exceptions hereinafter
stated; however, above-ground placement, construction, modification, or
replacement of meters, gauges, transformers, street lighting, and service
connection pedestals shall be allowed.



      (2)   The requirements of this section shall apply equally
outside of the corporate limits of the city coincident with city jurisdiction
of platting, subdivision regulation, or comprehensive planning as may now or
in the future be allowed by law. All companies installing and operating lines
such as those described herein shall be referred to as “utility
companies” for purposes of this section.



   (B)   Exceptions to application. The following exceptions to the
strict applicability of this section shall be allowed upon the conditions
stated.



      (1)   Transmission lines. Above-ground placement,
construction, modification, or replacement of those lines commonly referred
to as “high-voltage transmission lines” upon which the conductor’s
normal operating voltage equals or exceeds 23,000 volts (phase to phase)
shall be allowed; provided, however, that 60 days prior to commencement of
construction of such a project, the city shall be furnished notice of the
proposed project and, upon request, the utility company involved shall
furnish any relevant information regarding such project to the city. This
section shall not be construed as waiving the requirements of any other
ordinance or regulation of the city as the same may apply to any such
proposed project.



      (2)   Technical and economic feasibility. Above-ground
placement, construction, modification, or replacement of lines shall be
allowed in residential, commercial, and industrial areas where the Council,
following consideration and recommendation by the Planning Commission, finds
that:



         (a)   Underground placement would place an undue
financial burden upon the landowner or the utility company or deprive the
landowner of the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights; or



         (b)   Underground placement is impractical or not
technically feasible due to topographical, subsoil, or other existing
conditions which adversely affect underground utility placement.



      (3)   Temporary service. Above-ground placement of temporary
service lines shall only be allowed:



         (a)   During the new construction of any project for a
period not to exceed 12 months;



         (b)   During any emergency to safeguard lives or
property within the city; or



         (c)   For a period of not more than seven months when
soil conditions make excavation impractical.



   (C)   Repair and maintenance of existing installations. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to prevent repair, maintenance, replacement,
or modification of existing overhead utility lines.



   (D)   Developer responsibility. All owners, platters, or developers
are responsible for complying with the requirements of this section, and
prior to the final approval of any plat or development plan, shall submit to
the Planning Commission written instruments from the appropriate utility
companies showing that all necessary arrangements with said companies for
installation of such utilities have been made.



   (E)   Placement.



      (1)   All utility lines shall be placed within appropriate
easements or dedicated public ways so as to cause minimum conflict with other
underground services. Whenever feasible, all utilities shall be placed within
the same trench.



      (2)   All utility companies shall submit annually to the
Building Inspector current maps revealing locations of underground
installations, whether such installations were installed prior to the
effective date of this section or hereafter.



(2006 Code, § 4.30)



§ 150.07  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS IN NEW CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Connections required. All buildings for which permits are
issued after adoption of this section shall be connected to the city sewerage
disposal system and water distribution system if required by this code of
ordinances.



   (B)   Roof and surface water, sump pumps, and other natural
precipitation. No water from the roof, surface, sump pump, or other natural
precipitation shall be discharged into the sanitary sewerage system from a
building for which a permit is issued after adoption of this section.



   (C)   Remote-type water meters. All buildings for which permits are
issued after adoption of this section shall have remote-type water meters and
mounting devices installed at the expense of the owner. Exceptions may be
granted in writing by the city for meters greater than one inch.



(2006 Code, § 4.31)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.08  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS AND WATER.



   (A)   Private sewage disposal systems. It is unlawful to construct
any private sewage disposal system which is not in full compliance with the
State Plumbing Code requirements.



   (B)   Private water wells. The Water Well Construction Code, adopted
by the State Board of Health, is hereby adopted and incorporated as part of
this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein. One copy of
said Code shall be marked “City of Wadena - Official Copy” and kept on
file in the office of the Building Inspector and open to inspection and use
by the public. It is unlawful to construct any private water well except in
accordance with said Code.



(2006 Code, § 4.50)  (Ord. 89, 3rd Series, passed 12-20-1991)  Penalty,
see § 150.99



§ 150.09  BUILDING MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect, preserve,
and promote the public health, safety, and the general welfare of the people
of the city; to prevent exterior building conditions that adversely affect or
are likely to adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare, and health
of persons occupying buildings within the city; to provide an adequate level
of maintenance; to preserve the value of land and buildings throughout the
city; and to provide for the administration and enforcement thereof



   (B)   Discrimination and privacy. This section shall be enforced in
a non-discriminatory manner and exclusively for the purpose of promoting
public, as opposed to private welfare. Except as may be specifically provided
herein or incidental to the enforcement hereof, this section is not intended
to interfere with personal privacy or with private legal rights and
liabilities, including without limitation landlord/tenant and lessor/lessee
relationships, and in enacting and enforcing this section, the city neither
expressly nor by implication assumes any obligations or liabilities
respecting such private rights or disputes, including those which involve or
arise out of the nonconformity of any premises in the city to the provisions
of this section.



   (C)   Applicability. Every building and its premises used in whole
or in part as a residence, or as an accessory structure thereof, for a single
family or person, and every building used in whole or in part as a residence
of two or more persons or families living in separate units, except rest
homes, convalescent homes, nursing homes, hotels, and motels, shall conform
to the requirements of this section, irrespective of when such building may
have been or may be constructed, altered, or repaired. This section
establishes minimum exterior standards for buildings, accessory structures,
and related premises.



   (D)   Responsibility of owners and occupants.



      (1)   Responsibility of owners. The owner of buildings shall
be responsible for the maintenance of that structure and for meeting the
provisions of the building maintenance regulations.



      (2)   Joint responsibility of occupants and owners.



         (a)   Generally. It is unlawful for any owner, agent, or
occupant of any building to allow the accumulation of rubbish or garbage on
the premises which he or she occupies or controls in a manner that could
create a health hazard to the building occupants or the general public.



         (b)   Rodent harborage in occupied areas. It is unlawful
for any owner, occupant, or agent to allow formation of rodent harborage in
or about the premises that he or she occupies or controls.



         (c)   Pest extermination. Every occupant of a dwelling
containing a single-dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination
of rodents, insects, or vermin on a premises. Every occupant of a dwelling
unit in a dwelling containing more that one-dwelling unit shall be
responsible for such extermination whenever his or her dwelling unit is the
only one infested. Notwithstanding; however, whenever infestation is caused
by the failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a reasonable
rodent-proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the
owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units, or
in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling
units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.



         (d)   Nuisances. It is unlawful for the owner, agent, or
occupant of any dwelling unit to allow the formation or presence of any
nuisance (as defined in §§ 130.08 or 130.09) in or about the premises he or
she occupies or controls.



   (E)   Standards.



      (1)   Exterior standards.



         (a)   Foundations, exterior walls, and roofs.



            1.   The foundation, exterior walls, and exterior
roof shall be water-tight, rodent-proof, and shall be kept in sound condition
and repair. Every window, exterior door, and hatchway shall be substantially
tight and shall be kept in sound condition and repair. The foundation shall
adequately support the building at all points. Exterior walls shall be
maintained and kept free from dilapidation by cracks, tears, or breaks or
from deteriorated plaster, stucco, brick wood, or other material that is
extensive and gives evidence of long neglect. The protective surface on
exterior walls of a building above the ground level shall be maintained in
good repair so as to provide a sufficient covering and protection of the
structural surface underneath against its deterioration.



            2.   Without limiting the generality of this
section, a protective surface of a building shall be deemed to be out of
repair if:



               a.   The protective surface is paint which
is blistered to an extent of more than 25% of the area of any plane or wall
or other area including window trim, cornice members, porch railings, and
other such areas;



               b.   More that 10% of the pointing of any
chimney or 25% of the pointing of any brick or stone wall is loose or has
fallen out; or



               c.   More than 25% of the finish coat of
stucco wall is worn through or chipped away.



         (b)   Exterior surfaces. Any exterior surface or plane
required to be repaired under the provisions of this section shall be
repaired in its entirety. If a weather-resistant surface such as brick,
plaster, or metal is covered with paint that is more than 25% blistered, it
shall be repainted unless the defective paint covering is removed in its
entirety.



         (c)   Accessory structure maintenance. Accessory
structures supplied by the owner, agent, or tenant on the premises shall be
structurally sound, and be maintained in good repair and appearance. Exterior
walls of accessory structures shall be maintained in accordance with the
standards set forth for principal structures.



         (d)   Retaining walls. Retaining walls shall be kept in
good condition, repair, and appearance. A retaining wall shall be deemed out
of repair when it has substantially shifted or slumped out of its position.



         (e)   Yard cover. All exposed areas surrounding (or
within) a principal or accessory use, including street boulevards which are
not devoted to parking, drives, sidewalks, patios, or other such uses, shall
be landscaped with grass, shrubs, trees, or other ornamented landscape
material. Such landscaping shall be maintained in good condition and free of
noxious weeds. Grass and weeds may not exceed eight inches in height at any
time.



         (f)   Gutters and downspouts. Existing gutters, leaders,
and downspouts shall be maintained in good working condition as to provide
proper drainage of stormwater. In no case shall stormwater be channeled into
the sanitary sewer system. Neither shall stormwater, ice, or snow be directed
onto, or channeled into the sanitary sewer. Neither shall stormwater, ice, or
snow be directed onto, or channeled across walkways or streets where it is
likely to be a hazard to life or health.



      (2)   Structural standards; stairways, porches, and balconies.
Every stairway, outside of a building and every porch or balcony, shall be
kept in safe condition and sound repair. Every flight of stairs and every
porch and balcony floor shall be free of deterioration. No flight of exterior
stairs shall have settled out of its intended position or have pulled away
from the supporting or adjacent structures enough to cause a hazard. No
flight of exterior stairs shall have rotting, loose, or deteriorating
supports.



   (F)   Enforcement and inspection. The Public Works Director shall
provide an annual inspection of properties within the city yearly between the
months of April and May to complete a list of public nuisances; this list
will then be given to the Police Department for its review of the properties
in question.



   (G)   Duties of city officers. The Police Department shall enforce
provisions of this section and shall assist the Public Works Director in the
enforcement of provisions relating to building maintenance affecting the
public safety. Such officers shall have the power to inspect private )
premises and take all reasonable precaution to prevent the commission and
maintenance of public nuisances.



   (H)   Abatement.



      (1)   Whenever the officer in charge of enforcement determines
that a public nuisance due to violation of the building maintenance
regulations exists on premises in the city, the officer shall notify in
writing the owner or occupant of the premises of such fact and order that
such nuisance be terminated and abated. The notice shall be served in person
or by mail. If the premises are not occupied and the owner is unknown, the
notice may be served by posting it on the premises.



      (2)   The notice shall specify the steps to be taken to abate
the nuisance and a reasonable time limit, not exceeding 30 days, within which
the nuisance is to be abated. If the notice is not complied with within the
time specified, the enforcing officer shall report that fact therewith to the
Council. Thereafter the Council may, after notice to the owner or occupant,
provide an opportunity to be heard, or provide for abating the nuisance by
the city.



      (3)   The notice shall be served in the same manner as notice
by the enforcing officer is served and shall be given at least ten days
before the date stated in the notice when the Council will consider the
matter. If notice is given by posting, at least 30 days shall elapse between
the day of posting and the hearing.



   (I)   Recovery of cost.



      (1)   The owner of premises on which a nuisance due to
violation of the building maintenance regulations has been abated by the city
shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of the abatement,
including administrative costs. As soon as the work has been completed and
the cost determined, the City Administrator shall prepare a bill for the cost
and mail it to the owner. Thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and
payable at the office of the City Administrator.



      (2)   In the event that the charges remain unpaid, the City
Administrator shall, on or before September 1 next following abatement of the
nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with all other such charges as
well as other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S. §
429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, against each separate lot or
parcel to which the charges are attributable.



      (3)   The Council may then spread the charges against such
property under that statute and other pertinent statutes for certification to
the County Auditor and collection along with current taxes the following year
or in annual installments, not exceeding ten, as the Council may determine in
each case.



(2006 Code, § 4.51)  (Ord. 132, Second Series, passed 7-24-1998)



Cross-reference:



   Owner or occupant permitting a public nuisance, see § 130.09



   Public nuisance, § 130.08



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or provision
of this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, or performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act
when such failure is prohibited or declared unlawful by a code adopted by
reference by this chapter, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.



(2006 Code, § 4.99)



CHAPTER 151:  PLATTING



Section




General Provisions




   151.01   General regulations



   151.02   Definitions



   151.03   Procedure



   151.04   Data required for preliminary and final plats



   151.05   Variances



   151.06   Registered land surveys and conveyance by metes and bounds



   151.07   Compliance



   151.08   Violations



   151.09   Engineering standards



   151.10   Required improvements and financial arrangements




Design Standards




   151.25   General design standards



   151.26   Streets and thoroughfares



   151.27   Alleys



   151.28   Easements



   151.29   Blocks



   151.30   Lots



   151.31   Public sites and open spaces



 



   151.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 151.01  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   This chapter is hereby adopted in order to safeguard the
best interest of the city and to assist the subdivider in coordinating his or
her developing plans with the aims and purposes of the city at large. It is
the purpose of these regulations to prevent the unregulated, piecemeal
development of new subdivisions which in turn might cause undesirable and
costly traffic circulation patterns and disrupt the unified scheme of
community development as set forth in the approved Comprehensive Plan for the
city.



      (2)   In order to accomplish the foregoing, all subdivision of
land hereafter submitted for approval to the Planning Commission shall, in
all respects, fully comply with the regulations set forth in this chapter.



      (3)   It is the intent of this chapter to provide regulations
and requirements for the platting of land within the city pursuant to the
authority stipulated in M.S. Chs. 429, 471, and 505, as they may be amended
from time to time, which regulations the Council deems necessary for the
health, safety, and general welfare of all residents.



   (B)   Jurisdiction.



      (1)   The regulations herein governing plats and the
subdivision of land shall apply within the corporate limits of the city and
the unincorporated area within two miles of its limits; provided, that where
a municipality lies less than four miles from the limits of the city, these
regulations shall apply only to a line equidistant from the city and said
municipality; and provided further, that the governing body or bodies of
unincorporated area adjacent to the city have not adopted ordinances for the
regulation of subdivision of land or platting.



      (2)   Copies of resolutions approving subdivision plats of
land outside the city, but not subject to its subdivision regulations, shall
be filed with the clerk of the town in which the land is situated.



   (C)   Application of chapter.



      (1)   Any plat, hereafter made, for each subdivision or each
part thereof lying within the jurisdiction of this chapter, shall be
prepared, presented for approval, and recorded as herein prescribed.



      (2)   The regulations contained herein shall apply to the
subdivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts,
or other division of land for the purpose of sale or building development,
whether immediate or future, including the resubdivision or replatting of
land or lots.



      (3)   Division of land in tracts larger than two and one-half
acres in area and 150 feet in width shall be exempt from the requirements of
this chapter.



   (D)   Approvals necessary for acceptance of subdivision plats.
Before any plat shall be recorded or be of any validity, it shall have been
approved by the Planning Commission and by the Council, as having fulfilled
the requirements of this chapter.



(2006 Code, § 12.01)



§ 151.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY. A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access
to abutting property.



   BLOCK. An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by
streets, or by streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the
subdivision, or a combination of the above with a river or lake.



   BOULEVARD. The portion of the street right-of-way between the curb line
and property line.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The group of maps, charts, and texts that make up
the comprehensive long-range plan of the city.



   DESIGN STANDARDS. The specifications to land owners or subdividers for
the preparation of plats, both preliminary and final, indicating among other
things, the optimum, minimum, or maximum dimensions of such items as
right-of-way, blocks, easements, and lots.



   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land
for the purpose of constructing and maintaining utilities, including, but not
limited to, sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines,
storm sewer, or storm drainage ways and gas lines.



   FINAL PLAT. A drawing or map of a subdivision, meeting all the
requirements of the city and in such form as required by the county for
purposes of recording.



   LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for
building development or for transfer of ownership.



   OWNER. Includes the plural as well as the singular, and where
appropriate shall include a natural person, partnership, firm, association,
public or quasi-public corporation, private corporation, or a combination of
any of them.



   PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS. Public lands and open spaces in the city
dedicated or reserved for recreation purposes.



   PEDESTRIAN WAY. A public or private right-of-way across a block or
within a block to provide access, to be used by pedestrians and which may be
used for the installation of utility lines.



   PERCENTAGE OF GRADE. On-street center line means the distance
vertically (up or down) from the horizontal in feet and tenths of a foot for
each one hundred feet of horizontal distance.



   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the city.



   PRELIMINARY PLAT. A tentative drawing or map of a proposed subdivision
meeting requirements herein enumerated.



   PROTECTIVE COVENANTS. Contracts made between private parties as to the
manner in which land may be used, with the view to protecting and preserving
the physical and economic integrity of any given area.



   ROAD. See STREET.



   SKETCH PLAN. An informal plan describing the proposed subdivision
development drawn prior to the preliminary plat application.



   STREET. A public right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians
and vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, lane, place, or however otherwise designated.



   STREET, THOROUGHFARE, or ARTERIAL STREET. Those used primarily for
heavy traffic, and serving as an arterial traffic way between the various
districts of the community, as shown on the Comprehensive Plan.



   STREET, COLLECTORS. Those that carry traffic from minor streets to the
major system of thoroughfares and highways, including the principal entrance
streets of residential districts, as show on the Comprehensive Plan.



   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street with only one outlet and having an
appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.



   STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS. Minor streets which are parallel and adjacent
to thoroughfares and highways, and which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.



   STREET, MINOR. Those which are used primarily for access to abutting
properties.



   STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between lines of lots delineating
the street right-of-way.



   SUBDIVISION. A described tract of land which is to be or has been
divided into two or more lots or parcels, any of which resultant parcels is
less than two and one-half acres in area, or 150 feet in width, for the
purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or, if dedication
of a public street is involved, any division of a parcel of land. The term
includes RESUBDIVISION and, where it is appropriate to the context, relates
either to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.



   SUBDIVIDER. Any person commencing proceedings under this chapter to
effect a subdivision of land.



   TANGENT. A straight line which is perpendicular to the radius of a
curve where a tangent meets a curve.



   VERTICAL CURVE. The surface curvature on a street, road, or highway
center line located between lines of different percentage of grade.



(2006 Code, § 12.02)



§ 151.03  PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Sketch plan.



      (1)   Prior to the filing of an application for conditional
approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit for review with
the Planning Commission staff, subdivision sketch plans which shall contain
the following information: tract boundaries; north point; description of
nature and purpose of tract; streets and alleys on and adjacent to the tract;
significant topographical and physical features; proposed general street
layout; and proposed general lot layout.



      (2)   Such sketch plans will be considered as submitted for
informal and confidential discussion between the subdivider and the
Commission staff. Submission of a subdivision sketch plan shall not
constitute formal filing of a plat with the Commission.



      (3)   As far as may be practical on the basis of a sketch
plan, the Commission staff will informally advise the subdivider as promptly
as possible of the extent to which the proposed subdivision conforms to the
design standards of this chapter and will discuss possible plan modifications
necessary to ensure conformance.



   (B)   Procedure for conditional approval of preliminary plat.



      (1)   The tracing and eight dark line prints of the
preliminary plat and the original and eight dark copies of sheets of data
accompany the plat shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, along with
written application for conditional approval, who shall issue a receipt for
same, dated as of the date of filing. If satisfactory, the original and two
copies of everything shall be retained for the Planning Commission, and one
copy given to the City Administrator for the Council and five copies to the
City Utility and Street Departments.



      (2)   Under each of the following conditions, one additional
copy of everything shall be required in filing and shall be transmitted to
the official referred to, with advice to the effect that any recommendations
for consideration by the Planning Commission in acting on the plat should be
received within 14 days after the date of filing.



         (a)   When land to be subdivided lies outside the
corporate limits of the city, the County Highway Engineer of the appropriate
county.



         (b)   When such land abuts on a state trunk highway, the
State Highway Commissioner.



      (3)   Not less than five days before the date of a meeting of
the Planning Commission at which a preliminary plat is scheduled for
consideration, the Secretary will so notify by U.S. mail the subdivider and
the record owners of the property immediately adjoining the land within the
plat. The Planning Commission shall act on such plat and give due
consideration to any recommendations received.



      (4)   Before approval of a preliminary plat by the Planning
Commission, the Zoning Administrator and Council shall have reviewed and
forwarded recommendations, when necessary, which take into consideration the
prospective character of the development of the area included in the plat and
of the surrounding territory, and shall be satisfied that the prospective
development will conform to the land use plan, or other portions of the
Comprehensive Plan, density of population, kinds, widths, and orientation of
streets and kinds, locations, and sizes of other public areas and facilities.



      (5)   It is the intent of these regulations that the
subdivider file for conditional approval of the preliminary plat with the
Zoning Administrator, and that the action regarding such conditional approval
shall issue from the Planning Commission following consideration at a meeting
for which the preliminary plat is scheduled. Such consideration shall involve
recommendations, if any, from the Council and the City Engineer, and other
concerned officials where necessary.



      (6)   If the Planning Commission fails to act within a
reasonable time as fixed by the Council, the Zoning Administrator shall
advise the subdivider of any and all recommendations received with respect
thereto and shall negotiate with him or her to the end that such of these
recommendations as may be consistent with these regulations shall be
satisfied. Thereupon, the preliminary plat shall be re-submitted to the
Planning Commission for action before the final plat is made.



      (7)   (a)   Conditional approval of a preliminary plat
shall not constitute approval of the final plat (subdivision plat). Rather,
it shall be deemed to be an expression of approval to the layout submitted on
the preliminary plat, and act as an authorization and guide to proceed with
the preparation of the final plat.



         (b)   This approval of the preliminary plat shall be
effective for a period of six months, unless an extension is granted by the
Council. The subdivider may file a final plat limited to such portion of the
preliminary plat which he or she proposes to record and develop at the time;
provided, that such portion must conform to all requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   Procedure for approval of final plat.



      (1)   (a)   After review and approval of the preliminary
plat by the Council and Planning Commission, the subdivider shall cause the
subdivision to be surveyed, staked, and monumented by a qualified land
surveyor or registered engineer.



         (b)   Where permanent monuments are not already in
place, monuments consisting of iron rods at least one inch and a quarter in
diameter and 48 inches in length and encased in concrete at least four inches
in diameter shall be set at the intersections of all boundary angles of the
subdivision and at the intersections of street, alley, and boundary lines,
all flush with the finished grade except that those within a roadway may be
set at sub-grade level.



         (c)   Iron rods of one inch and a quarter or more in
diameter and 24 inches or more in length, set flush with the finished grade,
shall be located at the boundary angles, intersections, and points of
curvature of all lot, street, alley, and boundary lines, where permanent
monuments are not set. Offset markers will be permitted in situations
prohibiting the placing of markers in the locations described above. The
exact location of all markers shall be shown on the final plat, together with
accurate internal angles, bearing, and distances.



      (2)   The plat may then be prepared in final form, and both
survey and plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved, including
the required modifications.



      (3)   The final plat shall be drawn in accordance with the
state statutes.



      (4)   The Zoning Administrator shall check the final plat and
accompanying data for conformity with the law, this code of ordinances, and
with these regulations, and any conditions or modifications of the
preliminary plat, and shall also check the plat and survey for required
accuracy, before accepting the plat for filing. A traverse of the boundaries
of the plat and of all lots and blocks, when computed from field measurements
of the ground, must close within a limit of error of one foot to 5,000 feet
of perimeter. The final plat and at least four dark line prints thereof, with
required data accompanying each, shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator
within six months after the date of approval of the preliminary plat.



      (5)   The final plat shall be submitted, along with written
application for approval of the final plat, at least ten days prior to a
Commission meeting at which consideration is requested. Approval or
disapproval of the final plat will be conveyed to the subdivider in writing
within ten days after the meeting of the Planning Commission at which such
plat was considered. In case the plat is disapproved, the subdivider shall be
notified of the reason for such action and what requirements shall be
necessary to meet the approval of the Commission.



      (6)   After a review and approval of the final plat by the
Planning Commission, such final plat, together with the recommendations of
the Planning Commission shall be submitted to the Council for approval. If
accepted, the final plat shall be approved by resolution, which resolution
shall provide for the acceptance of all streets, alleys, easements or other
public ways, and parks, or other open spaces dedicated to public purposes.
Failure of the Council to act on the application within 60 days shall be
deemed as approval. If disapproved, the grounds for any refusal to approve a
plat shall be set forth in the proceedings of the Council and reported to the
person or persons applying for such approval.



(2006 Code, § 12.03)



§ 151.04  DATA REQUIRED FOR PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLATS.



   (A)   Preliminary plat requirements.



      (1)   A preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn on
tracing paper, tracing cloth, or Mylar of good quality and all prints or
copies thereof shall be clear and legible. The size of the tracing should be
the same as the size used for the final plat. It shall be at a scale of 100
feet to one inch or more, showing clearly all details thereof.



      (2)   A preliminary plat, together with such accompanying
sheets of data and other materials as are needed for the purpose, shall show
the following:



         (a)   The proposed names of subdivision, north arrow,
scale, and date of preparation;



         (b)   Names and addresses of the owners, lien holders,
subdivider, surveyor, or engineer, and designer;



         (c)   Sufficient legal description to define the
location of and boundary of the land to be divided and the location and names
of all existing subdivisions, streets (and street widths), and unsubdivided
property and ownership adjoining the proposed subdivision, between it and the
nearest existing streets and for a distance of not less than 600 feet beyond
the boundaries of the subdivision, zoning on and adjacent to the subdivision.
Also: photographs, when required by the Planning Commission, identifying
camera location, directions of views, and key numbers;



         (d)   A sketch, approximately to scale, clearly
indicating an ultimate street and block layout for the entire ownership, when
only a portion is proposed to be subdivided first;



         (e)   Locations, names, widths, and existing and
proposed finished grades of all streets, highways, major thoroughfares, and
alleys;



         (f)   Locations and width of all easements and
rights-of-way for drainage, sewerage, public utilities, or railroads, or for
other purposes;



         (g)   Lot lines with approximate dimensions;



         (h)   Radii of all curves;



         (i)   Designation of areas which, before improvements,
are subject to inundation or stream water overflow, and location of all water
courses and drainage ditches;



         (j)   Proposed uses of the lots and parcels, proposed
building setback (front yard) lines, minimum areas for building sites, other
area requirements, and bulk and height requirements or restrictions, and an
outline of proposed deed restrictions;



         (k)   Designation of proposed public streets, alleys,
rights-of-way, easements, and other areas proposed to be dedicated for public
purposes, and their purposes;



         (l)   Locations and types of existing structures,
locations of large trees, and other ground cover, and contours at an interval
of one foot or at an interval of not more than five feet if the latter is
acceptable to the reviewing authority;



         (m)   The name and address of the person to whom notice
of the Planning Commission’s hearing on the plat shall be sent;



         (n)   Accompanying the preliminary plat shall be a plan
showing grades and profiles of the streets and the approximate location of
utilities; and



         (o)   A certificate by the Utility Departments or other
designated authority that all utilities, improvements have been discussed and
preliminary planning made.



   (B)   Final plat requirements.



      (1)   The final plat shall be drawn in accordance with the
provisions of state statutes.



      (2)   The final plat shall show:



         (a)   The name of the subdivision, scale, north arrow,
and date;



         (b)   Names and addresses of owners, lien holders,
subdivider, surveyor, and designer. Names of record owners of adjoining
unplatted land;



         (c)   Primary control points or descriptions and ties to
such control points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearing, elevations,
and similar data shall be referred;



         (d)   Subdivision boundary lines, side and center lines
of streets, and other rights-of-way, lines of easements, lot lines, lines of
all other sites, and of all reservations; with accurate dimensions, bearings,
or deflection angles, and radii, arcs, and central angles of all curves;



         (e)   Location and description of monuments. At least
three iron or stone monuments shall be placed at some corners in the ground
in such a way that the lines between the monument form two or more base lines
from which to make future surveys;



         (f)   Names and widths of streets and other
rights-of-way;



         (g)   Widths and purposes of easements;



         (h)   Block numbers, consecutive;



         (i)   Lot numbers, consecutive, starting with the figure
“I” in each block;



         (j)   Dedication of any sites, in addition to streets,
alleys, rights-of-way, and easements, and the purpose;



         (k)   Owners’ statement offering streets, alleys,
rights-of-way, and public areas for dedication to the public;



         (l)   Certificate of title or abstract showing ownership;



         (m)   Other data, certificates, affidavits, and
endorsement that may be required by the Planning Commission or the Council;



         (n)   Accompanying the final plat shall be restrictive
covenants, if any, in form for recording. On the plat shall be written an
instrument of dedication which shall be signed and acknowledged by the owner
of the land; and



         (o)   Accompanying the final plat shall be a plan
showing grades and profiles of streets and the approximate location of
utilities and a certificate by the Utility Departments that all utilities
improvements have been discussed and preliminary planning made.



      (3)   The surveyor shall certify under oath on the plat that
it is a correct representation of the survey, that all distances are
correctly shown on the plat, that the monuments for guidance of future
surveys have been correctly placed in the ground as shown, that the outside
boundary lines are correctly designated on the plat, and that the topography
of the land is correctly shown in the plat.



      (4)   No plan will be approved for a subdivision which covers
an area subject to periodic flooding or which contains extremely poor
drainage facilities and which would make adequate drainage of the streets and
lots impossible, unless the subdivider agrees to make improvements which
will, in the opinion of the Council, make the area completely safe for
occupancy and provide adequate street and lot drainage.



      (5)   Certification showing that all taxes and special
assessments currently due on the property to be subdivided have been paid in
full.



(2006 Code, § 12.04)  (Ord. 131, passed 12-24-1971; Ord. 24, 3rd Series,
passed 6-18-1981)



§ 151.05  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   The Council may grant a variance from these regulations
following a finding that all of the following conditions exist:



         (a)    There are special circumstances or conditions
affecting said property such that the strict application of the provisions of
this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his or her
land;



         (b)   The variance is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner; or



         (c)   The granting of the variance will not be
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the
territory in which said property is situated.



      (2)   In making this finding, the Council shall consider the
nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the
vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed
subdivision, and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic
conditions in the vicinity. In granting a variance as herein provided, the
Council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems desirable or necessary
to the public interest.



   (B)   Special application requirements.



      (1)   Application for any such variance shall be made in
writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for
the consideration of the Planning Commission and the Council, stating fully
and clearly all facts relied upon by the petitioner, and shall be
supplemented with maps, plans, or other additional data which may aid the
Planning Commission and Council in the analysis of the proposed project. The
plans for such development shall include such covenants, restrictions, or
other legal provisions necessary to guarantee the full achievement of the
plan.



      (2)   In all cases where applications for variance are
submitted for conditional approval along with the preliminary plat, the
action on such conditional approval shall issue from the Council. Where a
petition for variance is not involved, the Planning Commission may grant
conditional approval subject to procedural requirements stated in this
chapter.



(2006 Code, § 12.06)



§ 151.06  REGISTERED LAND SURVEYS AND CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS.



   (A)   Registered land surveyors.



      (1)   It is the intention of this chapter that all registered
land surveys in the city should be presented to the Planning Commission in
the form of a preliminary plat in accordance with the standards set forth in
this chapter for preliminary plats and that the Planning Commission shall
first approve the arrangement, sizes, and relationship of proposed tracts in
such registered land surveys, and that tracts to be used as easements or
roads should be so dedicated.



      (2)   Unless such approvals have been obtained from the
Planning Commission and Council in accordance with standards set forth in
this chapter, land use and zoning permits will be withheld for buildings on
tracts which have been so subdivided by registered land surveys and the city
may refuse to take over tracts as streets or roads or to improve, repair, or
maintain any such tracts unless so approved.



   (B)   Conveyance by metes and bounds. No conveyance of two or more
parcels in which the land conveyed is described by metes and bounds shall be
made or recorded if the parcels described in the conveyance are less than two
and one-half acres in area and 150 feet in width unless such parcel was a
separate parcel of record at the effective date of this chapter. Land use and
zoning permits will be withheld for buildings on tracts which have been
subdivided and conveyed by this method and the city may refuse to take over
tracts as streets or roads or to improve, repair or maintain any such tracts.



(2006 Code, § 12.07)



§ 151.07  COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   Conditions for recording plat. No plat of any subdivision
shall be entitled to record in the County Register of Deeds Office or have
any validity until the plat thereof has been prepared, approved, and
acknowledged in the manner prescribed by this chapter.



   (B)   Land use and zoning permits. No land use and zoning permits
will be issued by the city for the construction of any building structure or
improvement to the land or to any lot in a subdivision, as defined herein,
until all requirements of this chapter have been fully complied with.



(2006 Code, § 12.08)



§ 151.08  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Sale of lots from unrecorded plats. It is unlawful to sell,
trade, or otherwise convey or offer to sell, trade, or otherwise convey any
lot or parcel of land as a part of, or in conformity with, any plan, plat or
replat of any subdivision or portion of the city unless said plan, plat or
replat shall have first been recorded in the Office of the County Register of
Deeds.



   (B)   Receiving or recording unapproved plats. It is unlawful to
receive or record in any public office any plans, plats, or replats of land
laid out in building lots and streets, alleys, or other portions of the same
intended to be dedicated to public or private use, or for the use of
purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent thereto, and located
within the jurisdiction of this chapter, unless the same shall bear thereon,
by endorsement or otherwise, the approval of the Planning Commission and the
Council.



(2006 Code, § 12.09)  (Ord. 131, passed 12-24-1971)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.09  ENGINEERING STANDARDS.



   (A)   Monuments; survey monuments. All subdivision boundary corners,
block corners, street intersection corners, and points of tangency and
curvature shall be marked with survey monuments consisting of galvanized
pipes with caps minimum one-inch deformed steel rods 36 inches in length. Lot
corners shall be marked with survey monuments consisting of iron pipes, iron
rods, or other metal markers. All United States, state, county, and other
official bench marks, monuments, or triangulation stations in or adjacent to
the property shall be preserved in precise position.



   (B)   Streets.



      (1)   Street grading. Streets shall be graded in accordance
with a plan approved by the Public Works Director. The grading shall include
the full street width of the right-of-way and shall provide a boulevard
section, in addition to the minimum pavement width.



      (2)   Street pavement. The design of street pavement for all
streets covered by this regulation shall be in accordance with Standard
Specifications for Highway Construction, M.H.D. and the State Highway
Department Road Design Manual No. 5-291 for flexible pavements. The designed
thickness of the surfacing elements shall be in accordance with the flexible
pavement design standard for road classifications as follows.



 


Classification

 

Pavement Design Axle Load



Minor streets and marginal access streets
 

7-ton minimum



Thoroughfare collector streets and commercial or industrial service streets
 

9-ton minimum




 



      (3)   Gravel surface. Streets that at the present time will
only have a gravel surface shall be designed so the base and sub-base
requirements as set forth in the Standards for Highway Construction, M.H.D.
and the State Highway Department Road Design Manual No. 5-291 for flexible
pavements are met. In all cases at least the top six inches of the street
surface shall be of Class 5 gravel or a material as approved by the Public
Works Director.



      (4)   Curb and gutter. Concrete curb and gutter shall be in
accordance with Standard Specifications for Highway Design No. 8618, or
M.H.D. Design No. S-518.



      (5)   Sidewalks and pedestrian ways. All required walks shall
be concrete four inches thick placed on a four inch gravel base. Grades shall
be as approved by the Public Works Director. Sidewalks shall be placed in the
public right-of-way with a minimum six feet width.



   (C)   Public utilities.



      (1)   Water main. A minimum water main of six-inch c900 pipe
or other approved pipe shall be required. Mains over six inches in size may
be required.



      (2)   Sanitary sewer. Unless otherwise required, a sanitary
sewer of eight-inch pipe, ASTM Schedule 30.34 MDOT Regulation, shall be
installed as the minimum size placed at grades approved by the Public Works
Director. Mains over eight inches in size may be required. Service wyes shall
be four inches.



      (3)   House services. Each house service shall be run from the
main to the property line where a cap or plug shall be placed until the
service is extended to the structure. A one-inch Type K copper water service,
corporation cock, curb box and stop, and four-inch pipe, ASTM Schedule 30.34
MDOT Regulation, sewer service shall be the minimum requirements and may be
placed in a common trench.



   (D)   Sanitation.



      (1)   Where lots cannot be connected with a public sewerage
system, provisions must be made for sanitary sewerage facilities, consisting
of individual disposal devices for each lot. This does not mean that the
installation of individual disposal devices shall be at the expense of the
subdivider.



      (2)   Any subdivision or lot not provided with off-site sewer
facilities may be subject to soil and percolation tests being made to
determine whether or not the lot size proposed will meet minimum standards of
health and sanitation requested by the Planning Commission due to limitation
of soils as shown on existing soils maps. The lot area and topography must be
such that it will accommodate an adequate disposal system or systems to serve
the residence for the estimated unsewered years as determined by the Council.
Such tests shall be made at the expense of the subdivider, and a sketch map
shall be submitted to identify the specific locations where tests were made.



      (3)   All proposed sewage disposal systems shall comply with
the regulations and recommended standards of the State Department of Health,
the State Pollution Control Agency, and the city.



   (E)   House plumbing. When an individual sewage system is used and
the septic tank is placed on a side other than that from which the public
sewer line would connect, it shall be required that a capped sewage disposal
line shall be extended from the point of ground entrance of basement or house
to a point three feet beyond and to the side from which the future sewer
connection will be made. Inside the basement the elbow shall be set up to be
easily reversed for connection to the capped line.



   (F)   Drainage. All surface and underground drainage systems shall
be installed to adequately remove all natural drainage that accumulates on
the developed property. All such systems shall be in conformity to the city
drainage plans and all piping shall provide complete removal and a permanent
solution for the removal of drainage water.



   (G)   Boulevard trees. Tree varieties shall comply with
“boulevards tree policy”.



   (H)   Utilities location. Every lot in a subdivision shall be
capable of being served by all utilities, and where required casements shall
be provided with approval by the Utility Superintendents. All utility
distribution lines shall be installed within public right-of-way or within
property designated easements. When practicable and feasible, all utilities
shall be placed underground and shall be completed prior to street surfacing.
All utility lines for telephone, cable television, and electrical services
shall be placed in rear line easements when carried on overhead poles.



   (I)   Inspection. All required improvements shall be inspected by
the Public Works Director. Construction at the expense of the subdivider.



(2006 Code, § 12.10)



§ 151.10  REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS.



   (A)   Improvement required. Prior to the approval of a plat by the
Council, the subdivider shall have agreed, in the manner set forth below, to
install, in conformity with approved construction plans and in conformity
with all applicable standards and provisions of this code of ordinances, the
following improvements on the site.



      (1)   Survey monuments. All subdivision boundary corners,
block and lot corners, road intersection corners, and points of tangency and
curvature shall be marked with survey monuments meeting the minimum
requirements of state law. All United States, state, county, and other
official bench marks, monuments, or triangulation stations in or adjacent to
the property shall be preserved in precise position unless a relocation is
approved by the controlling agency.



      (2)   Streets. The street shall be graded to the grades and
dimensions shown on plans and profiles approved by the Council and shall
include the following improvements:



         (a)   Suitable drainage structures, culverts, storm
sewers, ditches, and related installations such as designated lots for runoff
basins, shall be provided to ensure adequate drainage of all points along the
streets;



         (b)   All streets shall be surfaced with stabilized
gravel to a surface width as approved by the Public Works Director; and



         (c)   When a street within a subdivision has 35% or more
of the lots sold and buildings are constructed and occupied by individual
property owners, the property owners may petition the city to pave their
streets and install curb and gutter. The costs for paving and installing curb
and gutter shall be borne by special tax assessments against those property
owners. Petition for street paving may occur if less than 35% of the
subdivision is occupied when the subdivision developer(s) are also in favor
of such street improvements by special tax assessments.



      (3)   Storm drainage. The construction of a storm drainage
system shall conform to specification by the Public Works Director. When
storm sewers are not installed in a subdivision, areas within the subdivision
shall be designated as runoff basins to ensure adequate drainage of all
points along a street.



      (4)   Water mains. Where mains from a public water system are
available, as determined by the Council, the subdivider shall be required to
install water mains with a connection for each lot.



      (5)   Public sanitary sewer. In all cases where trunk line
sanitary sewer facilities are available, the subdivider shall be required to
install sanitary sewers in the plan and convert the same to such trunk line
sewer. If such facilities are not available but it is expected that they will
be within five years, the Council may require that such sewers, together with
all necessary laterals extending from the main sewer to the street curb shall
be installed and capped for future connection as services become available.
In the event the subdivider may also install on-site disposal units provided
they are so located as to permit easy and the least expensive connection to
the sewer when it becomes available and usable. When such on-site units are
installed, the subdivider shall provide underground plumbing to extend three
feet beyond the footing, which plumbing shall be plugged. The area around the
stack shall be scored so that the septic tank line can be disconnected and
connection can be made with the public sanitary sewer system.



   (B)   Payment for installation of improvements. The required
improvements as listed elsewhere are to be furnished and installed at the
sole expense of the subdivider with provision available for financing by the
city under the “special assessment policy”. Further, if any improvement
installed within the subdivision will be of substantial benefit to lands
beyond the boundaries of the subdivision, provision may be made for causing a
portion of the cost of the improvement, representing the benefit of such
lands, to be assessed against the same. In such a situation, the subdivider
will be required only to pay for such portion of the whole cost of said
improvements as will represent the benefit to the property within the
subdivision.



   (C)   Agreement providing for the installation of improvements.



      (1)   Prior to the installation of any required improvements
and prior to approval of the plat, the subdivider shall enter into a contract
in writing with the city requiring the subdivider to furnish and construct
said improvements at his or her sole cost and in accordance with plans and
specifications and usual contract conditions.



      (2)   This shall include provision for supervision of details
of construction by the engineer and shall grant to the engineer authority to
correlate the work to be done under said contract by any subcontractor
authorized to proceed thereunder and with any other work being done or
contracted by the city in the completion of part or all of the improvements
covered thereby prior to acceptance of the plat.



      (3)   The time for completion of the work and the several
parts thereof shall be determined by the Council, upon recommendation of the
Public Works Director, after consultation with the subdivider. It shall be
reasonable with relation to the work to be done, the seasons of the year, and
proper correlation with construction activities in the plat and subdivision.



   (D)   Construction plans and inspection.



      (1)   Construction plans for the required improvements
conforming in all respects with the standards and provisions of this code of
ordinances shall be prepared at the subdivider’s expense by a professional
engineer who is registered in the state, and said plans shall contain his or
her certificate. Such plans, together with the quantities of construction
items, shall be submitted to the engineer for his or her approval and for his
or her estimate of the total costs of the required improvement. Upon
approval, such plans shall become a part of the required contract. The
tracings of the plans approved by the engineer, plus two prints shall be
furnished to the city to be filed as a public record.



      (2)   All required improvements on the site that are to be
installed under the provisions of this regulation shall be inspected during
the course of construction by the Public Works Director at the subdivider’s
expense, and acceptance by the Council shall be subject to the engineer’s
certificate of compliance with the contract.



   (E)   Trunk facilities. Where a larger size water main, sanitary
sewer, storm drain, or similar facility is required to serve areas outside
the subdivision, the larger facility required must be constructed. Additional
cost is to be borne by the benefitting properties. The assessments are to be
determined accordingly by the Council.



   (F)   Alternate installation and incomplete improvements.



      (1)   It is hereby the announced policy of the Council that
full and complete utility systems be installed in all needed areas as soon as
is practicable and feasible. Accordingly, the city shall order in such
improvements as soon as it is practicable after final approval of a
subdivision with installation within the subdivision of such improvements as
may be determined to be necessary.



      (2)   In the event of small subdivisions or in subdivisions in
which development may proceed slowly, or in other events in which the
construction of surfaced streets, sidewalks, utility lines, or other
improvements is clearly not feasible, immediately following the approval of
the plat, the Council may elect to commence assessment proceedings, or
otherwise move to finance and install improvements when the subdivision is
developed to the point of warranting the improvements.



      (3)   Such improvements are required in order to provide
greater assurance of public health, assure reliability of water supply,
provide for economy of installation, provide more effective fire fighting
through hydrants, and otherwise protect the public health, safety,
convenience, and general welfare.



(2006 Code, § 12.11)  (Ord. 30, 3rd Series, passed 6-23-1983)




DESIGN STANDARDS




§ 151.25  GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   General design, street pattern, street widths, proposed
private and public area, facilities and uses, and proposed density of
population, shall conform to applicable plans, ordinances, and regulations,
including: major thoroughfare plan; land use plan; other portions of the
Comprehensive Plan; building and zoning regulations and other applicable
regulations; and the official map adopted by reference.



   (B)   Valuable topographic and scenic features and ground cover
shall be preserved and retained to the maximum possible extent. Drainage
shall be provided for in the subdivision by adequate storm drains or by
maintenance of natural drainage channels.



(2006 Code, § 12.05)



§ 151.26  STREETS AND THOROUGHFARES.



   (A)   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location
of all streets shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan and shall be
considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographic
conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate
relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.



   (B)   Where such is not shown in the Comprehensive Plan, the
arrangement of existing principal streets in a subdivision shall either:



      (1)   Provide for the continuation of appropriate projection
of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or



      (2)   Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or
adopted by the Planning Commission and Council to meet a particular situation
where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to
existing streets impracticable.



   (C)   The street pattern shall be adequate to serve platted lots
when developed and shall not be such as to obstruct the development of
adjoining unsubdivided lands in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan and
platting, existing or proposed, as shown on the official map.



   (D)   Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through
traffic will be discouraged.



   (E)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial street, the Planning Commission may require marginal access streets,
reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation
along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such
other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential
properties and which will afford separation of through and local traffic.



   (F)   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad
right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the Planning Commission
may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such
right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the
intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for
commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances
shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach
grades and future grade separations.



   (G)   Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 100 feet
shall be prohibited.



   (H)   Streets shall intersect or intercept each other at right
angles with variation of not more than ten degrees permitted when considered
necessary.



   (I)   Names of streets which are extensions of existing streets
shall be the same. No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be
confused with the names of separate existing streets. Street names shall be
subject to the approval of the Council.



   (J)   At residential street corners the street lines (property
lines) at each corner shall be connected by a circular arc having a radius of
not less than ten feet, and the curb line (or lines designating outside edges
of roadways) shall be connected by a circular arc having a radius of not less
than 15 feet. At business and industrial corners, these lines shall be
similarly connected by arcs or their equivalent chords according to standards
approved by the Council.



   (K)   Half-width streets shall be prohibited except where essential
to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of these regulations. Where an existing, half-width street
adjoins a portion of the boundary of a proposed subdivision, street
dedication in a width needed to make this a full width street may be required.



   (L)   Streets for residential development shall not be less than 80
feet in width. Dead-end streets shall be less than 500 feet in length
wherever possible. The roadway diameter at the dead-end shall be not less
than 100 feet and the street property line diameter not less than 120 feet.



   (M)   (1)   Unlimited access to railroads, trunk highway, and
major thoroughfares including all limited-access traffic ways, shall be
discouraged.



      (2)   Local service streets parallel to any such facility or
the rearing of lots upon its right-of-way line with intersections at
infrequent intervals only, four or less per mile, and at regular spacing
shall be encouraged.



   (N)   (1)   For all public ways hereafter dedicated and accepted,
the minimum right-of-way widths for streets and thoroughfares shall be shown
on the Comprehensive Plan and where not shown therein, the minimum
right-of-way width for streets, arterial highways, or pedestrian ways
included in any subdivision shall not be less than the minimum dimensions for
each classifications as follows:



 


Class

 

Desirable

 

Acceptable





Alley
 


 

20 feet



Collector streets
 

80 feet

 

80 feet



Local streets
 


 

80 feet



Marg. Serv. Acc. Roads
 


 

50 feet



Minor arterial highway
 


 

80 feet



Pedestrian way
 


 

10 feet



Principal arterial highway
 

104 feet

 

80 feet





 



      (2)   Where existing or anticipated traffic on principal and
minor arterial highways warrants greater widths of rights-of-way, these shall
be required.



(2006 Code, § 12.05)



§ 151.27  ALLEYS.



   (A)   Alleys shall be required at the rears of lots to be used for
single or multiple dwellings, commercial, industrial and institutional
purposes, lots fronting trunk highways, and major thoroughfares and lots
needing a second means of access.



   (B)   Alleys shall be not less than 20 feet in width.



   (C)   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be
avoided, but, where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to
permit safe vehicular movement.



   (D)   Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if
unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities at the
dead-end, as determined by the Planning Commission.



(2006 Code, § 12.05)



§ 151.28  EASEMENTS.



   (A)   An easement for utilities, at least ten feet width, shall be
provided along each side of a side line of lots and/or the rear line of lots
where necessary to form a continuous right-of-way, at least 20 feet in width.
If necessary for the extension of main water or sewer lines, electrical
transformer pads or similar utilities, easements of greater width may be
required along lot lines or across lots.



   (B)   Utility easements shall connect with easements established in
adjoining properties. These easements, when approved, shall not thereafter be
changed without the approval of the Council, by Ordinance, upon the
recommendation of the Planning Commission.



   (C)   Additional easements for pole guys should be provided at the
outside of turns. Where possible, lot lines shall be arranged to bisect the
exterior angle so that pole guys will fall along side lot lines.



   (D)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage
way, channel, or stream, a stormwater easement, drainage right-of-way, or
park dedication, whichever the Planning Commission may deem the most
adequate, conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse shall
be provided, together with such further width or construction, or both, as
will be adequate for the stormwater drainage of the area. The width of such
easements shall be determined by the Planning Commission.



   (E)   Easements intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall
be avoided, but, where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to
permit safe vehicular movement.



(2006 Code, § 12.05)



§ 151.29  BLOCKS.



   (A)   The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks, and lots within
blocks, shall be determined with due regard to:



      (1)   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the
special needs of the principal and all required accessory uses;



      (2)   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions, and
provisions regulating off-street parking and loading spaces;



      (3)   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and
safety of street traffic; and



      (4)   Limitations and opportunities of topography.



   (B)   Residential blocks shall normally be of sufficient width for
two tiers of lots. Block lengths shall be determined by circulation and other
needs. Where residential blocks with lots deeper than 200 feet are proposed,
a reservation for a future street through the middle of the block,
longitudinally, may be required.



   (C)   Pedestrian crosswalks, not less than ten feet wide, shall be
required where deemed essential to provide circulation, or access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other community facilities.



(2006 Code, § 12.05)



§ 151.30  LOTS.



   (A)   The lot size, width, depth, shape, and orientation, and the
minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the
subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated.



   (B)   Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning
Chapter.



      (1)   (a)   No residential lot shall be less than 9,000
square feet in area, 75 feet in widths at the building line, and 120 feet in
depth. A corner lot shall have extra width for setback of a building
adequately from both streets.



         (b)   No residential lot not served by public sewer and
public water supply shall be less than 22,000 square feet in area; provided,
that a lot served by public water supply but not public sewer may have a
minimum area of 11,000 square feet.



      (2)   Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for
commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the
off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and
development contemplated;



      (3)   Ordinarily side lines of lots shall be at right angles
to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines;



      (4)   Double-frontage, and reverse-frontage lots, should be
avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential
development from traffic arteries or to overcome special disadvantages of
topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten feet,
and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along
the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use;
and



      (5)   The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide,
by means of a public street, each lot with satisfactory access to an existing
public street for purposes of firefighting, utilities, and other public and
quasi-public services.



(2006 Code, § 12.05)



§ 151.31  PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES.



   (A)   In subdividing land or re-subdividing an existing plat, due
consideration shall be given to the subdivider and by the Planning Commission
upon review, to the dedication or reservation of suitable sites for schools,
parks, playgrounds, conservation areas, or other public or semi-public
recreational areas or open spaces. Areas so dedicated or reserved shall
conform as nearly as possible to the Comprehensive Plan. Whenever the
Comprehensive Plan shows the proposed park or recreational area partially or
completely within a proposed subdivision, the preliminary and final plats of
said subdivision shall show the proposed site as reserved and the city shall
have one year from the date of the approval of the preliminary plat by the
Planning Commission in which to purchase said land or to initiate
condemnation proceedings with respect thereto.



   (B)   Where deemed essential by the Planning Commission, upon
consideration of the particular type of development proposed in the
subdivision, and especially in larger scale neighborhood unit developments
not anticipated in the Comprehensive Plan, the Planning Commission may
require the dedication or reservation of such other areas or sites of a
character, extent, and location suitable to the needs created by such a
development for schools, parks, and other neighborhood purposes. When so
desired, the Planning Commission may recommend, and the Council rule, that as
an alternative, the subdivider may, at his or her option, contribute an
equivalent amount in cash. Payments received under such option shall be
placed in a special park fund by the city and used only for the acquisition
of land for parks and playgrounds in accordance with M.S. § 462.358, subd.
2, as it may be amended from time to time.



(2006 Code, § 12.05)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph, or provision of
this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.



(2006 Code, § 12.99)  (Ord. 131, passed 12-24-1971)



CHAPTER 152:  ZONING



Section




General Provisions




   152.01   Scope and interpretation



   152.02   Definitions



   152.03   Regulation of dish-type satellite signal-receiving antennas



   152.04   Wind energy conversion systems



   152.05   Sexually-oriented business zoning



   152.06   Nonconforming uses



   152.07   Conditional use permits



   152.08   The Administrative Official



   152.09   Adjustments and variances



   152.10   Amendments to this chapter



   152.11   Annexations




Zoning Districts




   152.25   Districts, maps, and boundaries



   152.26   R-1 One- To Four-Family Residence District



   152.27   R-2 Multiple-Family Residence District



   152.28   C-B Central Business District



   152.29   C-1 Commercial



   152.30   I-1 Light Industrial District



   152.31   I-2 Heavy Industrial District



   152.32   Floodplain District



   152.33   PID Planned Industrial District




General Regulations




   152.45   Scope of regulations



   152.46   Erection of more than one principal structure on a lot



   152.47   Accessory buildings



   152.48   Height regulations



   152.49   Yard regulations



   152.50   Fences



   152.51   Streets closures



   152.52   Areas under water



   152.53   Essential services



   152.54   Structures to have access



   152.55   Sign regulations



   152.56   Off-street parking and loading-unloading space requirements



   152.57   Minimum mobile home park requirements



   152.58   Residential structures



   152.59   Temporary structures




Solar Energy Conversion System Regulation




   152.70   Definitions



   152.71   Purpose



   152.72   Solar energy systems




Telecommunications Facilities




   152.80   Purpose and intent



   152.81   Definitions



   152.82   Administrative approval



   152.83   Conditional use



   152.84   General standards



 



   152.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 152.01  SCOPE AND INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Scope. From and after the effective date of this chapter, the
use of all land and every building and the erection or structural alteration
of any building or portion of a building in the city shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. Any structure or use lawfully existing
at the passage of this chapter but not in conformity with the regulations of
the appropriate zoning district may be continued subject to the regulations
of § 152.06.



   (B)   Interpretation. The provisions of this chapter shall be
interpreted as the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, morals, convenience, and general welfare. Where the
provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any
statute, other provision of this code of ordinances, or regulation, this
chapter shall apply. Where the provisions of any statute, other provision of
this code of ordinances, or regulation impose greater restrictions than this
chapter, such restrictions shall apply.



(2006 Code, § 11.01)



§ 152.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGRICULTURE. The growing of soil crops in the customary manner on open
tracts of land; the raising of animals or poultry. The term shall include
incidental retail selling by the producer of the products raised on the
premises; provided, that customer parking space is furnished off of the
public right-of-way.



   ALLEY. A public or private right-of-way less than 30 feet in width
which affords secondary means of access to abutting property.



   APARTMENTS. A room or suite of rooms designed for, intended for, or
used as a residence for one family or individual and equipped with cooking
facilities.



   APARTMENT BUILDING. Three or more dwelling units grouped in one
building.



   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets or a combination of streets
and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines,
unsubdivided acreage, or boundary line of the corporate limits of the city.



   BOARDING HOUSE. Any dwelling other than a hotel or motel where meals or
lodging and means for compensation are provided for five or more persons
pursuant to previous arrangements.



   BUILDING. Any structure for the shelter, support, or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattel, or property of any kind; and when separated by
bearing walls without openings, each portion of such building so separated
shall be deemed a separate BUILDING.



   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A subordinate building, the use of which is
incidental to that of the main building on the same lot.



   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the average of the lowest
and the highest point of the portion of the lot covered by the building to
the highest point of the roof, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the
mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.



   BUSINESS. Any occupation, employment, or enterprise wherein merchandise
is exhibited or sold, or which occupies time, attention, labor, and
materials, or where services are offered for compensation.



   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT. Main concentration of uses devoted to the
retailing of goods and services for a profit.



   COMMERCIAL - C-1 DISTRICT. would consist of other business locations,
such as highway serving uses and that which deal more in convenience goods
and services.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A residential building designed for or
occupied by three or more families, with the number of families in residence
not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached residential dwelling unit other
than a mobile home, designed for and occupied by one family only.



   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A detached residential building containing two
dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families.



   DWELLING UNIT. One room, or rooms connected together, constituting a
separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or
rental or lease on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis, and physically
separated from any other room or dwelling units which may be in the same
structure, and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities.



   FAMILY. Any number of individuals living together on the premises as a
single nonprofit housekeeping unit (except for necessary servants) as
distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house, hotel,
club, fraternity, or sorority house.



   FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of a building, measured from the exterior walls, including basements and
attached accessory buildings.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building for storage of self-propelled
vehicles and tools and equipment maintained as incidental to a conforming use
of the premises.



   GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any premises except those defined as a private garage
used for storage or care of self-propelled vehicles and/or where any such
vehicles are equipped for operating, repair, or are kept for remuneration,
hire, or sale.



   HOME OCCUPATION. Any use customarily conducted entirely within a
dwelling and carried on by members of a family residing therein, which use is
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling
purposes and does not change the character thereof. Clinics, hospitals,
barber shops, mortuaries, beauty parlors, motor vehicle repairing for hire,
welding, animal hospitals, and the maintenance of animals, except as provided
in § 152.26, shall not be deemed to be HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   INDUSTRIAL, HEAVY I-2 DISTRICT. All manufacture, compounding,
processing, packaging, treatment, or assembly of products and materials which
due to their size and nature, would not conform in the I-1 District.



   INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT I-1 DISTRICT. All uses which include the compounding,
processing, packaging, treatment, or assembly of products and materials
provided such use will not generate offensive odors, glare, smoke, dust,
noise, vibrations, or other objectionable influences that extend beyond the
lot on which the use is located.



   HOTEL. Any building or portion thereof where lodging is offered to
transient guests for compensation and in which there are more than five
sleeping rooms, with no cooking facilities in individual dwelling units.



   JUNK YARD. Land or buildings where waste, discarded, salvaged materials
are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, cleaned, packed, disassembled, or
handled, including, but not limited to, scrap metal, rags, paper, rubber
products, glass products, lumber products, and products resulting from the
wrecking of automobiles or other machinery.



   LOADING AREA. Any area where trucks are parked, maneuvered, or loaded
or unloaded of materials or equipment.



   LOT. One unit of a recorded plat or subdivision, which unit has
frontage on a public street and is occupied, or to be occupied, by a building
and its accessory buildings, and including as a minimum, such open spaces as
are required under this chapter.



   LOT AREA. The land area within the lot lines.



   LOT CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets.



   LOT COVERAGE. The total allowable amount of lot area, expressed as a
percentage, which may be covered by a principal use and its accessory
structures.



   LOT DEPTH. The average distance between the front and rear lot line
(the greater frontage of a corner lot shall be deemed its depth and the
lesser frontage its width).



   LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE. An interior lot having frontage on two streets.



   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.



   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal straight line distance between the side lot
lines at the setback line.



   NONCONFORMING USE. A use lawfully in existence on the effective date of
this chapter and not conforming to the regulations for the district in which
it is situated, except that such a use is not nonconforming if it would be
authorized under a special use permit where located.



   PREMISES. A lot or plot with the required front, side, and rear yards
for a dwelling or other use as allowed under this chapter.



   SETBACK. The shortest horizontal distance between the front lot line
and the foundation wall of a building or the allowable building line as
defined by the front yard regulations of this chapter.



   SIGN. A name, identification, display, illustration, or device which is
affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure,
or land in view of the general public and which directs attention to a
product, place, activity, purpose, institution, or business.



   SIGN, BILLBOARD, OFF-PREMISE. A sign which directs attention to a
business, commodity, service, activity, or entertainment not necessarily
conducted, sold, or offered upon the premises where such a sign is located.



   SIGN, BUSINESS. A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession of a commodity, service, or entertainment sold or offered upon the
premises where such a sign is located.



   SIGN, FLASHING. Any illuminated sign on which such illumination is not
kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such
sign is in use.



   SIGN, ILLUMINATED. Any sign which has characters, letters, figures,
designs, or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a
part of the sign.



   SIGN, NAMEPLATE. Any sign which states the name or address or both of
the business or occupant of the lot where the sign is placed.



   SIGN, ROTATING. A sign which revolves or rotates on its axis by
mechanical means.



   SIGN, SURFACE AREA OF. The entire area within a single continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the actual sign surface, not
including any structural elements outside the limits of such sign and not
forming an integral part of the display. Only one side of a double-face or
V-type sign structure shall be used in computing total surface area.



   STORY. The portion of the building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or, if there is no floor
above it, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.



   STORY, HALF. A story with at least two opposite exterior sides meeting
a sloping roof not more than two feet above the floor of such story.



   STREET LINE. The right-of-way line of a street.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change or addition to the supporting members
of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having a location on the
ground.



   SUBDIVISION. A described tract of land which is to be or has been
divided into two or more lots or parcels, any of which resultant parcels is
less than two and one-half acres in area and 150 feet in width, for the
purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or if a new street
is involved, any division of a parcel of land. The term includes
RESUBDIVISION, and, where it is appropriate to the context, relates either to
the process of SUBDIVISION or to the land subdivided.



   TRAILER HOUSE or MOBILE HOME. A detached dwelling structure used for
living purposes that is transportable in one or more sections and is less
than 24 feet wide, with or without a permanent foundation.



   USE. The purpose for which land or premises or a building thereon is
designated, arranged, or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained.



   USE, ACCESSORY. A use clearly incidental or accessory to the principal
use of a lot or a building located on the same lot as the accessory use.



   VARIANCE. A modification or variation of the provisions of this
chapter, as applied to a specific piece of property, except that modification
in the allowable uses within a district shall not be considered a variance.



   YARD. Any space in the same lot with a building open and unobstructed
from the ground to the sky, except for fences five feet or less in height,
and trees and shrubs.



   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the front of the lot between the
side yard lines and lying between the front street right-of-way of the road
or highway and the nearest line of the building.



   YARD, REAR. An open space unoccupied except for accessory buildings on
the same lot with a building between the rear lines of the building and the
rear line of the lot, for the full width of the lot.



   YARD, SIDE. An open, unoccupied space on the lot with a building
between the building and the side line of the lot.



(2006 Code, § 11.02)  (Ord. 130, passed 12-24-1971; Ord. 26, 3rd Series,
passed 7-29-1982; Ord. 147, 3rd Series, passed 12-20-2002)



§ 152.03  REGULATION OF DISH-TYPE SATELLITE SIGNAL-RECEIVING ANTENNAS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DISH. The part of a satellite signal receiving antenna
characteristically shaped like a saucer or dish.



      DISH-TYPE SATELLITE SIGNAL-RECEIVING ANTENNAS.



         (a)   One, or a combination of two or more of the
following:



            1.   A signal-receiving device (antenna, dish
antenna, or dish-type antenna), the purpose of which is to receive
communication or other signals from satellites in earth orbit and other
extraterrestrial sources;



            2.   A low-noise amplifier (LNA) which is situated
at the focal point of the receiving component and the purpose of which is to
magnify, store, transfer, and/or transmit electronic or light signals; or



            3.   A coaxial cable the purpose of which is to
carry or transmit said signals to a receiver.



         (b)   Also referred to as EARTH STATIONS or GROUND
STATIONS.



      GROUNDING ROD. A metal pole permanently positioned in the earth
to serve as an electrical conductor through which electrical current may
safely pass and dissipate.



      RECEIVER. A television set or radio receiver.



   (B)   Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to construct an
earth station without a permit, nor shall construction commence before a
permit is issued in accordance with division (C) below.



   (C)   Application for permit.



      (1)   The owner, or occupant with written permission from the
owner, of any lot, premises, or parcel of land within the city who desires to
construct an earth station on said lot, premises, or land parcel, must first
obtain a permit to do so from the Zoning Administrator.



      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall issue such permit,
provided, the applicant submits a written application upon forms provided and
approved by the Planning Department, along with a plot plan of the lot,
premises, or land parcel attached, showing the exact location and dimensions
of the proposed earth station and underground wiring; a description of the
kind of earth station proposed; the exact location and dimensions of all
buildings or structures; showing the elevations of the proposed earth station
upon completion.



      (3)   The applicant shall submit with each application a sum,
as set by City Council resolution, which represents the permit fee. The
permit fee shall cover the costs of processing the application.



   (D)   Location of earth station; ground mounted.



      (1)   No earth station shall be constructed in any front or
side yard, but, shall be constructed to the rear of the residence or main
structure.



      (2)   No earth station, including its concrete base slab or
other substructure, shall be constructed less than eight feet from any
property line or easement.



      (3)   Wiring between an earth station and a receiver shall be
placed at least eight inches beneath the surface of the ground.



      (4)   Such earth station shall be designed to withstand a wind
force of 75 mph without the use of supporting guy wires.



      (5)   An earth station must be bonded to a grounding rod.



      (6)   No earth station shall be constructed upon the roof top
of any garage, residential dwelling, church, school, apartment building,
hospital, or any other commercial building or structure.



      (7)   All earth stations and the construction and installation
thereof shall conform to National Electric Safety Code regulations.



(2006 Code, § 11.21)  (Ord. 54, 3rd Series, passed 4-24-1985)  Penalty,
see § 152.99



§ 152.04  WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the
installation and operation of wind energy conversion systems (WECS) within
the city for the safety and well-being of the citizens. This section is to
establish regulations not otherwise subject to the siting and oversight by
the state.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      METEOROLOGICAL TOWER. A temporary tower which is erected to
gather data on wind speed and direction, plus other data relevant to the
siting of a WECS.



      WECS-WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM. An electrical generating
facility comprised of one or more wind turbines and accessory facilities,
including and not limited to, power lines, transformers, substations, and
meteorological towers that operate by converting the kinetic energy of wind
into electrical energy. The energy may be used on-site or distributed to the
electrical grid.



   (C)   Special requirements.



      (1)   Wind energy conversion systems regulated by this section
shall only be allowed within any zoning district as a conditional use and
permitted as prescribed under the this chapter. In addition a land use and
zoning permit must be obtained



      (2)   Only one WECS system is permitted on any one lot.



   (D)   Application requirements.



      (1)   A site plan drawn to scale and dimensioned including all
structures, buildings, above- ground utilities, and trees on the lot where
the WECS is to be installed;



      (2)   The elevations of all items mentioned above;



      (3)   The proposed location of the WECS including the location
of guy wire anchors;



      (4)   The location and elevation of all structures within 350
feet of the exterior boundaries of the property of installation of the WECS;



      (5)   A description of the project including name plate
generating capacity, tower height, rotor diameter, and means of
interconnection with the electrical grid;



      (6)   Standard drawings of the structural components of the
WECS and support structures including base and footings shall be provided as
certified by a state licensed engineer;



      (7)   A contract or agreement with the affected electrical
power supplier for excess power fed back into the electrical grid;



      (8)   A permit or letter from the FAA or MNDOT Aeronautics
related to the use of air space; and



      (9)   Other local, county, state, and federal permits as may
be required.



   (E)   Meteorological towers.



      (1)   An interim permit will be issued for a meteorological
tower for a period not to exceed 18 months by the City Planning and Zoning
Director.



      (2)   The meteorological tower is subject to the same setback
regulations as a WECS.



      (3)   No tower shall have affixed or attached lights,
reflectors, flashers, or any other illumination, except for those required by
the Federal Aviation Administration.



      (4)   Any abandoned or obsolete temporary tower shall be
removed within 30 days from the cessation of operation at the site.



      (5)   The temporary meteorological tower shall be erected to
meet all standards for wind resistance and weatherability to not be a safety
hazard or nuisance.



   (F)   Performance standards.



      (1)   A WECS may not interfere with hospital heliport
approach/departure corridors.



      (2)   The permitted maximum height of a WECS shall be measured
from the base if the tower to the highest possible extension of the rotor and
shall not exceed 175 feet.



      (3)   No part of a WECS (including guy wires) shall be located
within or above any required front, side, or rear yard setback. WECS towers
shall be set back from the closest property line one foot for every one foot
of system height.



      (4)   No rotor blades may extend over driveways, sidewalks, or
parking areas and must not be within 12 feet of the ground. The maximum
diameter of the rotor shall not exceed 26 feet.



      (5)   WECS shall not be located within 30 feet of an above
ground utility line.



      (6)   Blade arcs created by the WECS shall have a minimum of
30 feet of clearance over any structure within a 200-foot radius.



      (7)   Each WECS shall be equipped with both a manual and
automatic braking device capable of stopping the WECS operation in high winds
(40 mph or greater).



      (8)   Each WECS shall be grounded to protect against natural
lightning strikes in conformance with the National Electrical Code.



      (9)   To prevent climbing by unauthorized people, the tower
must comply with one of the following:



         (a)   Tower climbing apparatus shall not be located
within 12 feet of the ground;



         (b)   A locked anti-climbing device shall be installed
on the tower; and



         (c)   Towers capable of being climbed shall be enclosed
by a locked, protective fence at least six feet high.



      (10)   WECS shall have a sign posted at the base of the tower
containing the following information:



         (a)   A high voltage warning;



         (b)   The manufacturer’s name;



         (c)   An emergency phone number;



         (d)   Emergency shutdown procedures; and



         (e)   This sign must be easily legible and not over four
square feet in size.



      (11)   WECS shall not have affixed or attached any lights,
reflector, flasher or any other illumination except for illumination devices
required by the FAA.



      (12)   WECS shall be designed and constructed not to cause
radio, television or other communication interference.



      (13)   Noises created by the operation of the WECS shall be in
compliance with and regulated by the State Pollution Control Standards, State
Regulations NPC 1 and 2, as amended; and



      (14)   All electrical equipment and connections shall be
designed and installed in compliance with the Electrical Code.



   (G)   Conditions of permit.



      (1)   Ornamental wind devices that are not a WECS shall be
exempt from this section.



      (2)   If a WECS is not maintained in operational condition and
poses a potential safety hazard or a nuisance, the owner shall be take
expeditious action to correct the situation.



      (3)   Any WECS or tower which is not used for 12 successive
months shall be deemed abandoned and shall be dismantled and removed from the
property at the expense of the property owner.



      (4)   By the acceptance of the conditional use permit, the
owner/operator grants permission to the city to enter the property to assure
compliance with all conditions set forth in this section.



(Ord. 176, 3rd Series, passed 5-12-2009)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.05  SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS ZONING.



   (A)   Location prohibitions. Sexually-oriented businesses shall be
prohibited in all of the city’s zoning districts, except in the commercial
district, as defined and regulated in this chapter, where such businesses
shall be permitted, provided, the conditions specified in this code of
ordinances are met.



      (1)   In the commercial district, in which sexually-oriented
businesses are permitted uses, the following conditions shall be met prior to
a sexually-oriented business being allowed.



         (a)   Sexually-oriented businesses shall be at least
1,500 feet from any other sexually-oriented business.



         (b)   Measurements shall be made in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point
of the actual business premises of the sexually-oriented business to the
nearest point of the actual business premises of any other sexually-oriented
business.



         (c)   Sexually-oriented businesses shall be located no
less than 1,500 feet from:



            1.   Any zoned residential area, whether R-1 or
R-2 as defined in this chapter;



            2.   Mobile home parks;



            3.   Places of worship;



            4.   Governmental buildings;



            5.   City/public parks, recreational areas, or
open spaces;



            6.   Schools, public or private;



            7.   Licensed family day care homes, licensed
group family day care homes, licenses child-care or day care centers,
licensed development achievement centers, and senior housing complexes; or



            8.   On-sale liquor establishments.



      (2)   Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point of the
actual business premises of the sexually-oriented business to the nearest
boundary of the residential use district or the boundary of a mobile home
park, or to the nearest property line of the premises used as a school, place
of worship, governmental building, city/public park, recreational area or
open space, licensed family day care home, licensed group family day care
home, licensed child-care or day care center, licensed developmental
achievement center, senior housing complex, or on-sale liquor establishment.



      (3)   The operation, establishment, or maintenance of more
than one sexually-oriented business in the same building, structure, or
portion thereof, or in the increase of the floor area of any
sexually-oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof is
prohibited.



   (B)   Sign restrictions. In order to protect children from exposure
to lurid signs and materials and in order to preserve the value of property
surrounding sexually-oriented businesses, the following sign regulations
shall apply to all sexually-oriented businesses in the city in lieu of the
provisions of the definitions of “signs” in §§ 152.02 and 152.54.



      (1)   (a)   All signs shall be flat wall signs.



         (b)   No signs shall be freestanding, located on the
roof or contain any flashing lights, moving elements or electronically, or
mechanically changing messages.



         (c)   No sign shall contain any message or image which
identifies changing messages which identifies “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”, as defined in § 115.03.



         (d)   The maximum allowable sign area shall be one
square foot of sign area per foot of lot frontage on a street, but in no
event exceeding 32 square feet. The maximum number of signs shall be one per
lot frontage.



         (e)   Signs otherwise permitted pursuant to this section
shall contain only:



            1.   The name of the sexually-oriented business;
and/or



            2.   The specific type of sexually-oriented
business conducted on the licensed premises.



      (2)   Temporary signage shall not be permitted in connection
with any sexually-oriented business.



      (3)   No signs shall be placed in any window.



      (4)   A one-square foot sign shall be placed on the door to
state hours of operation and admittance is restricted to adults only.



(2006 Code, § 11.25)  (Ord. 148, 3rd Series, passed 10-24-2003)  Penalty,
see § 152.99



Cross-reference:



   Sexually-Oriented Businesses, see Ch. 115



§ 152.06  NONCONFORMING USES.



   (A)   Generally. A nonconforming use may be continued subject to the
following limitations and such further regulations as the Council may require
for securing the purposes of this chapter.



      (1)   A nonconforming use of land shall not be enlarged or
increased in land area, nor shall such nonconforming use be moved to any part
of the parcel of land upon which the same was not conducted prior to the
adoption of this chapter.



      (2)   A nonconforming use shall not be changed, unless changed
to a conforming or more conforming use; such use shall not thereafter be
changed to a nonconforming use.



      (3)   If any existing nonconforming use of building or land is
discontinued for a period of one year it cannot be resumed.



      (4)   No building which has been damaged by fire, explosion,
act of God, or the public enemy to the extent of more than 50% of its value
shall be restored except in conformity with the regulations of this chapter.



      (5)   Alterations may be made to a residential building
containing nonconforming residential units when alterations will improve
livability of the unit provided the number of dwelling units in the building
is not increased.



   (B)   Necessary restoration. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent
the strengthening or restoration of a wall or structural member in a building
maintained for nonconforming use when such action is taken pursuant to a land
use and zoning permit as hereinafter provided.



(2006 Code, § 11.30)  (Ord. 130, passed 12-24-1971)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.07  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.



   (A)   Conditional use permits. Conditional use permits may be issued
for any of the following:



      (1)   Any of the uses or purposes for which such permits are
required or permitted by the provisions of this chapter;



      (2)   Public utility or public service uses or public building
in a district when found to be necessary for the public health, safety,
convenience, or welfare;



      (3)   To classify as a conforming use, any institutional use
existing in any district at the time of the establishment of such district; or



      (4)   To permit the location of any of the following uses in a
district from which they are excluded by the provisions of this chapter:
library; community center; church; hospital; fairgrounds; any institution of
any educational, philanthropic or charitable nature; cemetery; mausoleum; or
any other place for the disposal of the human dead.



   (B)   Application.



      (1)   Application for the issuance of a conditional use permit
shall be made to the Planning Commission. Any proceedings to classify certain
uses as conforming uses as provided in this section may be initiated either
by application or by the Council or by the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission may hold such hearings on the proposal to issue a conditional use
permit as it may consider necessary; but at least one public hearing shall be
held on any application for a use permit for the establishment of any use
listed in division (A)(4) above.



      (2)   The Planning Commission shall make a report to the
Council upon any application for conditional permit and shall recommend to
the Council whatever action it deems advisable; but it shall not recommend
the granting of a permit unless it finds that the establishment, maintenance,
or conducting of the use for which a use permit is sought will not under the
circumstances of the particular use be detrimental:



         (a)   To the health, safety, morals, comfort,
convenience, or welfare of the persons residing or working in the
neighborhood of such use;



         (b)   To the public welfare or injurious to property or
improvements in the neighborhood; or



         (c)   It may designate conditions and require guarantees
in the granting of use permits in the manner provided in § 152.09 for the
granting of adjustments. Upon receipt of the report of the Planning
Commission, the Council may hold whatever public hearings it deems advisable
and shall make a decision upon the proposal to grant a use permit. If the
Council finds that the conditions exist which are necessary under this
section before the Planning Commission may recommend the granting of a use
permit, the Council may grant the use permit and it may attach to the permit
such conditions and guarantees as are provided for in § 152.09 for the
granting of adjustments.



   (C)   Conformance. Any use permitted under the terms of any
conditional use permit shall be established and conducted in conformity to
the terms of such permit and of any conditions designated in connection
therewith.



(2006 Code, § 11.40)  (Ord. 130, passed 12-24-1971)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.08  THE ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL.



   (A)   The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the
provisions of this chapter. He or she may delegate the enforcement of this
chapter to any administrative official of the city, and supporting staff if
deemed necessary, who shall be directly under the control of the Mayor and
shall be known as the Zoning Administrator or Zoning Enforcement Officer.



   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall perform the following duties:



      (1)   Examine applications. Examine all applications
pertaining to use of land, buildings, or structures, and approve same when
the application conforms with the provisions of this chapter;



      (2)   Nonconforming uses. Keep a record of all nonconforming
uses;



      (3)   Inspections.



         (a)   Periodically inspect buildings, structures, and
uses of land to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter.



         (b)   In regard to performance standards, the Zoning
Administrator may require the services of a testing laboratory to determine
compliance.



         (c)   The cost of employing said laboratory shall be
paid for by the owner if a violation of this chapter is established,
otherwise by the city.



      (4)   Notifications. Notify, in writing, any person
responsible for violating a provision of this chapter, indicating the nature
of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it;



      (5)   Orders. Order discontinuance of illegal use of land,
buildings, or structures; order removal of illegal buildings, structures,
additions, alterations; order discontinuance of illegal work being done; or
take any action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or to
prevent violation of its provisions;



      (6)   Recordkeeping. Maintain permanent and current records of
this chapter as provided in § 152.25(B), including all maps, amendments,
conditional use, and variations;



      (7)   File maintenance. Maintain a current file of all
permits, all certificates, and all copies of notices of violation,
discontinuance, or removal for such time as necessary to ensure a continuous
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and, on request, provide
information to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in any
specific property; and



      (8)   Technical assistance. Provide technical assistance to
the Council and Planning Commission.



(2006 Code, § 11.50)  (Ord. 130, passed 12-24-1971)



§ 152.09  ADJUSTMENTS AND VARIANCES.



   (A)   Purpose. The Council, in each case as hereinafter provided,
shall have the power to grant adjustments in and exceptions to any of the
provisions of this chapter to the extent of the following and no further:



      (1)   To vary or modify the strict application of any of the
regulations or provisions contained in this chapter in cases in which there
are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of such strict
application; and



      (2)   To permit the extension of a district where the boundary
line thereof divides a lot in one ownership at the time of the passage of
this chapter.



   (B)   Application.



      (1)   Application for any adjustment permissible under the
provisions of this section shall be made to the Zoning Administrator in the
form of a written application for a permit to use the property or premises as
set forth in the application. An application for an adjustment shall be
accompanied by payment of a fee in such amount as may be set by motion or
resolution of the Council from time to time in addition to the regular
building fee, if any.



      (2)   Upon receipt of any application, such officer shall set
a time and place for a public hearing before the Planning Commission on such
application. At least ten days before the date of the hearing, a notice of
the hearing shall be published once in the official newspaper.



   (C)   Review and decision. The Commission shall thereupon make its
decision upon the application and report its recommendation to the Council
within ten days after such hearing. In recommending granting any adjustment
or variance under the provisions of this section, the Planning Commission
shall designate such conditions in connection therewith as will, in its
opinion, secure substantially the objectives of the regulation involved; and
in recommending denial, the Commission shall specify the reasons why the
variance cannot be adjusted to meet the purposes of this chapter as to light,
air, public health, safety, comfort, convenience, or general welfare.



   (D)   Issuance.



      (1)   No permit shall be issued under the provisions of this
section unless and until it is ordered by the Council. In reporting its
decision to the Council, the Planning Commission shall report its findings
with respect thereto and all facts in connection therewith and shall
specifically and fully set forth the conditions upon which variance is
recommended.



      (2)   Upon receipt of such report, the Council shall by
resolution either accept or reject the same and shall either grant or deny
the application for the permit according to its own determination of the
question involved. In all cases in which adjustments or variances are granted
under the provisions of this section, the Council shall require such evidence
and guarantees as it deems necessary to ensure compliance with the conditions
designated in connection therewith.



   (E)   Conditions for issuance. The Planning Commission shall not
recommend the granting of any application and the Council shall not grant any
application unless they find the following facts:



      (1)   There are special circumstances or conditions affecting
the land, building, or use referred to in the application;



      (2)   The granting of the application is necessary for the
preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights;



      (3)   The granting of the application will not materially
affect adversely the health or safety of persons residing or working in the
neighborhood of the property of the applicant and will not be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in
the neighborhood; and



      (4)   At the hearing, the applicant shall present a statement
and evidence in such form as the Planning Commission may require, to show
these facts.



   (F)   Form of action taken and record thereof. The Planning
Commission and the Council shall provide for a record of their proceedings,
which shall include the minutes of their meetings, their findings, and the
action taken on each matter heard by them, including final recommendation,
decision, and order.



   (G)   Appeals from the decision of the Council. Any person or
persons, or any board, taxpayer, department, or bureau of the city aggrieved
by any decision of the Council may seek review by a court of record of such
decision, in the manner provided by the laws of the state and particularly by
M.S. § 462.357, as it may be amended from time to time.



(2006 Code, § 11.60)



§ 152.10  AMENDMENTS TO THIS CHAPTER.



   (A)   Purpose. The Council may, on its own motion, or on request of
the Planning Commission, or on petition or appeal of the affected property
owners:



      (1)   Transfer land, or a portion thereof, from the district
in which it is situated into another district, by amendment to this chapter;
and



      (2)   Change any of the regulations of this chapter as to the
use or platting of land in any district, or as to the restrictions upon
buildings or structures herein, by amendment to this chapter



   (B)   Procedure.



      (1)   An application for amendment shall be filed with the
City Administrator in duplicate, accompanied by a fee as determined by the
Council. The City Administrator shall forward one copy to the Planning
Commission. The Planning Commission may transmit its recommendations on the
application to the city within 30 days.



      (2)   The Planning Commission may transmit its recommendations
on the application to the Council within 30 days.



      (3)   (a)   The Planning Commission shall give notice of
the time and place of the public hearing.



         (b)   Notice shall be given not more than 30 days nor
less than ten days in advance of the hearings, by publishing a notice thereof
at least once in a newspaper published in the city by notifying the owner or
owners of the property under consideration, and by notifying by mail at least
ten days prior to the meeting the property owners within 300 feet of the
subject property.



         (c)   The current City Assessor’s tax records shall be
deemed sufficient for the location or certification of ownership of said
properties.



      (4)   (a)   The Council, upon receiving reports of the
Planning Commission, and without further public hearing, may vote upon the
adoption of any proposed amendment or it may refer it back to the Planning
Commission and/or Board for further consideration.



         (b)   If no recommendation is transmitted by the
Planning Commission within 30 days after the hearing, the Council may take
action without awaiting such modifications.



         (c)   In considering such recommendations, due allowance
shall be made for existing conditions, for the conservation of property
values, for the direction of building development to the best advantage of
the entire city, and for the uses to which the property affected is being
devoted at the time; and no change shall be recommended unless it is required
for the public good.



         (d)   The amendment shall be effective only if
three-fourths of all the members of the Council concur in its passage.



   (C)   The petition. The petition shall:



      (1)   Give the name or names of the petitioner or petitioners,
and the petition shall be signed by each of them. The address of each
petitioner shall be given;



      (2)   Specifically describe the area proposed to be rezoned,
and give the names and addresses of all owners of property owned by each;



      (3)   State the present zone classification of the area and
the proposed zone classification;



      (4)   State the present use of each separately owned tract
within the area, and the intended use of any tract of land therein, if the
petitioners, or any of them, have particular use presently in mind;



      (5)   Show how the rezoning will fit in with the general
zoning pattern of the neighborhood, and the zoning plan of the entire city;
and



      (6)   Be accompanied by three copies of a map showing the
property to be rezoned, and the present zoning of the surrounding area for at
least a distance of 500 feet, including the street pattern of such area. The
map scale shall be 100 feet to the inch.



(2006 Code, § 11.61)  (Ord. 130, passed 12-24-1971)



§ 152.11  ANNEXATIONS.



   No annexation petition shall be considered unless and until a hearing
has also been petitioned for placing the annexed territory in a zoning
district or districts. No land use and zoning permits shall be issued in
annexed territory until such hearing has been held and the territory assigned
a zoning district or districts.



(2006 Code, § 11.62)  (Ord. 14, 3rd Series, passed 5-30-1984)  Penalty,
see § 152.99




ZONING DISTRICTS




§ 152.25  DISTRICTS, MAPS, AND BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   Districts, maps, and boundaries. For the purpose of this
chapter, the city is divided into the following districts:



      (1)   R-1 One- to Four-Family Residence District;



      (2)   R-2 Multiple-Family Residence District;



      (3)   C-B Central Business District;



      (4)   C-1 Commercial;



      (5)   I-1 Light Industrial District;



      (6)   I-2 Heavy Industrial District;



      (7)   F Floodplain District; and



      (8)   PID Planned Industrial District.



   (B)   Zoning map. The boundaries of the districts established by
this chapter are delineated on the zoning map; said map and all notations,
references, and date shown thereon are hereby adopted and made part of this
chapter and will be on permanent file, and for public inspection, in the
office of the City Administrator. It shall be the responsibility of the
Zoning Administrator and staff to maintain said Map, and amendments thereto
shall be recorded thereon within 30 days after official publication of
amendments.



   (C)   District boundaries. The boundaries between districts are,
unless otherwise indicated, either the center lines of streets, alleys, or
railroad rights-of-way, or such lines extended or lines parallel or
perpendicular thereto. Where figures are shown on the zoning map between a
street and a district boundary line, they indicate the district boundary line
runs parallel to the street at a distance therefrom equivalent to the number
of feet stated unless otherwise indicated.



(2006 Code, § 11.03)  (Ord. 130, passed 12-24-1971; Ord. 6, 3rd Series,
passed 1-17-1980)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.26  R-1 ONE- TO FOUR-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The R-1 District is intended for low-density
residential development in those areas where such development fits the land
use plan and policies, and where municipal utilities are available at
reasonable costs.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within an R-1 District, unless otherwise
provided by this chapter, no uses are permitted except the following:



      (1)   One- to four-family-dwellings;



      (2)   Parks and recreational areas owned or operated by
governmental agencies;



      (3)   Public elementary or high schools, or private schools
with an equivalent curriculum;



      (4)   Churches, parish houses, convents, children’s
nurseries, and schools; provided, that no building shall be located within 50
feet of any abutting lot in any residential district;



      (5)   Grain or vegetable farming or gardening on unplatted
land assessed as agricultural land, but not involving a sales structure;



      (6)   Home occupations and offices of professional persons
when such use does not exceed one-third of the main floor space of a
dwelling, is conducted only in principal dwelling, and does not employ more
than one person not residing on the premises;



      (7)   Public golf courses, except clubhouses, public swimming
pools, private recreational clubs, tennis courts, except those operated for
commercial purposes; and



      (8)   Accessory buildings and accessory uses (also to apply to
principal structure):



         (a)   Private garage or carport, boathouse, one of each
designation;



         (b)   Private swimming pools when completely enclosed
within a chain-like or similar fence five or more feet high;



         (c)   Boarding or rental of rooms shall be subject to
providing off-street parking for all motor vehicles of tenants by landlord;



         (d)   Maintenance of dogs and cats or other household
pets, subject to licensing requirements, health regulations and other
applicable provisions of this code of ordinances;



         (e)   Off-street parking as regulated by § 152.56;



         (f)   Parking of one commercial motor vehicle of not
over 26-foot length used by the resident occupant, and parking of passenger
cars, but not including the storage of vehicles which are inoperable or for
sale or rent; or



         (g)   Signs as regulated in § 152.55.



   (C)   Uses by conditional use permit within an R-1 District.
Buildings or land may be used for the following if granted a conditional use
permit as provided in § 152.07:



      (1)   Municipal administration buildings, police and fire
stations, libraries, museums, art galleries, post offices, and other
municipal service buildings except those customarily considered industrial in
use; providing, that no building shall be located within 50 feet of any other
lot in a residential district;



      (2)    Water supply buildings, reservoirs, wells, elevated
tanks, and similar essential public utility and service structures;



      (3)   Golf clubhouse, commercial country club, commercial
swimming pool, private swimming pool service more than one family; provided,
that no principal structure shall be located within 50 feet of any other lot
in a residential district;



      (4)   Apartment buildings and multiple-dwelling units housing
four to eight families with appropriate off-street parking facilities;



      (5)   Boarding or rental of rooms for three to eight persons
on a premises;



      (6)   Mobile home park developments, subject to the
regulations as established in § 152.57, “minimum mobile home park
requirements”;



      (7)   Barber shops and beauty salons; or



      (8)   Property owners within 150 feet of the proposed barber
shop/beauty salon will be notified in writing by the city that a conditional
use permit has been applied for.



   (D)   Height, yard, and lot coverage regulations.



      (1)   Height regulations. No structure shall exceed two and
one-half stories or 35 feet whichever is less in height, except that church
spires, belfries, domes which do not contain usable space, chimneys, and
similar structures not intended for human occupancy, may be of any height
which does not conflict with airport requirements.



      (2)   Front yard regulations.



         (a)   There shall be a front yard having a depth of not
less than 25 feet, except that in a block where two or more residences have
been erected facing the same street, the setback for remaining lots in that
block fronting on the same street shall be determined by the average setback
of existing buildings.



         (b)   There shall be a front yard on each street side of
each corner lot except that for corner lots of record at the date of this
chapter, the front yard on the side street may be reduced to a depth of not
less than 15 feet.



         (c)   The yard shall be landscaped and no off-street
parking or other accessory uses shall be permitted except as would be
characteristic and in harmony with the purposes of an R-1 District.



      (3)   Side yard regulations. Each lot shall have two side
yards, each such yard having a width of not less than ten feet.



      (4)   Rear yard regulations. Each lot shall have an unoccupied
rear yard having a depth of not less than 25% of the lot depth, except that
accessory buildings and uses as stipulated in divisions (B)(8)(a) and
(B)(8)(b) above shall be allowed.



      (5)   General yard regulations. General yard regulations shall
be as set forth in § 152.49, “yard regulations”.



      (6)   Lot size regulations.



         (a)   Every lot on which a one- or two-unit dwelling is
erected shall contain an area of not less than 9,000 square feet. For lots on
which three to eight multiple-family dwelling units are erected, 2,000
additional square feet shall be provided for each dwelling unit in excess of
two.



         (b)   Every lot on which a one- or two-family dwelling
is erected shall not be less than 75 feet in width, nor less than 120 feet in
depth. Lots fronting on curvilinear streets shall have a minimum frontage of
50 feet and a 75-foot width at the building line.



         (c)   No residential lot not served by public sewer and
public water supply shall be less than 22,000 square feet in area; provided,
that a lot served by public water supply, but not public sewer may have a
minimum area of 11,000 square feet.



         (d)   The lot area, width, and depth regulations of this
section shall not apply to lots platted prior to the adoption of this
chapter; however, such lots shall not be altered in any way which would
further reduce their dimensions below the minimum requirements of this
section, and no lot in conformance with the provisions of this section shall
be reduced or resubdivided to produce a lot not in full conformance with this
section.



         (e)   Not more than 35% of a lot or plot shall be
occupied by buildings.



   (E)   General regulations. Additional regulations applicable to the
R-1 District are set forth in §§ 152.45 through 152.58.



(2006 Code, § 11.04)  (Ord. 64, 3rd Series, passed 10-15-1986; Ord. 130,
passed 12-24-1971; Ord. 206, 3rd Series, passed 6-7-2016)  Penalty, see §
152.99



§ 152.27  R-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The R-2 District is intended for apartments, row
houses, townhouses, dormitories, and other buildings of three or more
dwelling units in those areas where such development fits the land use plan,
where properly related to other land uses and thoroughfares, and where
adequate municipal utilities are available. A secondary characteristic of
this District is to provide areas suitable for administrative buildings and
related office uses where there is limited contact with the public, no
manufacture or exterior display, and where merchandising is limited to
essential land convenience types of goods serving neighborhood needs.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within an R-2 District, unless otherwise
provided by this chapter, no building or land shall be used except for the
following:



      (1)   Any use permitted in § 152.26(B), as regulated therein;



      (2)   Multiple dwellings, apartment buildings, townhouses, and
group or row houses;



      (3)   Boarding or lodging houses;



      (4)   Hospitals, convalescent and nursing homes, elderly
housing projects;



      (5)   Institutions of a religious, educational, charitable, or
philanthropic nature;



      (6)   Private clubs or lodges, except those whose chief
activity is a service customarily carried on as a business for profit;



      (7)   Accessory storage garages or other accessory uses or
buildings, customarily incident to the uses permitted in this section;



      (8)   Signs as regulated in § 152.55; and



      (9)   Off-street parking and loading as regulated by § 152.56.



   (C)   Uses by conditional use permit. Within an R-2 District,
buildings or land may be used for one or more of the following uses if
granted a conditional use permit as provided in § 152.07:



      (1)   Any use permitted in § 152.26(C), R-1 Residence
District;



      (2)   Mobile home park developments only, subject to the
special conditions and requirements set forth in § 152.57, minimum mobile
home park requirements”;



      (3)   Medical and dental offices and clinics;



      (4)   Offices for administrative, executive, professional,
research, or similar organization and laboratories having only limited
contact with the general public; provided, that no merchandise or
merchandising services are sold on the premises, except such as are
incidental or accessory to the permissible use;



      (5)   Neighborhood grocery delicatessen, bakery, or drug
store; provided, that floor space for the principal use shall be limited to
1,400 square feet, and that no more than four employees shall be required to
operate the use at any given time;



      (6)   Laundry and dry cleaning collection and clothes storage
centers, tailor shops, hobby shops, small home appliance repair and hardware
stores, and specialty shops; provided, that floor space for the principal use
shall be limited to 2,400 square feet and that no more than four employees
shall be required to operate the use at any given time; and



      (7)   Barber shops and beauty salons.



   (D)   Height, yard, and lot coverage regulations.



      (1)   Height regulations. Structures shall not exceed two and
one-half stories or 35 feet in height, whichever is less, except that church
spires, belfries, domes which do not contain usable space, water towers,
chimneys or smokestacks, cooling towers, and similar structures not designed
for human occupancy, may be erected with no height limitations except airport
requirements.



      (2)   Front yard regulations.



         (a)   There shall be a front yard having a depth of not
less than 25 feet, except that for any building exceeding three stories in
height, there shall be an additional front yard setback of one foot for every
one foot that the building exceeds the height of 30 feet.



         (b)   There shall be a front yard on each street side of
a corner lot.



         (c)   On double-frontage lots the required front yard
shall be provided on both streets.



      (3)   Side yard regulations.



         (a)   For one- and two-family dwellings and their
accessory buildings the side yard regulations of § 152.26(D)(3) applies.



         (b)   For other buildings not exceeding two stories in
height, there shall be two side yards, each such yard having a width of not
less than ten feet.



         (c)    For buildings exceeding two stories in height,
there shall be two side yards, each yard having a width of 15 feet, plus one
foot for each one foot of building height over 30 feet.



      (4)   Rear yard regulations. There shall be a rear yard as
required in § 152.26(D)(4), yard regulations”.



      (5)   General yard regulations. General yard regulations shall
be as set down in § 152.49, “yard regulations”.



      (6)   Lot size regulations.



         (a)   The minimum total lot area for a multiple-dwelling
structure shall not be less than 11,000 square feet, plus 2,000 square feet
for each unit in excess of two.



         (b)   A lot for a multiple-dwelling structure shall have
a width of not less than 85 feet and a depth of not less than 125 feet.



         (c)   Not more than 35%of a lot or plot shall be
occupied by buildings.



   (E)   General regulations. Additional regulations applicable to the
R-2 District are set forth in §§ 152.45 through 152.58.



(2006 Code, § 11.05)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.28  C-B CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The C-B District is intended for retail stores and
offices which are mutually compatible and can benefit from and contribute to
a compact shopping area serving the city and surrounding area.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within a C-B District, unless otherwise
provided by this chapter, no building or land shall be used except for the
following:



      (1)   Antique shops;



      (2)   Apparel shops;



      (3)   Appliance stores;



      (4)   Art and school supply;



      (5)   Art galleries;



      (6)   Art studios;



      (7)   Auction room;



      (8)   Auto accessory store;



      (9)   Bakeries, provided, the room or rooms containing the
preparation and baking process shall not have a gross floor area in excess of
2,400 square feet;



      (10)   Banks and other saving institutions;



      (11)   Barber parlors;



      (12)   Beauty parlors;



      (13)   Beverage stores;



      (14)   Bicycle sales, rental, and repairs;



      (15)   Book and stationery stores;



      (16)   Brewpubs;



      (17)   Camera and photo stores;



      (18)   Candy and ice cream stores;



      (19)   Carpet and rug stores;



      (20)   Catering establishments;



      (21)   Clothes pressing and tailoring shops;



      (22)   Clothing stores;



      (23)   Coin and philatelic stores;



      (24)   Decorating studios;



      (25)   Delicatessen;



      (26)   Department stores;



      (27)   Drug stores;



      (28)   Dry cleaning and laundry receiving and pick-up
stations, excluding laundering and dry cleaning processing;



      (29)   Dry goods or notions stores;



      (30)   Electrical appliance sales and service;



      (31)   Employment agencies;



      (32)   Fabric shops;



      (33)   Florist shops;



      (34)   Financial institutions;



      (35)   Food, grocery, meat, fish, bakery, and delicatessen
stores;



      (36)   Furniture stores;



      (37)   Furrier shops;



      (38)   Gift shops;



      (39)   Grocery, fruit, vegetable, or meat stores;



      (40)   Hardware stores;



      (41)   Hobby stores;



      (42)   Hotel;



      (43)   Jewelry stores;



      (44)   Leather goods and luggage shops;



      (45)   Library;



      (46)   Liquor stores or taverns;



      (47)   Loan office and finance company;



      (48)   Locksmith shops;



      (49)   Medical and dental offices;



      (50)   Mail order stores;



      (51)   Millinery shops;



      (52)   Music stores;



      (53)   Newsstand;



      (54)   Offices, professional;



      (55)   Office supply stores;



      (56)   Optical stores;



      (57)   Orthopedic and medical appliance stores;



      (58)   Paint and wallpaper stores;



      (59)   Parking and garages other than those accessory to a
principal use for the parking and storage of private passenger automobiles
only;



      (60)   Personal apparel stores;



      (61)   Pet shops;



      (62)   Phonograph, record, and sheet music stores;



      (63)   Photography studios;



      (64)   Physical culture and health services, reducing salons,
and masseurs;



      (65)   Picture framing and picture stores;



      (66)   Pipe and tobacco shops;



      (67)   Post offices;



      (68)   Plumbing sales stores;



      (69)   Public utility service stores;



      (70)   Radio and television sales and repair stores;



      (71)   Record shops;



      (72)   Rental agencies for the rental of clothing, appliances,
automobiles, and household fixtures, furnishing and accessories;



      (73)   Restaurant, excluding drive-ins;



      (74)   Sewing machine sales and service shops;



      (75)   Shoe and hat sales and repair shops;



      (76)   Stationery shops;



      (77)   Stock and brokerage firms;



      (78)   Taxi stand;



      (79)   Telephone booth;



      (80)   Theater, excluding drive-in;



      (81)   Ticket agencies;



      (82)   Tea, spice, and condiment specialty shops;



      (83)   Toy stores;



      (84)   Travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices;



      (85)   Variety, gift, notion, and soft goods stores;



      (86)   Vending machines which are coin or card operated;



      (87)   Accessory uses as follows:



         (a)   Any accessory uses, except signs, customarily
incident to the above permitted uses; and



         (b)   Signs as regulated in § 152.55, “sign
regulations”.



      (88)   Alterations may be made to a residential building
containing nonconforming residential units when alterations will improve
livability of the unit provided the number of dwelling units in the building
are not increased.



   (C)   Uses by conditional use permit. Buildings or land may be used
for the following, if granted a conditional use permit as provided in §
152.07:



      (1)   Any business activity of the same general character as
those listed in division (B) above;



      (2)   Multiple dwellings, but only if a part of a planned
concept in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan;



      (3)   Schools, music, dance, business, and vocational;



      (4)   Microbreweries and taprooms;



      (5)   Microdistilleries and related activities; and



      (6)   Retail gas stations and related convenience goods stores.



   (D)   Height, yard, and lot coverage regulations.



      (1)   Height regulations. The height regulations of the C-B
District shall be those of § 152.27(D)(1).



      (2)   Yard regulation and lot coverage regulations. In the C-B
District, there shall be no specific yard requirements or lot coverage
requirements except as necessary to provide off-street parking and loading
where applicable as regulated in § 152.56.



   (E)   Additional regulations.



      (1)   Lighting (glare) shall be directed away from the public
right-of-way and residential districts.



      (2)   (a)   Any awning, canopy, or marquee suspended from a
building may extend over the public right-of-way ten feet, but not to within
two feet of the curb line.



         (b)   Such structures shall be of a height not less than
eight feet from the sidewalk or ground grade line, and the owner of such
structure shall be responsible for its structural safety.



   (F)   General regulations. Additional regulations applicable to the
C-B District are set forth in §§ 152.45 through 152.58.



(2006 Code, § 11.06)  (Ord. 130, passed 12-24-1971; Ord. 207, 3rd Series,
passed 8-8-2016; Ord. 224, 3rd Series, passed 12-11-2018)  Penalty, see §
152.99



§ 152.29  C-1 COMMERCIAL.



   (A)   Purpose. The C-1 District is intended to provide suitable
locations for commercial retail and wholesaling, administrative, servicing,
and related activities dealing more in convenience goods and services.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within any C-1 District, no structure or land
shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:



      (1)   Those uses as first permitted, and as regulated in §
152.28 (C-B District), shall be a permitted use;



      (2)   Accessory uses, except signs, customarily incident to
the uses permitted in this division (B) and division (C) below;



      (3)   Animal hospitals, kennels, and training runs;



      (4)   Armories, convention halls, or exhibition halls,
including fairgrounds exhibition areas;



      (5)   Automobile display enclosed showrooms and sales areas
and automotive repairs;



      (6)   Bakeries;



      (7)   Bowling alleys, billiard, or pool halls;



      (8)   Brew pubs, microbreweries, microdistilleries and related
taprooms;



      (9)   Building materials sales and storage establishments;



      (10)   Bus stations with service and/or garage facilities;



      (11)   Cabinet, carpenter, upholstering, or furniture repair
shops;



      (12)   Dry cleaning, dyeing, and laundry establishments;



      (13)   Electrical contractors and equipment repair and
services;



      (14)   Farm implement dealer’s sales and display;



      (15)   Frozen food lockers for family or commercial storage
purposes;



      (16)   Engraving, printing, publishing, cartographic, and
bookbinding establishments;



      (17)   Grocery, fruit, vegetable, and meat retail
establishments;



      (18)   Greenhouses, nurseries, and garden supply stores;



      (19)   Laboratories, medical, dental, and optical;



      (20)   Lumber sales and yards;



      (21)   Marine and boat sales display and servicing
establishments;



      (22)   Medical and dental clinics;



      (23)   Miniature golf courses, par-three golf courses or
archery or golf driving ranges operated for commercial purposes;



      (24)   Monuments, processing, and sales;



      (25)   Mortuaries, vault, and casket establishments;



      (26)   Motels, hotels, and auto courts;



      (27)   Municipal and government buildings and structures;



      (28)   Newspaper printing and distribution agencies;



      (29)   Public utility structures;



      (30)   Plumbing, heating and air conditioning shops, service,
and showrooms;



      (31)   Radio and television service and repair shops;



      (32)   General retail and wholesale sales establishments;



      (33)   Residential dwelling unit.



         (a)   Alterations may be made to a residential building
containing nonconforming residential units when alterations will improve
livability of the unit provided the number of dwelling units in the building
are not increased; and



         (b)   A residential dwelling currently existing on a lot
or parcel of land in the C-1 District may be replaced by a newly constructed
residential dwelling provided the number of dwelling units in the building
are not increased.



      (34)   Restaurants (excluding drive-in type);



      (35)   Retail gas stations and related convenience goods
stores;



      (36)   Office and home furniture manufacture and warehousing;



      (37)   Theaters (enclosed structures only);



      (38)    Signs as regulated in § 152.55, “sign
regulations”;



      (39)   Off-street parking and loading as regulated by §
152.56.



   (C)   Uses by conditional use permit. Within a C-1 Commercial
District, buildings or land may be used for one or more of the following uses
if granted a conditional use permit as provided in § 152.07:



      (1)   Any business activity of the same general character as
those listed in division (B) above;



      (2)   Multiple-dwelling units and complexes if part of a
planned concept in accord with the approved Comprehensive Plan;



      (3)   New or used automobile sales or storage lots, new or
used implement sales or storage lots, automobile laundries or car washes,
automobile service stations, or repair shops provided:



         (a)   The parking lot shall be surfaced with a dust-free
material and plans for the arrangement of entrances, exits, screening of
exterior storage lots, and parking stalls shall accompany the request for a
special use permit;



         (b)   Artificial lighting and glare shall be directed
away from any public right-of-way and any residential district; and



         (c)   A screen of acceptable design shall be constructed
along the property line when said use is abutting any residential district.



      (4)   Drive-in restaurants, drive-in theaters, or similar uses
that provide goods and services to patrons in automobiles, provided:



         (a)   A screen of acceptable design shall be constructed
along the property line when said use is abutting any residential district;



         (b)   The parking area shall be surfaced with a
dust-free material, and plans for the arrangement of entrances, exits, and
parking stalls shall accompany the request for a conditional use permit; and



         (c)   Artificial lighting and glare shall be directed
away from any public right-of-way and any residential district.



      (5)   Mobile home park developments, subject to the
regulations as established in § 152.57, “Minimum mobile home park
requirements”.



   (D)   Height, yard, and lot coverage regulations.



      (1)   Height regulations. No structure shall exceed four
stories or 45 feet, whichever is less in height, except that cooling towers,
elevator penthouses, domes which do not contain usable space, water towers,
and smokestacks or other similar structures not intended for human occupancy
may be of any height which does not conflict with airport requirements.



      (2)   Yard regulation and lot coverage regulations. In the C-1
District, there shall be no specific yard requirements or lot coverage
requirements except as necessary to provide off-street parking and loading
where applicable as regulated in § 152.56.



   (E)   Performance standards.



      (1)   In order to ensure compliance with the performance
standards set forth below, the Council may require the owner or operator of
any permitted use to have made such investigations or tests as may be
required to show adherence to the performance standards. Such investigation
or tests as are required shall be carried out by an independent testing
organization selected by the city.



      (2)   Such investigations or testing shall be shared equally
by the owner or operator and the city, unless the investigation or tests
disclose noncompliance with the performance standards, in which situation the
entire cost shall be paid by the owner or operator.



         (a)   Noise. At any property line the sound pressure
level of noise radiated from an industrial operation shall not exceed the
values given in Table 1 herein. The sound pressure level shall be measured
with a “sound level meter” and an associated “octave band analyzer”,
both of which are manufactured to specifications published by the American
Standard Specifications for an Octave Band Filter Set for the Analysis of
Noise and Other Sounds, Z24, 10-1953. American Standards Association, Inc.,
New York, New York. Measurements shall be made using the flat network of the
sound level meter.



 


Table 1




Frequency Band Cycles Per Second

 

Maximum Permitted Sound Level (Decibels)






20-75

 

72




75-150

 

67




150-300

 

59




300-600

 

52




600-1,200

 

46




1,200-2,400

 

40




2,400- 4,800

 

34




Over 4,800

 

32





 



         (b)   Odors. No objectionable odors shall be detectable
beyond the limits of the property.



         (c)   Exterior lighting. Any lights used for exterior
illumination shall direct light away from adjoining property. Glare, whether
direct or reflected, such as from floodlights, spotlights, or high
temperature processing, and as differentiated from general illumination,
shall not be visible beyond the limits of the property.



         (d)   Vibration. No vibration shall be discernible at
any property line to the human sense of feeling for an accumulated total of
three or more minutes during any hour.



         (e)   Smoke. The Ringelman Smoke Chart, published by the
U.S. Bureau of Mines, shall be used for measuring smoke at the point of
emission. Smoke not darker or more opaque than No. 4 on said Chart may be
emitted, except that smoke darker or more opaque than No. 2 on said Chart may
not be emitted for periods longer than four minutes in any 30 minutes. These
provisions, applicable to visible gray smoke, shall also apply to visible
smoke of a different color but an equivalent apparent opacity.



         (f)   Dust. Solid or liquid particles shall not be
emitted at any point in concentrations exceeding three-tenths grains per
cubic foot of the conveying gas or air. For measurements of the amount of
particles in gases resulting from combustions, standard corrections shall be
applied to a stack temperature of 500°F and 50% excess air.



         (g)   Fumes or gases. Fumes or gases shall not be
emitted at any point in concentrations or amounts that are noxious, toxic, or
corrosive. The values given in Table I (Industrial Hygiene Standards -
Maximum Allowable Concentration for eight hour day, five days per week),
Table III (Odor Thresholds), Table IV (Exposure to Substances Causing Pain in
the Eyes), and Table I (Exposure to Substances Causing Injury to Vegetation)
in the latest revision of Chapter 5, Physiological Effects, that contains
such tables, in Air Pollution Abatement Manual, by the Manufacturing
Chemists’ Association, Inc., Washington, D.C., are hereby established as
guides for the determination of permissible concentration or amounts.
Detailed plans for the elimination of fumes or gases may be required before
the issuance of a land use and zoning permit.



         (h)   Sewer and water. The design and construction of
water supply facilities and treatment of all industrial sewage and waste
shall comply with city and state health standards and requirements.



   (F)   Screening, landscaping, lighting, storage, and outdoor
displays.



      (1)   Screening.



         (a)   All principal and accessory uses, except business
signs, which are situated within 50 feet of a residential district, shall be
screened from such district by a wall or fence of not less than 90% opacity
and not less than five nor more than seven feet in height above the level of
the residential district property at the district boundary. Walls or fences
of lesser heights or planting screens may be permitted by the Council if
there is a finding that the nature or extent of the use being screened is
such that a lesser degree of screening will as adequately promote and protect
the use and enjoyment of the properties within the adjacent residential
district, or there is a finding that a screening of the type required by this
chapter would interfere with the provision of adequate amounts of light and
air to same said properties.



         (b)   Loading docks in the C-1, I-1, and I-2 Districts
shall be screened so as not to be visible from any public street right-of-way
within a residential district. All required screening devices shall be
designed so that they are architecturally harmonious with the principal
structures on the site and they shall be properly maintained so as not to
become unsightly, hazardous, or less opaque than when originally constructed.



      (2)   Landscaping. All exposed ground areas surrounding or
within a principal or accessory use including street boulevards, which are
not devoted to drives, sidewalks, patios, or other such uses shall be
landscaped with grass, shrubs, trees, or other ornamental landscaped
materials. All landscaped areas shall be kept neat, clean, and uncluttered.
No landscaped area shall be used for the parking of vehicles or the storage
or display of materials, supplies, or merchandise.



      (3)   Lighting. All sources of artificial light situated in a
C-1, I-1, and I-2 District site shall be so fixed, directed, designed, or
sized that the sum total of their illumination will not increase the level of
illumination on any nearby residential property by more than one-tenth
footcandle in or within 25 feet of a dwelling nor more than one-half
footcandle on any other part of the property. Glare, whether direct or
reflected, as differentiated from general illumination, shall not be visible
from beyond the limits of the immediate site from which it originates.



      (4)   Storage - displays. All materials, supplies,
merchandise, or other similar matter not on display for a direct sale,
rental, or lease to the ultimate consumer or user shall be stored within a
completely enclosed building within the C-1, I-1, and I-2 Districts, or
within the confines of a 100% opaque wall or fence not less than five feet
high. Merchandise which is offered for sale as described above may be
displayed beyond the confines of a building in the C-1, I-1, and I-2
Districts, but the area occupied by such outdoor display shall not constitute
a greater number of square feet than 10% of the ground floor area of the
building housing the principal use, unless such merchandise is of a type
customarily displayed outdoors such as garden supplies. No storage of any
type shall be permitted within the one-half of the required front or side
street setback nearest the street.



   (G)   Requirements for vehicular and pedestrian circulation.



      (1)   Traffic and circulation.



         (a)   All commercial buildings or structures and their
accessory uses shall be accessible to and from nearby public streets and
sidewalks by driveways and walkways surfaced with a hard, all-weather,
durable, dust-free material, and property drained. Vehicular traffic
generated by a commercial use shall be channeled and controlled in a manner
that will avoid congestion on the public streets, traffic hazards, and
excessive traffic through residential areas, particularly truck traffic.



         (b)   The adequacy of any proposed traffic circulation
system to accomplish these objectives shall be determined by the City
Engineer who may require such additional measures for traffic control and he
or she may deem necessary, including, but not limited to, the following:
directional signalization, channelization, standby turn lanes, illumination,
and storage area and distribution facilities within the commercial site to
prevent back-up of vehicles on public streets.



      (2)   Ingress and egress. No area used by motor vehicles other
than driveways serving as ingress and egress to the commercial site shall be
located within the public street right-of-way.



      (3)   Driveway restrictions. All driveways to or from public
streets shall be subject to the following restrictions.



         (a)   Driveway widths: (measurement between roadway
edges).



 


Type

 

Maximum Feet

 

Minimum Feet




One-way

 

20

 

12




Two-way

 

30

 

24




 



         (b)   Minimum driveway angle to street: Thirty degrees
when street is one-way or divided, otherwise 60 degrees;



         (c)   Minimum distance between driveways: Twenty feet,
between roadway edges measured along street curb line; and



         (d)   Minimum distance of driveway from street
intersections: (Measured along street curb line between nearest driveway edge
and intersecting street curb line).



 


If the Driveway Enters a Street Classified as a

 

And the Intersecting Street Is Classified as a

 

And the Driveway Enters Land Approaching or Leaving Intersection   





 


 

Approaching

 

Leaving*





Collector Street
 

Collector street or minor arterial

 

15 feet

 

15 feet





 

Major arterial

 

35 feet

 

20 feet



 

Minor street

 

20 feet

 

15 feet



Major Arterial
 

Collector street or minor arterial

 

25 feet

 

15 feet





 

Expressway ramp

 

200 feet

 

100 feet





 

Major arterial

 

40 feet

 

20 feet



 

Minor street

 

20 feet

 

15 feet



Minor Street
 

Major arterial

 

15 feet

 

20 feet



 

Minor street, collector street or minor arterial

 

15 feet

 

15 feet



Note:

*Minimum distance to be the same as that specified for approaching lane if
left turns are permitted into or out of driveway




 



   (H)   General regulations. Additional regulations applicable to the
C-1 District are set forth in §§ 152.45 through 152.58.



(2006 Code, § 11.07)  (Ord. 130, passed 12-24-1971; Ord. 171, passed
5-17-1978; Ord. 73, 3rd Series, passed 11-20-1987; Ord. 207, 3rd Series,
passed 8-8-2016; Ord. 224, 3rd Series, passed 12-11-2018)  Penalty, see §
152.99



§ 152.30  I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The I-1 District is intended for conducting a
process, fabrication, wholesale operation, manufacturing, providing a
service, or assembly of products and materials provided such use will not
generate offensive odors, glare, smoke, dust, noise, vibrations, or other
objectionable influences that extend beyond the lot on which the use is
located and that all development uses are conducted wholly within a building.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within the I-1 District, unless otherwise
provided by this chapter, no building or land shall be used except for the
following:



      (1)   Those uses as first permitted, and as regulated in §
152.29 (C-1 District), shall be a permitted use;



      (2)   Appliance assembly and warehousing;



      (3)   Machine shops;



      (4)   Electrical and electronic manufacturing establishments;



      (5)   Light assembly and manufacturing operations;



      (6)   Airports;



      (7)   Bottling establishments;



      (8)   Building materials sales and storage establishments;



      (9)   Camera and photographic manufacturing establishments;



      (10)   Cartage and express facilities;



      (11)   Heliports;



      (12)   Jewelry manufacturers;



      (13)   Medical, dental, and optical laboratories;



      (14)   Public utility structures and municipal and government
buildings;



      (15)   Railroad rights-of-way;



      (16)   Storage and warehousing facilities;



      (17)   Wholesale business and office establishments;



      (18)   Blacksmith shops;



      (19)   Manufacturing, processing, storage, servicing, and
testing establishments;



      (20)   Accessory uses, as follows:



         (a)   Accessory uses, except signs, customarily incident
to the above permitted uses;



         (b)   Signs as regulated in § 152.55; and



         (c)   Off-street parking and loading as regulated by §
152.56, which shall be provided on the premises.



      (21)   Alterations may be made to a residential building
containing nonconforming residential units when alterations will improve
livability of the unit provided the number of dwelling units in the building
are not increased; and



      (22)   A residential dwelling currently existing on a lot or
parcel of land in the I-1 District may be replaced by a newly constructed
residential dwelling provided the number of dwelling units in the building
are not increased.



   (C)   Uses by conditional use permit. Within an I-1 District,
buildings or land may be used for one or more of the following uses if
granted a conditional use permit as provided in § 152.07.



      (1)   Gasoline, fuel, and oil bulk stations, storage, and
distribution plants.



      (2)   Manufacturing, production, and the like. Any
manufacturing, production, processing, cleaning, storage, servicing, repair,
and testing of materials, goods, or products similar to those listed in
division (B) above, which comply with the performance standards of this
District.



      (3)   Sand, gravel, and the like. Extraction, processing, or
storage of sand, gravel, stone, or other raw material subject also to the
following special provisions and limitations.



      (4)   Removal of soil, sand or other material.



         (a)   Temporary excavation district. The use of land for
the removal of topsoil, sand, or gravel, and other material from the land is
not permitted in any zone except by the granting of a temporary excavation
permit by the Council. Permits shall be issued for a maximum period of one
year and shall be subject to review and rehearing at that time.



         (b)   Future use of the land. The persons applying for a
temporary excavation permit must submit a plan of intent as to the future use
of the property being excavated as well as development plans showing proposed
elevations, drainage, access routes to be used in hauling to and/or from the
site, and daily hours intended for the operation as well as projected period
of excavation.



         (c)   Safety precautions. If during the excavation work,
it becomes necessary for the person excavating to create a condition of grade
or drainage not in the interest of health or safety, it shall become that
person’s duty to correct, immediately, the dangerous situation created, as
well as fence such area from the general public during the period of danger.



         (d)   Bonding. It shall be necessary for the person
securing a temporary excavation permit to present adequate proof of bonding
to the city in the form of a performance bond, sufficient in value to cover
the expense of the completion of the development plan or to bring such
portion of the completed project to a safe grade and elevation so as to be
healthful and safe to the general public and to provide safe and adequate
drainage of the site.



      (5)   Retail and service establishments. Retail and service
establishments, of an essential or convenience nature consistent with the
operation of an industrial district.



   (D)   Height, yard, and lot coverage regulations.



      (1)   Height regulations. No structure shall exceed four
stories or 45 feet in height whichever is less.



      (2)   Yard regulations.



         (a)   No building shall be located within 50 feet of any
residential district.



         (b)   Except for railroad loading areas, no parking or
loading space shall be located within 25 feet of any residential district.



         (c)   Any open storage of materials or open loading
areas shall be located or screened so as not to be visible from any
residential district.



   (E)   Performance standards. The performance standards of the I-1
District shall be those of § 152.29(E), except that measurement or
determination of noise, odor, and vibration shall be made at the boundary of
the I-1 District, rather than at the property line of the use concerned.



   (F)   Screening, landscaping, lighting, storage and outdoor
displays. The regulations shall be those of § 152.29(F) as regulated therein.



   (G)   General regulations. Additional regulations applicable to the
I-1 District are set forth in §§ 152.45 through 152.58.



(2006 Code, § 11.08)  (Ord. 130, passed 12-24-1971; Ord. 171, passed
5-17-1978; Ord. 73, 3rd Series, passed 12-20-1987; Ord. 224, 3rd Series,
passed 12-11-2018)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.31  I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The I-2 District is intended to provide a district
which will allow all manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging,
treatment, or assembly of products and materials which due to their size and
nature, would not conform in the I-1 District.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within an I-2 District, unless otherwise
provided by this chapter, no building or land shall be used except for the
following:



      (1)   Those uses as first permitted, and as regulated in §
152.30 (I-1 District), shall be a permitted use;



      (2)   Canning factories, and creameries, food processing
plants, including smoking and curing operations;



      (3)   Contractor’s offices, shops and yards for plumbing,
heating, glazing, painting, paper hanging, roofing, ventilating, air
conditioning, masonry, electrical, and refrigeration industries;



      (4)   Cooperatives;



      (5)   Freight terminals and classification yards;



      (6)   Fuel and ice sales and storage facilities, including
bulk fuel storage;



      (7)   Garages for storage, repair, and servicing of motor
vehicles and farm implements;



      (8)   Gasoline and oil bulk stations and distributing plants;



      (9)   Hatcheries;



      (10)   Grain elevators, milling, and processing activities;



      (11)   Highway maintenance shops and yards;



      (12)   Monument works, cutting, grinding and polishing
operations (excavation excluded);



      (13)   Poultry and animal rendering plants, processing, and
treatment yards;



      (14)   Accessory uses, as follows:



         (a)   Accessory uses, except signs, customarily incident
to the above permitted uses;



         (b)   Signs as regulated in § 152.55; and



         (c)   Off-street parking and loading as regulated by §
152.56, which shall be provided on the premises.



      (15)   A residential dwelling currently existing on a lot or
parcel of land in the I-2 District may be replaced by a newly constructed
residential dwelling provided the number of dwelling units in the building
are not increased.



   (C)   Uses by conditional use permit. Within an I-2 District,
buildings or land may be used for one or more of the following uses if
granted a conditional use permit as provided in § 152.07.



      (1)   Any manufacturing, production, processing, cleaning,
storage, servicing, repair, and testing of materials, goods, or products
similar to those listed in division (B) above, which comply with the
performance standards of this District.



      (2)   Storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials or
products which could decompose on detonation.



      (3)   Automobile wrecking and/or junk yards, provided, such
use is conducted within a building or the premises on which such business is
conducted is entirely enclosed within a solid substantial fence, except for
gates, not less than eight feet in height. The term SOLID as used herein
shall mean a fence having an opacity of 100%.



      (4)   Mobile home park development, subject to the regulations
as established in § 152.57, “minimum mobile home park requirements”.



      (5)   Retail and service establishments, of an essential or
convenience nature consistent with the operation of an industrial district.



   (D)   Height, yard, and lot coverage regulations.



      (1)   Height regulations. No structure shall exceed four
stories or 45 feet in height, whichever is less.



      (2)   Yard regulations.



         (a)   No building shall be located within 50 feet of any
residential district.



         (b)   Except for railroad loading areas, no parking or
loading space shall be located within 25 feet of any residential district.



         (c)   Any open storage of materials or open loading
areas shall be located or screened so as not to be visible from any
residential district.



   (E)   Performance standards. The performance standards of the I-2
District shall be those of § 152.29(E) except that measurement or
determination of noise, odor, and vibration shall be made at the boundary of
the I-2 District, rather than at the property line of the use concerned.



   (F)   Screening, landscaping, lighting, storage, and outdoor
displays. The regulations shall be those of § 152.29(F), as regulated
therein.



   (G)   General regulations. Additional regulations applicable to the
I-2 District are set forth §§ 152.45 through 152.58.



(2006 Code, § 11.09)  (Ord. 130, passed 12-24-1971; Ord. 73, 3rd Series,
passed 12-20-1987)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.32  FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT.



   (A)   Statutory authorization, findings of fact and purpose.



      (1)   Statutory authorization. The State Legislature has, in
M.S.§ 103F.101 and M.S. §§ 394.21 through 394.37, as they may be amended
from time to time, delegated the authority to local governmental units to
adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses, state statutes. M.S.§
103F.101, as it may be amended from time to time, further stipulates that
communities subject to recurrent flooding must participate and maintain
eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.



      (2)   Statement of purpose. The purpose of this section is to
maintain the city’s eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program and
to minimize potential losses due to periodic flooding including loss of life,
loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce, and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection
and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety, and general welfare.



      (3)   Warning of disclaimer of liability. This section does
not imply that areas outside of the floodplain district or land uses
permitted within such districts will be free from flooding and flood damages.
This section shall not create liability on the part of the city or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this section or any administrative decisions lawfully made thereunder.



   (B)   General provisions.



      (1)   Adoption of flood insurance rate map. The flood
insurance rate map for the city, dated July 17, 1986, developed by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, is hereby adopted by reference as the
official floodplain zoning district map and made a part of this section.



      (2)   Land to which floodplain district applies. This section
shall apply to all lands designated as floodplain within the jurisdiction of
the city.



      (3)   Interpretation.



         (a)   The boundaries of the floodplain district shall be
determined by scaling distances on the official floodplain zoning district
map. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the floodplain district, the Planning and Zoning Director shall
make the necessary interpretation based on elevations on the regional
100-year flood profile, if available.



         (b)   If 100-year flood elevations are not available,
the city shall:



            1.   Require a floodplain evaluation consistent
with the requirements of this section to determine a 100-year flood elevation
for the site; or



            2.   Base its decision on available
hydraulic/hydrologic or site elevation survey data which demonstrates the
likelihood the site is within or outside of the floodplain.



      (4)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         ACCESSORY USE or STRUCTURE. A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.



         BASEMENT. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces,
having its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides,
regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level.



         FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the floodplain outside of the
floodway.



         FLOODPLAIN. The channel or beds proper and the areas
adjoining a wetland, lake, or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be
covered by the regional flood. FLOODPLAIN areas within the city shall
encompass all areas designated as Zone A on the flood insurance rate map.



         FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a
watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are
reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge.



         OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike,
pile, abutment, projection, excavation, dredged spoil, channel modification,
culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, stockpile
of sand or gravel or other material, or matter in, along, across, or
projecting into any channel, watercourse, lake bed, or regulatory floodplain
which may impede, retard, or change the direction of flow, either in itself
or by catching or collecting debris carried by floodwater.



         REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large
floods known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably
characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in
magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous
with the term BASE FLOOD used in the flood insurance rate map.



         REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. An elevation no
lower than one foot above the elevation caused by encroachments on the
floodplain that result from designation of a floodway.



         STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground, or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to,
buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes,
travel trailers/vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in
division (L)(1) below, and other similar items.



   (C)   Conflict with pre-existing zoning regulations and general
compliance.



      (1)   The Floodplain District as overlay zoning district. The
floodplain zoning district shall be considered an overlay zoning district to
all existing land use regulations of the city. The uses permitted in
divisions (D) and (E) below shall be permitted only if not prohibited by any
established, underlying zoning district.



      (2)   Compliance.



         (a)   No new structure or land shall hereafter be used
and no structure shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally
altered without full compliance with the terms of this section and other
applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this
section. Within the floodway and flood fringe, all uses not listed as
permitted uses in division (D) below shall be prohibited.



         (b)   In addition, a caution is provided here that:



            1.   New manufactured homes, replacement
manufactured homes, and certain travel trailers and travel vehicles are
subject to the general provisions of this section and specifically in
divisions (D) and (L) below;



            2.   Modifications, additions, structural
alterations, or repair after damage to existing nonconforming structures and
nonconforming uses of structures or land are regulated by the general
provisions of this section and specifically in division (I) below; and



            3.   As-built elevations for elevated structures
must be certified by ground surveys as stated in division (G) below.



   (D)   Permitted uses. Standards, and floodplain evaluation criteria.



      (1)   Permitted uses in the floodplain. The following uses of
land are permitted uses in the floodplain district:



         (a)   Any use of land which does not involve a
structure, an addition to the outside dimensions to an existing structure, or
an obstruction to flood flows such as fill, excavation, or storage of
materials or equipment;



         (b)   Any use of land involving the construction of new
structures, the placement or replacement of manufactured homes, the addition
to the outside dimensions of an existing structure or obstructions, such as
fill or storage of materials or equipment, provided, these activities are
located in the flood fringe portion of the floodplain. These uses shall be
subject to the development standards in division (D)(2) below and the
floodplain evaluation criteria in division (D)(3) below for determining
floodway and flood fringe boundaries; and



         (c)   Travel trailers and travel vehicles are requested
by division (L) below.



      (2)   Standards for floodplain permitted uses.



         (a)   Fill. Fill shall be properly compacted and the
slopes shall be properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover, or
other acceptable method. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has
established criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation
for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood
elevation. FEMA’s requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and
side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot
developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the initiation
of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area designation will
be requested.



         (b)   Storage of materials and equipment.



            1.   The storage or processing of materials that
are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to
human, animal, or plant life is prohibited.



            2.   Storage of other materials or equipment may
be allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after
a flood warning or if placed on fill to the regulatory flood protection
elevation.



            3.   No use shall be permitted which will
adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any tributary
to the main stream, or of any drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility
or system.



            4.   All structures, including accessory
structures, additions to existing structures and manufactured homes, shall be
constructed on fill so that the basement floor, or first floor if there is no
basement, is at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The
finished fill elevation must be no lower than one foot below the regulatory
flood protection elevation and shall extend at such elevation at least 15
feet beyond the limits of the structure constructed thereon.



            5.   Uses that do not have vehicular access at or
above an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood
protection elevation to lands outside of the floodplain shall not be
permitted unless granted a variance by the Planning Commission. In granting a
variance, the Commission shall specify limitations on the period of use or
occupancy of the use and only after determining the adequate flood warning
time and local emergency response and recovery procedures exist.



            6.   Accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad
tracks, and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation; however, a permit for such facilities to be used by the
employees or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a
flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area
would be inundated to a depth greater than two feet or be subject to flood
velocities greater than four feet per second upon occurrence of the regional
flood.



            7.   Where public utilities are not provided:



               a.   On-site water supply systems must be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems; and



               b.   New or replacement on-site sewage
treatment systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood
waters and they shall not be subject to impairment or contamination during
times of flooding. Any sewage treatment system designed in accordance with
the state’s current statewide standards for on-site sewage treatment
systems shall be determined to be in compliance with this division (D).



            8.   All manufactured homes must be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces.



      (3)   Floodplain evaluation.



         (a)   Upon receipt of an application for a permit,
manufactured home park development or subdivision approval within the
floodplain district, the Planning and Zoning Director shall require the
applicant to furnish sufficient site development plans and a
hydrologic/hydraulic analysis by a qualified engineer or hydrologist
specifying the nature of the development and whether the proposed use is
located in the floodway or flood fringe and the regulatory flood protection
elevation for the site. Procedures consistent with Minn. Rules pts. 6120.5600
(Technical Standards and Requirements for Floodplain Evaluation) and Minn.
Rules pt. 6120.5700 (State Floodplain Management Standards for Local
Ordinances) shall be followed during the technical evaluation and review of
the development proposal.



         (b)   The Planning and Zoning Director shall submit one
copy of all information required by division (D)(3)(a) above to the
respective Department of Natural Resources’ Area Hydrologist for review and
comment at least 20 days prior to the granting of a permit or manufactured
home park development/subdivision approval by the city. The Planning and
Zoning Director shall notify the respective Department of Natural Resources
Area Hydrologist within ten days after a permit or manufactured home park
development/subdivision approval is granted.



   (E)   Utilities, railroads, roads, and bridges in the floodplain
district. All utilities and transportation facilities, including railroad
tracks, roads, and bridges, shall be constructed in accordance with state
floodplain management standards contained in Minn. Rules 1983 pts. 6120.5000
through 6120.6200.



   (F)   Subdivisions.



      (1)   No land shall be subdivided and no manufactured home
park shall be developed or expanded where the site is determined to be
unsuitable by the Planning Commission for reason of flooding, inadequate
drainage, water supply, or sewage treatment facilities. The Planning
Commission shall review the subdivision/development proposal to ensure that
each lot or parcel contains sufficient area outside of the floodway for fill
placement for elevating structures, sewage systems, and related activities.



      (2)   In the Floodplain District, applicants for subdivision
approval or development of a manufactured home park or manufactured home park
expansion shall provide the information required in division (D)(3)(a) above.
The Planning and Zoning Director shall evaluate the proposed subdivision or
mobile home park development in accordance with the standards established in
divisions (D)(2), (D)(3), and (E) above.



      (3)   For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the floodway and
flood fringe boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation, and the
required elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all
required subdivision drawings and platting documents.



      (4)   The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has
established criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation
for certain structures properly elevated to fill above the 100-year flood
elevation. FEMA’s requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and
side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot
developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the initiation
of site preparation or a change of special flood hazard area designation will
be requested.



      (5)   This division (F) is not intended as a substitute for a
comprehensive city or county subdivision ordinance. It can, however, be used
as an interim control until the comprehensive subdivision ordinance can be
amended to include necessary floodplain management provisions.



   (G)   Administration.



      (1)   Permit required. A permit issued by the Planning and
Zoning Director shall be secured prior to the construction, addition, or
alteration of any building or structure; prior to the use or change of use of
a building, structure, or land; prior to the change or extension of a
nonconforming use; and prior to the excavation or the placement of an
obstruction within the floodplain.



      (2)   State and federal permits. Prior to granting a permit or
processing an application for a variance, the Planning and Zoning Director
shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and
federal permits.



      (3)   Certification of first floor elevations. The applicant
shall be required to submit certification by a registered professional
engineer, registered architect, or registered land surveyor that the finished
fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with the
provisions of this section. The Planning and Zoning Director shall maintain a
record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) for all new
structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the
floodplain district.



   (H)   Variances.



      (1)   A variance means a modification of a specific permitted
development standard required in an official control including this section
to allow an alternative development standard not stated as acceptable in the
official control, but only as applied to a particular property for the
purpose of alleviating a hardship, practical difficulty, or unique
circumstances as defined and elaborated upon in a city’s respective
planning and zoning enabling legislation.



      (2)   The Planning Commission may authorize upon appeal in
specific cases such relief or variance from the terms of this section as will
not be contrary to the public interest and only for those circumstances such
as hardship, practical difficulties, or circumstances unique to the property
under consideration, as provided for in the respective enabling legislation
for planning and zoning for cities or counties as appropriate. In the
granting of such variance, the Planning Commission shall clearly identify in
writing the specific conditions that existed consistent with the criteria
specified in the respective enabling legislation which justified the granting
of the variance.



      (3)   Variances from the provisions of this section may be
authorized where the Planning Commission has determined the variance will not
be contrary to the public interest and the spirit and intent of this section.
No variance shall allow in any district a use prohibited in that district or
permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood
protection elevation. Variances may be used to modify permissible methods of
flood protection.



      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Department shall submit by mail
to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for
proposed Variance sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will
receive at least ten days’ notice of the hearing. A copy of all decisions
granting a variance shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of Natural
Resources within ten days of such action.



      (5)   Appeals from any decision of the Planning Commission may
be made and as specified in the city’s Official Controls and also in state
statutes.



      (6)   (a)   The Planning and Zoning Director shall notify
the applicant for a variance that:



            1.   The issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and



            2.   Such construction below the 100-year or
regional flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification
shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions.



         (b)   The city shall maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such
variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the
Administrator of the national flood insurance.



   (I)   Nonconformities. A structure or the use of a structure or
premises which was lawful before the effective date of this section, but
which is not in conformity with the provisions of this section may be
continued subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or
altered in a way which increases its nonconformity;



      (2)   An alteration within the inside dimensions of a
nonconforming use or structure is permissible, provided, it will not result
in increasing the flood damage potential of that use or structure;



      (3)   The cost of all structural alterations or additions both
inside and outside of a structure to any nonconforming structure over the
life of the structure shall not exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure unless the conditions of this division (I)(3) are satisfied. The
cost of all structural alterations and additions constructed since the
adoption of the city’s initial floodplain controls must be calculated into
today’s current cost which will include all costs such as construction
materials and a reasonable cost placed on all manpower or labor. If the
current cost of all previous and proposed alterations and additions exceeds
50% of the current market value of the structure, then the structure must
meet the standards of division (D) above for new structures; or



      (4)   If any nonconforming use of a structure or land or
nonconforming structure is destroyed by any means, including floods, to an
extent of 50% or more of its market value at the time of destruction, it
shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
section. The Planning and Zoning Director may issue a permit for
reconstruction if the use is located outside the floodway and, upon
reconstruction, is adequately elevated on fill in conformity with the
provisions of this section.



   (J)   Unlawful acts. Violation of the provisions of this section or
failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances
or conditional uses) is unlawful.



      (1)   In responding to a suspected violation of this code of
ordinances, the Planning and Zoning Director and the Council may utilize the
full array of enforcement actions available to it including, but not limited
to, prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for
corrective measures, or a request to the National Flood Insurance Program for
denial of flood insurance availability to the guilty party. The city must act
in good faith to enforce these official controls and to correct violations of
this code of ordinances to the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its
eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.



      (2)   When a violation of this code of ordinances is either
discovered by or brought to the attention of the Planning and Zoning
Director, the Planning and Zoning Director shall immediately investigate the
situation and document the nature and extent of the violation of the official
control. As soon as is reasonably possible, this information will be
submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural Resources’ and Federal
Emergency Management Agency Regional Office along with the city’s plan of
action to correct the violation to the degree possible.



      (3)   (a)   The Planning and Zoning Director shall notify
the suspected party of the requirements of this section and all other
official controls and the nature and extent of the suspected violation of
these controls. If the structure and/or use is under construction or
development, the Planning and Zoning Director may order the construction or
development immediately halted until a proper permit or approval is granted
by the city.



         (b)   If the construction or development is already
completed, then the Planning and Zoning Administrator may either:



            1.   Issue an order identifying the corrective
actions that must be made within a specified time period to bring the use or
structure into compliance with the official controls; or



            2.   Notify the responsible party to apply for an
after-the-fact permit/development approval within a specified period of time
not to exceed 30 days.



      (4)   If the responsible party does not appropriately respond
to the Planning and Zoning Director within the specified period of time, each
additional day that lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this
section and shall be prosecuted accordingly. The Planning and Zoning Director
shall also, upon the lapse of the specified response, period notify the
landowner to restore the land to the condition which existed prior to the
violation of this section.



   (K)   Amendments. All amendments to this section, including
revisions to the official floodplain zoning district map, shall be submitted
to and approved by the Commissioner of Natural Resources prior to adoption.
The floodplain designation on the official floodplain zoning district map
shall not be removed unless the area is filled to an elevation at or above
the regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside
of the floodplain. Changes in the official zoning map must meet the Federal
Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Technical Conditions and Criteria and
must receive prior FEMA approval before adoption. The Commissioner of Natural
Resources must be given ten days’ written notice of all hearings to
consider an amendment to this section and said notice shall include a draft
of the ordinance amendment or technical study under consideration.



   (L)   Travel trailers and travel vehicles. Travel trailers and
travel vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria specified in division
(L)(1) below, shall be subject to the provisions of this section and as
specifically spelled out in divisions (L)(3) and (L)(4) below.



      (1)   Exemptions. Travel trailers and travel vehicles are
exempt from the provisions of this section if they are placed in any of the
areas listed in division (L)(2) below, and further they meet the following
criteria:



         (a)   Have current licenses required for highway use;



         (b)   Are highway ready, meaning on wheels or the
internal jacking system, are attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities commonly used in campgrounds and trailer parks and the travel
trailer/travel vehicle has no permanent structural type additions attached to
it; or



         (c)   The travel trailer or travel vehicle and
associated use must be permissible in any pre-existing, underlying zoning use
district.



      (2)   Areas exempted for placement of travel/recreational
vehicles. Areas exempted for placement of travel/recreational vehicles are as
follows:



         (a)   Individual lots or parcels of record;



         (b)   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds; and



         (c)   Existing condominium type associations.



      (3)   Loss of exemption. Travel trailers and travel vehicles
exempted in division (L)(1) above, lose this exemption when development
occurs on the parcel exceeding $500 for a structural addition to the travel
trailer/travel vehicle or an accessory structure such as a garage or storage
building. The travel trailer/travel vehicle and all additions and accessory
structures will then be treated as a new structure and shall be subject to
the elevation requirements and the use of land restrictions specified in
division (D) above.



      (4)   Floodplain conditions. Travel trailers/travel vehicles
(including replacements and new commercial type uses and residential type
subdivisions) are not permissible in the floodplain.



      (5)   New commercial travel trailer, travel vehicle parks, and
the like. New commercial travel trailer or travel vehicle parks or
campgrounds and new residential type subdivisions and condominium
associations and the expansion of any existing similar use exceeding five
units or dwelling sites shall be subject to the following.



         (a)   Any new or replacement travel trailer or travel
vehicle will be allowed in the floodway or flood fringe districts, provided,
said trailer or vehicle and its contents are placed on fill above the
regulatory flood protection elevation determined in accordance with the
provisions of division (D)(3) above and proper elevated road access to the
site exists in accordance with division (D) above. No fill placed in the
floodway to meet the requirements of this division (L)(5) shall increase
flood stages of the 100-year or regional flood.



         (b)   All new or replacement travel trailers or travel
vehicles not meeting the criteria of division (L)(5)(a) above, may, as an
alternative, be allowed if in accordance with the following provisions. The
applicant must submit an emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all
vehicles and people during the 100-year flood. Said plan shall be prepared by
a registered engineer or other qualified individual and shall demonstrate
that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation. All
attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement travel trailers
or other recreational vehicles must be protected or constructed so as to not
be impaired or contaminated during times of flooding in accordance with
division (D) above.



(2006 Code, § 11.10)  (Ord. 83, 3rd Series, passed 8-31-1990)



§ 152.33  PID PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The PID is intended to provide for certain industrial
uses that, because of location, transportation, access, and other land use
factors, must necessarily be located and adjacent to lesser land use
intensities, and with proper control, these areas should become compatible
with and maintain the value of properties and uses adjacent to them.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within a PID, no building or land shall be
used, and no building shall be erected, structurally altered, converted, or
enlarged except for one or more of the following uses:



      (1)   Bottling establishments;



      (2)   Building material sales and storage establishments;



      (3)   Broadcasting antennas, television, and radio;



      (4)   Cartage and express facilities;



      (5)   Cartography and bookbinding establishments;



      (6)   Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging,
treatment, and assembly of products and materials;



      (7)   Offices;



      (8)   Scientific research, investigation, testing, or
experimentation;



      (9)   Warehousing of products;



      (10)   Electrical and electronic products manufacturers;



      (11)   Engraving, printing, and publishing establishments;



      (12)   Medical, dental, and optical laboratories;



      (13)   Public utility structures and municipal and
governmental buildings;



      (14)   Railroad rights-of-way;



      (15)   Storage or warehousing facilities; or



      (16)   Wholesale business and office establishments.



   (C)   Uses by conditional use permit. Within a PID, no building or
land shall be used for one or more of the following uses except by
conditional use permit:



      (1)   Any manufacturing, production, processing, cleaning,
storage, servicing, repair, and testing of materials, goods, or products
similar to those listed in division (B) above which conform with the
performance standards set forth in § 152.29; and



      (2)   Retail and service establishments of an essential or
convenience nature consistent with the operation of a Planned Industrial
District.



   (D)   Height, yard frontage, area, and lot coverage regulations.



      (1)   Height regulations. No building shall hereafter be
erected to exceed a height of three stories, except that buildings permitted
in this District may be erected to greater heights if the building is set
back from each required yard line at least one more foot for each foot of
additional height above 35 feet.



      (2)   Front yard regulations. There shall be a front yard
having a depth of not less than 50 feet between building and the street
right-of-way line, except where the district abuts or adjoins residence
districts across the street, there shall be a front yard having a depth of
not less than 75 feet.



      (3)   Side yard regulations. There shall be two side yards,
one on each side of a building. Each side yard shall be not less than 20 feet
in width, except where the district abuts or adjoins residence districts, the
side yard abutting said residence district shall be not less than 75 feet in
width.



      (4)   Rear yard regulations. There shall be a rear yard not
less than 50 feet in depth, except where lots abut railroad siding and where
the districts abut or adjoin residence districts, there shall be a rear yard
of not less than 100 feet in depth.



      (5)   Lot area regulations. Every individual lot, site or
tract shall have an area of not less than two acres.



      (6)   Minimum district area regulations. No PID shall be
established on any tract, which is less than 80 acres. This requirement may
be waived if the tract is in single ownership or under unified control where
tract abuts or adjoins at least 25% of the perimeter of a PID.



      (7)   Frontage regulations. Every lot or tract shall have a
width of not less than 200 feet abutting a public right-of-way.



      (8)   Lot coverage regulations. Not more than 35% of the total
area of a lot shall be covered by buildings.



   (E)   Procedures.



      (1)   All petitions for rezoning to establish or expand must
also concurrently follow subdivision platting procedures and a complete
preliminary plat with all supporting data required, must be filed with the
Planning Commission.



      (2)   All public rights-of-way within a PID shall be
considered streets or thoroughfares as defined in the Thoroughfare Plan.



      (3)   Every application for the establishment of a PID shall
be accompanied by the following documents, which, in their entirety, shall
constitute an overall development plan for the property described in the
application:



         (a)   A boundary survey and legal description of the
entire tract covered by the application, prepared by a registered land
surveyor;



         (b)   A land use plan prepared by a person trained or
experienced in land use planning. The Plan shall be to scale and shall show
the following:



            1.   The relationship of the application area to
surrounding properties, section lines, and other existing features such as
streets and highways, buildings, railroads, and utilities;



            2.   The alignment and functional classification
of all proposed streets;



            3.   The alignment and characteristics of all
proposed railroad facilities; and



            4.   The dimensions and areas of all lots and
blocks.



         (c)   The arrangement and extent of all land use
classifications, and zoning districts preliminary layout of all proposed
water mains, sanitary sewers, and storm drainage facilities, together with
profiles and typical design cross-sections for all street, roadways, and a
general overall site grading plan, including arrows indicating direction and
destination of surface drainage. Such layouts, profiles, design
cross-sections, and plans shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor or
civil engineer;



         (d)   Copies of all proposed protective covenants, and
any provisions for associations of individual owners;



         (e)   The names and addresses of all persons holding fee
title to the entire land area included in the overall development plan as
well as the names and addresses of all persons engaged in developing and
managing said plan;



         (f)   The owners or developers contemplated development
schedule;



         (g)   The owners and developers contemplated cost of all
street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water main improvements;



         (h)   Upon a finding by the Planning Commission and
Council that the proposed PID and preliminary plat will be consistent with
long-range comprehensive plans for the city and meet the requirements of the
PID, the Council may establish a PID on the property included in the
preliminary plat. The preliminary plat as approved together with such
covenants, deed restrictions, controls, or special conditional use permits as
may be attached to it, shall become a part of the ordinance establishing the
zoning change. Any change in the plan will require resubmission to the
Planning Commission and final approval by the Council; and



         (i)   The final platting of the land zoned PID shall be
subject to such requirements for approval, recording, and the installation of
improvements as required by other provisions of this code of ordinances.



   (F)   Performance standards.



      (1)   Intent. It is the intent of this division (F) to provide
that industry and related activities shall be established and maintained with
proper appearance from streets and adjoining properties and to provide that
each such permitted use shall be a good neighbor to adjoining properties.



      (2)   Performance standards. The performance standards of the
PID shall be those of § 152.29(E), except that measurement or determination
of noise, odor, and vibration shall be made at the boundary of the PID rather
than at the property line of the use concerned.



      (3)   Regulations on screening, landscaping, lighting,
storage, and outdoor displays. The regulations shall be those of § 152.29(F)
as regulated therein.



   (G)   Building design and construction.



      (1)   (a)   In addition to other restrictions of this
chapter and any other provision of this code of ordinances, any building or
structure within the Planned Industrial District shall meet the following
standards:



         (b)   All exterior walls finished on any building shall
be any single one or combination of the following:



            1.   Face brick;



            2.   Concrete block;



            3.   Natural stone;



            4.   Special designed precast concrete units if
the surfaces have been integrally treated with an applied decorative material
or texture;



            5.   Factory fabricated and finished metal framed
panel construction, if the panel materials are any of those named above,
glass, pre-finished metal (other than unpainted galvanized iron), or plastic;
and



            6.   Other material as may be approved by the
Council.



      (2)   All subsequent additions and outbuildings constructed
after the erection of an original building or buildings shall be designed in
a manner conforming and harmonizing with the original architectural design
and general appearance.



      (3)   Any other exterior wall finishes, or any changes in
architectural design must be approved by the Council.



   (H)   General regulations.



      (1)   Signs as regulated in § 152.55; and



      (2)   Off-street parking and loading as regulated in §
152.56(B) and (C).



(2006 Code, § 11.11)  (Ord. 6, 3rd Series, passed 1-17-1980)  Penalty, see
§ 152.99




GENERAL REGULATIONS




§ 152.45  SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Except as may otherwise be provided in § 152.06,
nonconforming structures and uses, all buildings erected hereafter, all uses
of land or buildings established hereafter, all structural alterations or
relocation of existing buildings occurring hereafter, and all enlargements of
additions to existing uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all
regulations of this chapter which are applicable to the zoning districts in
which such buildings, uses, or land shall be located.



   (B)   No application for a land use and zoning permit or other
permit or license, or for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be
approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and no permit or license shall be
issued by any other city department which would authorize the use or change
in use of any land or building contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or
the erection, moving, alteration, enlargement, or occupancy of any building
designed or intended to be used for a purpose or in a manner contrary to the
provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards
or other open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed by this chapter, nor
shall the density of population be increased in any manner, except in
conformity with the area regulations as hereinafter provided, nor shall the
area of any lot be reduced below the minimum requirement herein established.



(2006 Code, § 11.20)



§ 152.46  ERECTION OF MORE THAN ONE PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE ON A LOT.



   In any district, more than one structure housing a permitted or
permissible principal use may be erected on a single lot; provided, that yard
and other requirements of this chapter shall be met for each structure as
though it were on an individual lot.



(2006 Code, § 11.20)



§ 152.47  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.



   In case an accessory building is attached to the main building, it
shall be made structurally a part of the main building and shall comply in
all respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable to the main
building.



   (A)   An accessory building, unless attached to and made a part of
the main building, shall not be closer than five feet to the main building.



   (B)   A detached accessory building shall not be located in any
required front yard.



   (C)   A detached accessory building not over one story and not
exceeding 12 feet in height (measured from ground to eaves) shall occupy not
more than 30% of the area of any side or rear yard; provided further, that no
detached accessory building shall be placed nearer than two and one-half feet
from any side or rear lot line, except that a two-stall garage may be used
jointly and solely by the families living on two adjacent lots and may be
built so as to place one stall on each side or rear lot line; provided, that
the two stalls are separated by a fire wall.



(2006 Code, § 11.20)



§ 152.48  HEIGHT REGULATIONS.



   (A)    Where the average slope of a lot is greater than one foot
rise or fall in seven feet of horizontal distance from the established street
elevation at the property line, one story in addition to the number permitted
in the district in which the lot is situated shall be permitted on the
downhill side of any building.



   (B)   Height limitations set forth elsewhere in this chapter may be
increased by 100% when applied to the following: chimneys; cooling towers;
elevator bulkheads; fire towers; monuments; penthouses; water towers; stacks;
stage towers; or scenery lofts; tanks; ornamental towers and spires; wireless
towers; or necessary mechanical appurtenances usually required to be placed
above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy.



(2006 Code, § 11.20)



§ 152.49  YARD REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The following requirements qualify or supplement, as the case
may be, the district regulations appearing elsewhere in this chapter.



   (B)   Measurements shall be taken from subject to the following
requirements.



      (1)   Every part of a required yard or court shall be open
from its lowest point to the sky, unobstructed, except for the ordinary
projection of window wells above the bottom of such yard or court and except
for the projections of sills, belt courses, cornices, and ornamental features
not to exceed 18 inches.



      (2)   Open or lattice enclosed fire escapes, fire-proof
outside stairways, and balconies opening upon fire towers projecting into a
yard not more than two feet or into a court not more than three and one-half
feet shall be permitted, where the same are to be so placed as not to
obstruct light and ventilation.



      (3)   A yard, court, or other open space provided about any
building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter
shall not again be used as a yard, court, or other open space for another
building.



      (4)   The setback requirements shall be observed on each
street side of a corner lot; provided, however, that the buildable width of a
lot shall not be reduced to less than 30 feet.



      (5)   Where a lot is to be occupied for permitted uses without
buildings or structures thereon, the side yards and front yards required
herein for the zone within which such lot is located, shall be provided and
maintained between such use and the respective lot lines; provided, that side
and rear yards shall not be required on lots without buildings or structures,
used for garden purposes or public playgrounds.



      (6)   The following shall not be considered to be obstructions
when located in the required yards specified:



         (a)   In front yards. One story bay windows projecting
three feet or less into the yard; and overhanging caves and gutters
projecting two and one-half feet or less into the yard.



            1.   A landing place or uncovered porch may extend
into the required front yard to a distance not exceeding six feet, if the
landing place or porch has its floor no higher than the entrance floor of the
building. An open railing no higher than three feet may be placed around such
place.



            2.   The required front yard of a corner lot shall
not contain any wall, fence, or other structure, tree, shrub, or other growth
which may cause danger to traffic on a street or public road by obscuring the
view.



            3.   On double-frontage lots, the required front
yard shall be provided on both streets.



         (b)   In side yards. Overhanging eaves and gutters
projecting into the yard for a distance of two inches per foot of required
side yard; and



         (c)   In rear yards.



            1.   Enclosed, attached or detached off-street
parking spaces; open off-street parking spaces; accessory structures, tool
rooms, and similar buildings or structures for domestic storage; balconies;
breeze-ways and open porches; one story bay windows projecting two and
one-half feet or less into the yard; and overhanging eaves and gutters
projecting two and one-half feet or less into the yard.



            2.   In determining the depth of rear yard for any
building where the rear yard opens into an alley, one-half the width of the
alley, but not exceeding ten feet, may be considered as a portion of the rear
yard.



(2006 Code, § 11.20)  (Ord. 130, passed 12-24-1971)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.50  FENCES.



   (A)   Fences.



      (1)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the
following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         FENCE. Any row of stakes, posts, poles, or other vertical
supports connected by wire, wood, plastic, or metal is considered a FENCE.
Posts not connected but located less than six feet apart so as to form a
barrier or define an area are also considered a FENCE.



      (2)   Location. All boundary fences shall be installed
directly adjacent to and on the owner’s side of the property line. It is
the property owner’s responsibility to determine the property line. If
adjoining property owners cannot agree on the location of the property line,
a survey shall be obtained to determine the property line at the cost of the
person installing the fence. Determination of the property line location is
not the responsibility of the city. No individual may install a fence in any
public right of way. No fence shall be located nearer than two and one-half
feet to a platted alley.



      (3)   Construction. Fences shall be installed so that the
“face side” or non-structural side is facing the outside, adjoining
property or right of way. The structural side that contains the posts, cross
members, and the structural pieces shall face toward the fence owner’s side
of the property line. All fences shall be constructed of rot resistant
materials, preserved, or treated to resist deterioration from the elements.
All rear and side yard fences over 48 inches high shall have a minimum of 10%
opening for air and light. Any fence that is more than 90% solid or does not
let 10% air or light pass through the fence shall be considered a wall and
shall be constructed using building setbacks. No fence may support a roof. If
a fence supports a roof, it will be considered a structure and will be
subject to normal building setbacks.



      (4)   Access. Access must be available for public utilities
personnel to access their equipment and read related meters.



      (5)   Maintenance. All fences must be installed in a proper
workmanlike manner. The fence must be maintained in both structure and finish
to be neat in appearance.



      (6)   Swimming pools. All permanent swimming pools must be
fenced and properly gated in accordance with the BOCA National Building Codes.



      (7)   Height; residential fence heights; maximum.



         (a)   Rear yard. Six feet. Privacy screening fences up
to six feet in height are allowed within the setback areas of a rear or side
yard;



         (b)   Side yard. Six feet except within the setback
area, three feet maximum height;



         (c)   Front yard. Three feet within the 25-foot setback
area;



         (d)   Corner lots. Must allow for the traffic visibility
triangle of creating a diagonal line 30 feet back from the corner of two
intersecting curbs or curb lines. Nothing in this area may be more than two
and one-half feet high; and



         (e)   A fence more than three feet high that is adjacent
to a driveway in a rear or side yard, must be reduced to three feet maximum
height within 15 feet of the driveway or set back 15 feet from the property
line.



      (8)   Easement. An owner may install a fence on a utility
easement at their own risk. Such fences may be removed or damaged if access
is needed on the easement. The replacement or repair of the fence is the
responsibility of the property owner.



      (9)   Prohibited fences. In residential areas:



         (a)   Barbed wire;



         (b)   Electric fences, except for underground pet fences;



         (c)   Fences with spiked tops;



         (d)   Woven chicken wire except when used for gardening;



         (e)   Woven wire not specifically made as a landscape
fence;



         (f)   Chain link fence without a top rail;



         (g)   Any fence where climbing or traveling over the
fence will obviously result in injury; or



         (h)   Snow fences made of wood or plastic other than
temporary fence between November 1 and April 10 of each year. Snow fences may
not cause snow to accumulate on the roadway or property of others.



      (10)   Compliance. Any fence that is currently noncompliant
may not be rebuilt or repaired without a permit and must follow current
regulations.



      (11)   Permit. A permit must be obtained prior to the
installation of any permanent fence. Any person that fails to obtain a permit
to install a fence is subject to a misdemeanor. The payment of a misdemeanor
fine does not allow a person to install a fence not in compliance with the
regulations and a permit must still be obtained.



      (12)   Temporary fences. Temporary fences may be constructed
for construction sites, securing vacant buildings, snow fencing or gardening.
Temporary fences may be installed for a maximum of 150 days.



   (B)   Vision clearance; fences, walls in front yard.



      (1)   In any residence zone or any corner lot, no fence or
accessory structure or planting shall rise over two and one-half feet in
height above the level of the public sidewalk within 20 feet of any corner,
so as to interfere with traffic visibility across the corner.



      (2)   No fence or wall or shrub planting of more than two and
one-half feet in height above the level of the public sidewalk shall be
erected on any interior lot within ten feet of the front property line where
it will interfere with traffic visibility from a driveway.



   (C)   Swimming pools. Swimming pools of a permanent nature must be
enclosed by a fence of at least five feet in height.



   (D)   Public right-of-way. No fence shall be permitted on a public
right-of-way or boulevard area.



   (E)   Residential district. No barbed wire shall be allowed in a
residential district except barbed wire fences presently used in farming
operations.



   (F)   Screening wall. For patio/decks screening walls that do not
extend more than 20 feet in length, may exceed the six-foot height limitation
if the wall does not encroach upon side yard and rear yard lot setback
requirements.



   (G)   Commercial/industrial district. No barbed wire shall be used
for fencing except that it may be used on security fences which are at least
six feet high exclusive of the barbed wire.



   (H)   Height limitation. Fences in a commercial or industrial
district shall be limited to six feet in height.



   (I)   Fence maintenance.



      (1)   Both sides of fences shall be maintained in good
condition both in appearance and in structure. Wood material, other than
decay resistance varieties, shall be protected against decay by use of paint
or other preservative.



      (2)   If 25% or more of the painted surface of a fence is
determined by the enforcement officer to be paint blistered, the surface
shall be properly scraped and repainted. Maintenance is a responsibility of
owner.



(2006 Code, § 11.20)  (Ord. 119, 3rd Series, passed 5-22-1998; Ord. 194,
Third Series, passed 12-9-2014)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.51  STREETS CLOSURES.



   Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated by official
action of the city, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street,
alley, or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such
vacation, and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be
subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts.



(2006 Code, § 11.20)



§ 152.52  AREAS UNDER WATER.



   (A)   All areas within the corporate limits of the city which are
under water and not shown as included within any zone shall be subject to all
of the regulations of the zone which immediately adjoins the water area.



   (B)   If the water area adjoins two or more zones, the boundaries of
each zone shall be construed to extend into the water area in a straight line
until they meet the other district at a halfway point.



(2006 Code, § 11.20)



§ 152.53  ESSENTIAL SERVICES.



   Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by
law and other ordinances of the city in any district, it being the intention
hereof to exempt such erection, construction, alteration, and maintenance
from the application of this chapter.



(2006 Code, § 11.20)



§ 152.54  STRUCTURES TO HAVE ACCESS.



   Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to
a public street, or with access to an approved private street, and all
structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient
access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking.



(2006 Code, § 11.20)



§ 152.55  SIGN REGULATIONS.



   All signs hereafter erected or maintained, except official, public
traffic, and street signs, shall conform with the provisions of this section
and other provisions of this code of ordinances or regulation of the city.



   (A)   General provisions for all districts. The following
regulations shall apply to all signs hereafter permitted in all districts.



      (1)   (a)   Signs shall not be permitted within the public
right-of-way or easements, except a name plate sign erected under a store
front canopy near the entrance identifying a place of business, provided,
such sign does not exceed 18 inches by 48 inches and such sign shall be
limited to one for a lot of 50-foot frontage or less. Such sign may be
illuminated.



         (b)   Any sign which is suspended from or forming part
of a canopy, awning, mansard roof, which sign does not extend more than 24
inches into the right-of-way, and sign is erected parallel with the building,
sign, and structure shall be of a height not less than eight feet from the
sidewalk or ground grade line.



      (2)   Flashing or rotating signs resembling emergency vehicles
shall not be permitted in any district.



      (3)   No sign shall be placed that resembles any official
marker erected by a governmental agency or displaying such words as stop or
danger.



      (4)   No sign shall be permitted to obstruct any door, fire
escape, stairway, or opening intended to provide access to any building or
structure.



      (5)   Upon notification by the Council or Zoning Administrator
that a sign is rotted, unsafe or unsightly, the owner of said sign or owner
of property thereunder shall remove or repair same.



      (6)   The owner, lessee, or manager of any ground sign and the
owner of the land on which the same is located shall keep grass or weeds and
other growth cut and debris and rubbish cleaned up and removed from the lot
on which a sign is located.



      (7)   Noncommercial campaign signs of any size may be posted
in any number from August 1 in a state general election year until ten days
following the state general election. The subject matter of a campaign sign
must relate to an election in which a candidate is running or issue to be
decided.



      (8)   Rotating signs or flashing signs shall not be permitted.



   (B)   Signs in R-1 and R-2 Residential Districts. No sign shall be
erected in any R-1 or R-2 District except:



      (1)   A nameplate sign identifying the owner or occupant of a
building or dwelling unit, provided, such sign does not exceed six square
feet in surface area and five feet in height. Such signs may be illuminated;



      (2)   A sign pertaining to the lease or sale of the building
or property, provided, such sign does not exceed four square feet in surface
area. Such signs shall not be illuminated;



      (3)   A temporary sign identifying an engineer, architect,
contractor, or product engaged in or used in the construction of a building,
provided, such sign does not exceed four square feet in surface area and is
removed prior to the occupancy of the building. Such sign shall not be
illuminated; or



      (4)   Public street identification signs, traffic signs, and
directional signs in any parking area where such signs are necessary for the
orderly movement of traffic.



   (C)   Signs in C-B and C-1 Districts. Signs may be erected in
commercial districts subject to the following provisions.



      (1)   The total surface area of all business signs on a lot
shall not exceed two square feet per lineal foot of lot frontage or 10% of
the building frontage area, or 75 square feet in area, whichever is greater.
Signs may be illuminated.



      (2)   For corner lots, the frontage used to determine
allowable sign area shall be the least dimension along a street, but an
equivalent sign area shall be allowed facing the intersecting street.



      (3)   No sign shall project higher than six feet above the
height of the building, or 32 feet above average grade at the building line,
whichever is greater.



      (4)   Signs painted on a building shall be governed by the
square footage limitations specified above. Such signs shall be maintained in
good condition and shall be repainted, removed, or painted out when, in the
opinion of the Council and/or Zoning Administrator, they are not so
maintained.



      (5)   Where a sign is illuminated, the source of light shall
not be visible from any public right-of-way, and such light shall be directed
away from any residential district.



      (6)   Billboard, off-premises signs shall not be a permitted
use in C-B and C-1 Zoning Districts.



   (D)   Signs in the I-1 and 1-2 Districts.



      (1)   Signs may be erected in industrial districts subject to
the following provisions.



      (2)   The total surface area of all business signs, including
billboard-off premises signs on a lot shall not exceed two square feet per
lineal foot of lot frontage of 20% of the building frontage area or 300
square feet in area, whichever is greater. Such signs may be illuminated.



         (a)   Billboard-off premises signs may be erected in I-1
and I-2 Zoning Districts.



         (b)   Billboard off-premises sign structures shall not
be erected within 500 feet of any picnic area, rest areas, playground, or
park, in any direction.



         (c)   Billboard off-premises sign structures shall not
be erected within 500 feet of any existing Billboard off-premises sign
structures on the same side of the highway and 250 feet between signs on the
opposite side of the highway.



         (d)   Billboard off-premises sign structures shall not
be erected within 400 feet of the C-B Central Business District.



         (e)   Billboard off-premises sign structures shall not
contain more than one sign surface, and shall not exceed 300 square feet in
sign surface area. (Back to back signs will be allowed).



         (f)   Billboard off-premises sign structures shall not
exceed 30 feet in height as measured from the established grade.



(2006 Code, § 11.20)  (Ord. 130, passed 12-24-1971; Ord. 5, 3rd Series,
passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 55, 3rd Series, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. 98, 3rd Series,
passed 4-30-1993; Ord. 139, 3rd Series, passed 5-19-2000; Ord. 147, 3rd
Series, passed 12-20-2002; Ord. 165, 3rd Series, passed 10-11-2005) 
Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.56  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING-UNLOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Parking in the Central Business District. Uses located within
the Central Business District are exempt from all off-street parking and
loading requirements.



   (B)   Parking space requirements.



      (1)   The required parking and loading spaces shall be
provided on the premises of each use. Each parking space shall contain a
minimum area of not less than 300 square feet including access drives and a
width of not less than nine feet, and a depth of not less than 20 feet.



      (2)   The minimum number of required off-street parking spaces
for various uses shall be as follows:



         (a)   One- to four-family dwelling. One parking space
per unit. No garage shall be converted into living space unless other
acceptable on-site parking space is provided;



         (b)   Apartments. One and one-half parking spaces for
each apartment, except housing for the elderly projects, which shall provide
three-tenths parking space for each dwelling unit;



         (c)   Board housing. One parking space off-street per
person owning motor vehicle;



         (d)   Mobile home park. One and one-fourth parking space
per mobile home berth;



         (e)   Motel or motor hotel. One parking space for each
rental room or suite;



         (f)   Churches. One parking space for each four seats,
based on the design capacity of the main seating area;



         (g)   Elementary school or junior high school. Two
parking spaces for each classroom;



         (h)   Senior high school. One parking space for each
classroom, plus one parking space for each ten students, based on design
capacity;



         (i)   Public administration buildings, community center,
public library, museum, art galleries, post office, and other public service
buildings. One parking space for each 500 square feet of floor area in the
principal structure;



         (j)   Assembly or exhibition hall, armory, auditorium,
theater, or sports arena. One parking space for each four seats, based on
design capacity;



         (k)   Golf course, golf clubhouse, country club,
swimming club, tennis club, public swimming pool. Twenty spaces, plus one
space for each 500 square feet of floor area in the principal structure;



         (l)   Hospitals. One parking space for each three beds;
convalescent, or nursing home, one parking space for each four beds;



         (m)   Automobile service station. Four parking spaces,
plus two parking spaces for each service stall. Such parking spaces shall be
in addition to gas pump service area;



         (n)   Drive-in restaurant. Twenty parking spaces or one
space for each 20 square feet of floor area, whichever is greater;



         (o)   Restaurant, café, night club, tavern, or bar. One
parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area;



         (p)   Bowling alley. Five parking spaces for each
bowling lane;



         (q)   Miniature golf course, archery range or golf
driving range. Ten parking spaces;



         (r)   Professional offices, medical and dental clinics
and animal hospital. One parking space for each 500 square feet of floor area;



         (s)   Office building. One parking space for each 500
square feet of floor area;



         (t)   Retail stores and service establishments. One
parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area;



         (s)   Research, experimental, or testing stations. One
parking space for each employee on the major shift or one off-street parking
space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area within the building,
whichever is the greater;



         (u)   Auto sales, trailer sales, marine, and boat sales,
implement sales, garden supply store, buildings materials sales, auto repair.
One parking space for each 500 square feet of floor area;



         (v)   Shopping center. Where several business uses are
grouped together according to a general development plan, on-site automobile
parking shall be provided in a ratio of not less than three square feet of
gross parking area for each one square foot of gross floor area; separate
on-site space shall be provided for loading and unloading;



         (w)   Storage, wholesale, or warehouse establishments.
One parking space for each two employees on the major shift or one space for
each 2,000 square feet of floor area, whichever is greater, plus one space
for each company motor vehicle when customarily kept on the premises; and



         (x)   Manufacturing or processing plant. One off-street
parking space for each two employees on the major shift or one off-street
parking space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area within the
building, whichever is greater, plus one space for all company motor vehicles
when customarily kept on the premises.



   (C)   Off-street loading design and maintenance.



      (1)   Location. All required loading or unloading into or out
of trucks in excess of three-fourths-ton capacity, or railroad cars, shall be
conducted at facilities specifically designed or designated for that purpose.
These facilities shall be located upon the zoning lot of the principal use
requiring them. All berths beyond one shall be separate from areas used for
off-street parking.



      (2)   Access. Each required off-street loading berth shall be
so designed as to avoid undue interference with other vehicular or rail
access or use of public streets, alleys, or other public transport system.



      (3)   Surfacing. All off-street loading facilities, including
loading berths and maneuvering areas, shall be surfaced with a hard,
all-weather, dust-free durable surfacing material, and shall be well drained
and landscaped and shall be maintained in a sightly and well-kept condition.



      (4)   Landscaping and screening. All berths shall be screened
from view from the property street frontage and/or from the zoning district
boundary when the adjacent property or property across the street frontage or
side street frontage is zoned or used for residential purposes. Said
screening shall be accomplished by a solid wall not less than eight feet in
height and shall be so designed as to be architecturally harmonious with the
principal structure. Screen plantings may be substituted for the prescribed
wall, however, such plantings must not be less than two and one-half inches
in diameter and of such type as to permit a minimum of 90% opacity during all
months of the year.



      (5)   Design. Fifty percent of the required number of truck
berths shall be 50 feet in length, 12 feet in width and 15 feet in height.
All loading areas shall consist of a maneuvering area in addition to the
berth and shall not use any of that portion of the site containing parking
stalls. Maneuvering areas shall be of such size as to permit the backing of
truck tractors and coupled trailers into a berth, without blocking the use of
other berths or drive or maneuvering areas.



      (6)   Required loading areas.



         (a)   Space for loading and unloading of goods,
supplies, and services shall be provided in addition to required off-street
parking spaces and shall be sufficient to meet the requirements of each use.



         (b)   The following uses shall observe required loading
and unloading spaces as indicated.



 


Use

 

Required Spaces





Auditorium, stadium, gymnasium, community centers, and religious institutions
and schools (private and public)
 
1 for every structure over 100,000 square feet of gross floor area


Bowling alleys
 
1 space for each structure over 20,000 square feet of gross floor area


Furniture, automobile and boat sales, and appliance sales
 
1 space, plus one additional space for each 25,000 square feet of gross floor
area


Hospitals, rest homes, nursing homes, and the like
 
1 space, plus one additional space for each 100,000 square feet of gross
floor area


Light and heavy commercial uses, except where otherwise specified
 
1 space for the first 10,000 square feet of gross floor area and one space
for each additional 50,000 feet of gross floor area


Manufacturing and research, experimental, or testing stations
 
1 space for each 50,000 square feet of gross floor area.


Motels, hotels, lodging and rooming houses, private clubs, and lodges
 
1 for each structure over 20,000 square feet of gross floor area


Office building and professional offices (other than doctor and dentist),
banks   
 
1 space for buildings between 30,000 and 100,000 square feet of gross floor
area and one additional space for each additional 100,000 square feet of
gross floor area


Restaurants and other food dispensing establishments except drive-in
restaurants
 
1 for each structure with over 10,000 square feet of gross floor area




 



(2006 Code, § 11.20)  (Ord. 130, passed 12-24-1971; Ord. 5, 3rd Series,
passed 1-17-1980)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.57  MINIMUM MOBILE HOME PARK REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Minimum density and area requirements. Lot areas and density
as hereby established shall be considered the minimum requirements within a
mobile home park.



      (1)   Minimum area requirements for a mobile home park shall
be five acres and shall not be less than 150 feet in width; and



      (2)   A minimum of 500 square feet per mobile home shall be
provided for definable play areas and open space within the mobile home park.
Such areas of open space and/or play area shall not be areas included within
any setback nor shall they include any areas of less than 20 feet in length
or width.



   (B)   Lot coverage and setback requirements.



      (1)   Maximum lot coverage for mobile home parks shall be 25%.



      (2)   Minimum distance between units shall be not less than 20
feet, or the sum of the heights of the two units, whichever is greater; the
point of measurement being a straight line between the closest point of the
units being measured.



      (3)   (a)   When a mobile home park abuts a single-family
residential use area, there shall be a minimum setback on that side of 50
feet between the street right-of-way line and any mobile home park use; which
setback area shall act as a buffer zone and shall be landscaped according to
a landscape plan, to be submitted at the time of application.



         (b)   Such plan shall show the type of planting
material, size, and planting schedule.



   (C)   General internal park development requirements.



      (1)   There shall be a minimum front yard setback from the
mobile home unit to the street line of 15 feet.



      (2)   The mobile home stand shall be at such elevation,
distance and angle relative to the street and driveway that placement and
removal of the mobile home with a car, tow truck, or other customary moving
equipment is practical. The mobile home stand shall have a longitudinal grade
of less than 4% and transverse crown or grade to provide adequate surface
drainage. The stand shall be compacted and surfaced with a material which
will prevent the growth of vegetation while supporting the maximum
anticipated loads during all seasons.



      (3)   The entire mobile home park shall be landscaped
(excluding hard surfaced areas) and there shall be planted, or otherwise
located, one shade tree placed and maintained near each unit pad.



   (D)   Parking and street requirements.



      (1)   Parking.



         (a)   Off-street parking areas shall be surfaced in
accordance with the street surface standards below.



         (b)   All required off-street parking space shall be
located not further than 200 feet from the unit or units for which they are
designed.



         (c)   A minimum of one and one-fourth spaces of parking
must be provided for each mobile home unit space provided within the park.
The one-unit space for occupant use must be within the distance from the unit
established above. The remaining spaces equivalent to one-fourth spaces must
be in the group compounds at an appropriate location within the park.



      (2)   Streets.



         (a)   Streets shall be of sufficient width so as to
permit ease of access to the mobile home parking stands and the placement and
removal of mobile homes without causing damage to or otherwise jeopardizing
the safety of any occupants or mobile homes in the park.



         (b)   Streets shall have a minimum width so as to permit
two moving lanes of traffic. Minimum lane width shall be 15 feet.



         (c)   Public access to a mobile home park shall be so
designed as to permit a minimum number of ingress and egress points to
control traffic movement, and to keep undesirable traffic out of the park.



         (d)   Streets shall be graded to their full width to
provide proper grades for pavement and sidewalks to have adequate surface
drainage to the storm sewer system. The improvements shall extend
continuously from existing improved streets to provide access to each lot and
to provide connections to existing or future streets at the boundaries of the
mobile home park.



         (e)   Streets and parking areas shall be surfaced for
all weather travel with not less than four inches of crushed stone, gravel,
or other suitable base material topped with not less than one and one-half
inches of bituminous concrete, or four inches Portland cement concrete. The
surface shall be limited at the edge by a Portland cement curb not less than
four inches high.



   (E)   Storage. Enclosed storage lockers when provided, shall be
located either adjacent to the mobile home in a mobile home park or at such
other place in the park as to be convenient to the unit for which it is
provided. Storage of large items such as boats, boat trailers, and the like,
shall not be accomplished at the site of the mobile home unit, but rather
shall be provided in a separate screened area of the park.



   (F)   Registration.



      (1)   (a)   It shall be the duty of the operator of the
mobile home park to keep a register containing a record of all mobile home
owners and occupants located within the park.



         (b)   The register shall contain the following
information:



            1.   The name and address of each mobile home
occupant;



            2.   The name and address of the owner of each
mobile home;



            3.   The make, model, year, and license and number
of each mobile home;



            4.   The state, territory, or county issuing such
license;



            5.   The date of arrival and departure of each
mobile home; and



            6.   The number and type of motor vehicles of
residents in the park.



      (2)   The park shall keep the register available for
inspection at all times by city and county law enforcement officers, public
health officials, and other public offices whose duty necessitates
acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register record
for each occupant and/or mobile home registered shall not be destroyed until
after a period of three years following the date of departure of the
registrant from the park.



   (G)   Maintenance. The operator of any mobile home park, or a duly
authorized attendant or caretaker, shall be in charge at all times to keep
the mobile home park, its facilities and equipment, in a clean, orderly, and
sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable, with said
operator, for the violation of any provisions of these regulations to which
said operator is subject.



   (H)   Relocated structures.



      (1)   Before any house or other structure is moved onto a
vacant lot, a special use permit must be secured. The Planning Department
shall submit a report concerning type of building and improvements that
should be made if the building is relocated. The applicant shall submit
photographs taken from two or more angles of the structure to be moved and
photos of the lot on which the structure is to be located together with
adjacent lots and structures.



      (2)   Notice shall be given by mail at least ten days prior to
the meeting, to the property owners within 150 feet of the subject property.
The Planning Commission shall report to the Council whether the structure
will be compatible with other development in the area.



      (3)   If the Council concurs with the decision of the Planning
Commission that a structure would depreciate the area into which it is to be
moved, the Council may withhold issuance of a permit for such relocation.
These requirements do not apply to construction sheds or other temporary
structures to be located on a lot for 12 months or less.



(2006 Code, § 11.20)  (Ord. 130, passed 12-24-1971; Ord. 8, 3rd Series,
passed 4-17-1980)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.58  RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.



   Unless located in a mobile home park or a travel trailer park, all
residential dwelling structures for living purposes shall be at least 24 feet
wide and at least 30 feet long and placed on a permanent foundation.



(2006 Code, § 11.20)  (Ord. 26, 3rd Series, passed 7-29-1982)



§ 152.59  TEMPORARY STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the
regulation of the erection of temporary structures, and structures needed for
emergency purposes or for temporary use during the construction of a
permanent structure, and to protect and provide for the public's health,
safety, and welfare and to protect adjacent property values from being
negatively impacted.



   (B)   Temporary structure defined. A TEMPORARY STRUCTURE shall be
defined as any structure not permanently affixed to a foundation which is
designed to be transported or dismantled after its function has been
fulfilled. These structures may include but are not limited to portable
shelters, party tents, facilities in conjunction with construction or
emergency activities, and storage pods.



   (C)   Removal of temporary structure. Temporary structures shall be
removed when the designated time period, event, or use for which the
temporary structure has been created as established in the land use and
zoning permit has ceased.



   (D)   Procedure. Temporary structures governed by this section shall
be allowed by a land use and zoning permit, as may be issued by the Zoning
Administrator, in all zoning districts.



   (E)   Site plan required. A site plan is required in conjunction
with the application for a land use and zoning permit injunction with the
establishment of new or remodeled temporary structures.



   (F)   Special requirements for temporary structures.



      (1)   A time limit shall be established for temporary
structures to remain on a site as a part of the land use and zoning permit.
Temporary structures allowed by shall be limited to a total of 120 days in
duration within a 12-month period. Applicants shall acknowledge and certify
the temporary structure shall be in place for 120 days or less. The Planning
Commission may extend the 120-day time limit if a practical difficulty exists
for a one time additional term not to exceed 120 additional days. The
applicant bears the burden of proving a practical difficulty exists.



      (2)   Temporary structures shall follow the required building
setbacks of the applicable zoning district. Any temporary structure is to be
located within the interior side yard or rear yard of the site.



      (3)   No temporary structure shall be allowed to be serviced
by water, sewer, electric, gas or any other type of utility.



      (4)   There shall be no more than one temporary structure per
parcel.



      (5)   A temporary structure must be sufficiently anchored to
withstand overturning, uplifting, or sliding from an 80 mile-an-hour wind.



      (6)   A temporary structure must be of sufficient design to
withstand a snow load of 20 pounds per square foot if the structure will be
in place at any time during the months of November through April.



      (7)   No temporary structure shall be placed on a right-of-way
or utility easement without receiving prior approval from the Planning and
Zoning Department.



      (8)   Party tents or tents for promotional sales shall be
allowed up to ten calendar days per year without having to obtain a land use
and zoning permit.



      (9)   Temporary structures shall not be used for habitation
purposes.



   (G)   Right of appeal. Decisions of the Zoning Administrator may be
appealed pursuant to the provisions of § 30.09 of this code.



(Ord. 195, 3rd Series, passed - -)  Penalty, see § 152.99



SOLAR ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM REGULATION



§ 152.70  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING-INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system that is
directly incorporated into the building by replacing typical building
materials.



   GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system that is
installed onto the ground directly or by means of brackets or poles.



   ROOF-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system mounted to a
house or other building.



   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A set of devices whose primary purpose is to
provide for the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy for
space heating or cooling, electricity generation or water heating.



   SOLAR THERMAL SYSTEM. A system that includes a solar collector and a
heat exchanger that heats or preheats water for building heating systems or
other hot water needs of the building.



(Ord. 204, 3rd Series, passed 4-19-2016)



§ 152.71  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter permits, as an accessory use, solar energy systems,
while protecting the health, safety and welfare of city residents and the
property interests of adjacent and surrounding land uses through appropriate
zoning and land use controls.



(Ord. 204, 3rd Series, passed 4-19-2016)



§ 152.72  SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS.



   Solar energy systems are allowable as an accessory use in all zoning
districts, subject to the following requirements:



   (A)   Standards.



      (1)   Height. Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall not
project beyond the peak of the roof and shall not be more than two feet above
the roof surface to which they are attached. Ground-mounted solar energy
systems shall not exceed 15 feet in height.



      (2)   Location. Ground-mounted solar energy systems must be
located in the rear yard only in residential areas.



      (3)   Setbacks.  Ground mounted solar systems shall follow
all current setback requirements and coverage area restrictions applicable
for a detached structure as set forth by zoning ordinance, and shall be
located a minimum of five feet from all utility easements. Roof-mounted solar
energy systems shall comply with all building setbacks in the applicable
zoning district and shall not extend beyond the exterior perimeter of the
building on which the system is mounted.



      (4)   Coverage. Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall be
flush mounted on pitched roofs. Solar energy systems must have three feet of
clearance around all edges to facilitate emergency responder access.



      (5)   Feeder lines. All power exterior electrical or other
service lines must be buried below the surface of the ground and within the
interior of each parcel.



      (6)   Exemption. Building integrated solar energy systems are
exempt from the requirements of this section and shall be regulated as any
other building element.



      (7)   Easements. Solar energy systems shall not encroach on
public drainage, utility, roadway or trail easements.



      (8)   Screening. Solar energy systems shall be screened from
view to the extent possible without reducing their efficiency. Screening may
include walls, fences or landscaping. Reflection angles from collector
surfaces shall be oriented away from neighboring windows. Where necessary,
screening may be necessary to address glare.



   (B)   Safety.



      (1)   Compliance with building codes. All solar energy systems
shall comply with the Minnesota Building Code.



      (2)   Compliance with electric code. All solar energy systems
shall comply with the National Electrical Code.



      (3)   Compliance with plumbing code. All solar thermal systems
shall comply with the Minnesota State Plumbing Code.



      (4)   Certifications. Solar energy system components shall be
certified by Underwriters Laboratories Inc. (UL) and the Solar Rating and
Certification Corporation. The city reserves the right to deny zoning permit
for proposed solar energy systems deemed to have inadequate certification.



   (C)   Approval.



      (1)   Permits. The erection, alteration, improvement,
reconstruction, and movement of a solar energy system with an output capacity
in excess of one kW requires a zoning permit from the city.



      (2)   Utility notification. The owner of a solar energy system
that will physically connect to a house or other building's electrical system
and/or the electric utility grid must enter into a signed interconnection
agreement with the utility prior to the issuance of a zoning permit.



      (3)   Required approvals and inspections. Applicable state
inspection and approvals are required.



   (D)   Abandonment.  If the solar energy system remains
nonfunctional or inoperative for more than 12 consecutive months, the system
shall constitute a public nuisance. The owner shall obtain a demolition
permit and remove the abandoned system at their expense. Removal includes the
entire structure, including collector, mount, and transmission equipment.



   (E)   Easements.  It shall be the responsibility of the property
owner to secure any desired solar easement to protect solar access for the
system (per M.S. § 500.30, as it may be amended from time to time).



   (F)   Installation. Solar energy systems shall be installed only by
licensed contractors.



(Ord. 204, 3rd Series, passed 4-19-2016)



TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES



§ 152.80  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish predictable and balanced
regulations for the siting and screening of wireless telecommunication
equipment in order to accommodate the growth of wireless communication
systems within the city, while protecting the public against any adverse
impacts on the city's aesthetic resources and the public welfare. This
subchapter creates two categories of support structures for antennas. The
first category consists of existing towers, water towers, and high-density
residential and non-residential buildings, which the subchapter favors in
order to minimize the number of freestanding towers needed to serve the
community. The second category consists of all other support structures. The
structures in this second category are all classified as freestanding
telecommunications towers even if they are intended to replace existing light
poles, utility poles, or similar structures. Freestanding towers are subject
to increased standards to minimize their visual impact. One such standard is
that towers in residential and commercial zoning districts must use
state-of-the-art stealth design techniques to disguise the towers and soften
their views. A telecommunications company that does not currently use stealth
technology will need to develop this capability in order to place
freestanding towers in this city. This subchapter allows minimal use of the
public right-of-way for telecommunication antennas because that space should
be reserved for public utilities and should be free of safety hazards. In
addition, telecommunications facilities located in the right-of-way have the
potential of being very visible to the traveling public. In order to locate
in a public right-of-way, telecommunications companies must use improved
technology to reduce the size and visibility of their facilities.



(Ord. 212, 3rd Series, passed 11-15-2016)



§ 152.81  DEFINITIONS.



   The following additional definitions apply to this subchapter in
addition to the definitions contained in § 152.02 of this chapter.



   ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT. The wires, cables, and other equipment or
facilities that are used with antennas.



   ANTENNA. A device used for transmitting or receiving telecommunication,
television or radio signals that is used for personal wireless
telecommunication service or any other purpose, except a device used for the
private enjoyment of those on the premises where it is located, such as
amateur radio antennas and antennas receiving television signals for viewing
on site. ANTENNA  also does not include a lightning rod.



   ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE. An existing structure that is a
telecommunication tower, high density residential or non-residential
building, water tower, or electric transmission tower carrying over 200 kilo
volts of electricity, that can be used for the location of antennas without
increasing the mass of the existing structure.



   ENGINEER. An engineer licensed by the State of Minnesota, or an
engineer acceptable to the city if licensing is not available.



   STEALTH DESIGN. State-of-the-art design techniques used to blend the
object into the surrounding environment and to minimize the visual impact as
much as reasonably possible. Examples of stealth design techniques include
architecturally screening roof-mounted antennas and accessory equipment;
integrating telecommunications facilities into architectural elements;
nestling telecommunications facilities into the surrounding landscape so that
the topography or vegetation reduces their view; using the location that
would result in the least amount of visibility to the public, minimizing the
size and appearance of the telecommunications facilities; and designing
telecommunications towers to appear other than as towers, such as light
poles, power poles, flag poles, and trees.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. Antennas, accessory equipment, and
telecommunications towers.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER or TOWER. A free-standing, self-supporting
lattice, guyed, or monopole structure constructed from grade intended to
support antennas.



(Ord. 212, 3rd Series, passed 11-15-2016)



§ 152.82  ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL.



   (A)   The Zoning Administrator may grant administrative approval of
the following telecommunications facilities:



      (1)   Telecommunications facilities located on electric
transmission towers carrying over 200 kilo volts of electricity.



      (2)   Telecommunication facilities located on an antenna
support structure that has already been approved by a conditional use permit
as the location for a telecommunication facility, if the proposed facility
does not involve a variance and is not accompanied by any other matter
requiring consideration by the Planning Commission or City Council.



      (3)   A one-time, 15-foot extension of an existing monopole
telecommunications structure or one-time replacement of an existing monopole
by a tower no greater than 15 feet taller than the existing monopole may be
administratively approved if the proposed facility does not involve a
variance and is not accompanied by any other matter requiring consideration
by the Planning Commission and City Council.



      (4)   Telecommunication facilities that are attached to an
existing public utility structure within a right-of-way if:



         (a)   The telecommunication facility does not extend
above the top of the existing utility structure and the height of the
existing utility structure is not increased to accommodate the
telecommunication facility;



         (b)   Any replacement utility structure does not exceed
the height of the existing utility structure, including the telecommunication
facility, and does not exceed the diameter of the existing utility structure
by more than 50%;



         (c)   The telecommunication facility is no larger than
three cubic feet and has no individual surface larger than four square feet;



         (d)   The telecommunication facility extends outward
from the utility structure by no more than two and one-half feet, except that
an antenna no greater than one half inch in diameter may extend an additional
six inches;



         (e)   There is no ground mounted equipment;



         (f)   There is no interference with public safety
communications or with the original use of the public utility structure; and



         (g)   The telecommunication facility must be removed and
relocated when the road authority requires the removal and relocation of the
public utility structure.



   (B)   Administrative review and approval is subject to the following:



      (1)   Submittal of a complete site and building plan review
application, complete site plan, building elevations, and antenna elevations,
and signed by a registered architect, civil engineer, landscape architect or
other appropriate design professional;



      (2)   Submittal of an analysis prepared by a radio or
electrical engineer demonstrating that the proposed location of the antennas
is necessary to meet the coverage and capacity needs of the applicant's
system. The applicant also must pay the reasonable expenses of a radio or
electrical engineer retained by the city, at its option, to review this
analysis; and



      (3)   Submittal of any necessary easements and easement
exhibits, which have been prepared by an attorney knowledgeable in the area
of real estate and which are subject to the City Attorney's approval.



   (C)   The Zoning Administrator will render a decision within 60 days
and serve a copy of the decision upon the applicant by mail.



   (D)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Administrator
may appeal the decision to the City Council.



(Ord. 212, 3rd Series, passed 11-15-2016)



§ 152.83  CONDITIONAL USE.



   Telecommunications facilities that are not eligible for administrative
approval under § 152.82 are permitted only as a conditional use in all
zoning districts and must be in compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter. Conditional use telecommunications facilities are subject to the
following standards:



   Residential and Commercial Zoning Districts. Telecommunication
facilities may be located only on public property in the R-2 residential
district or the C-1 commercial districts subject to the standards listed in
divisions (A) through (D) that follow.



   (A)   An applicant must provide an analysis prepared by a radio or
electrical engineer demonstrating that the proposed location of the antennas
is necessary to meet the coverage and capacity needs of its system and that
there is no existing antenna support structure that could adequately serve
the area if antennas were placed on it. The applicant must also pay the
reasonable expenses for a radio or electrical engineer retained by the city,
at its option, to review this analysis;



   (B)   A telecommunications facility must use as many stealth design
techniques as reasonably possible. Economic considerations alone are not
justification for failing to provide stealth design techniques. The City
Council may require that a different location be used if it would result in
less public visibility, is available, and would meet the applicant's
reasonable capacity and coverage needs; and



   (C)   A telecommunications tower and antennas, including attachments
other than lightning rods, must not exceed 75 feet in height, measured from
grade. The City Council may increase this height to 90 feet if the increase
in height would not have a significant impact on surrounding properties
because of proximity, topography or screening by trees or buildings or would
accommodate two or more users. The City Council may waive this height
standard for a tower used wholly or partially for essential public services,
such as public safety.



   (D)   Telecommunications facilities may be located in public
right-of-way of a major collector or arterial roadway as defined in the
comprehensive plan, if they meet all of the following requirements:



      (1)   The facility, including attachments other than lightning
rods, may not exceed 60 feet in height measured from grade. The City Council
may waive this height standard for a tower used wholly or partially for
essential public services, such as public safety;



      (2)   The facility must use as many stealth design techniques
as reasonably possible. In particular, the antennas must be designed to
minimize their size and appearance and may not project out from the side of
the tower by more than two feet. Economic considerations alone are not
justification for failing to provide stealth design techniques; and



      (3)   The facility is not located adjacent to residentially
zoned property unless the applicant demonstrates by providing a study
prepared by a radio or electrical engineer demonstrating that the proposed
location of the antennas is necessary to meet the coverage and capacity needs
of its system and no other location is feasible in a non-residential zone.



(Ord. 212, 3rd Series, passed 11-15-2016)



§ 152.84  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   The following standards apply to all telecommunications facilities.



   (A)   Vertical projection on antenna support structures. Antennas
mounted on an antenna support structure must not extend more than 15 feet
above the height of the structure to which they are attached. Wall or
facade-mounted antennas may not extend above the cornice line and must be
constructed of a material or color that matches the exterior of the building.



   (B)   Horizontal projection. Antennas must not project out from the
side of the antenna support structure or tower by more than three feet,
except if located in a commercial district.



   (C)   Setbacks. A tower adjacent to a residential zoning district
must meet the building setback that is established for the district where it
is to be located, but only from the residential zone. This setback is not
required for a tower in a right-of-way. The city may waive this setback
requirement if necessary to implement stealth design techniques or if the
residentially zoned property is public property. An accessory equipment
cabinet that is greater than 120 square feet in size must be at least ten
feet from all property lines.



   (D)   Height. The height of an antenna and tower must be the minimum
necessary to meet the applicant's coverage and capacity needs, as verified by
an electrical engineer or other appropriate professional. The City Council
may waive this requirement if additional height is appropriate for
co-location opportunities.



   (E)   Exterior surfaces. Towers and antennas must be galvanized
steel and painted with a colored duplex coating applied in accordance with
the American Galvanized Association standards consistent with the surrounding
area in: blue, gray, brown, or silver.



   (F)   Ground-mounted equipment. Ground-mounted accessory equipment
or buildings must be architecturally designed to blend in with the
surrounding environment, including the principal structure, or must be
screened from view by suitable vegetation, except where a design of a
non-vegetative screening better reflects and complements the character of the
surrounding neighborhood. No more than one accessory building is permitted
for each tower. Additional space needed for the co-location of antennas must
be added to an existing accessory building in a manner to make it appear as
one building. Design of the building or equipment cabinet, screening and
landscaping are subject to a site plan review.



   (G)   Construction. Telecommunications facilities must be in
compliance with all building and electrical code requirements. A tower must
be designed and certified by an engineer to be structurally sound and in
conformance with the building code. Structural design, mounting and
installation of the telecommunications facilities must be in compliance with
the manufacturer's specifications.



   (H)   Co-location opportunity. If a new tower over 60 feet in height
is to be constructed:



      (1)   The tower must be designed to accommodate both the
applicant's antennas for at least one additional comparable user;



      (2)   The tower must be designed to accept antennas mounted at
additional heights;



      (3)   The applicant, the tower owner, the landowner, and their
successors must allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user
agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use,
must submit a dispute over the potential terms and conditions to binding
arbitration, and must sign the conditional use permit agreeing to these
requirements. The City Council may waive these co-location requirements if
necessary to implement stealth design.



   (I)   Exterior maintenance. The exterior finish of all towers shall
be maintained by the owner/operator in a condition free of rust and surface
coating deterioration.



   (J)   External messages. No advertising message or identification
sign larger than two square feet may be affixed to the telecommunications
facilities.



   (K)   Lighting. Telecommunications facilities may not be
artificially illuminated unless required by law or by a governmental agency
to protect the public's health and safety or unless necessary to facilitate
service to ground-mounted equipment.



   (L)   Rights-of-way. All telecommunication facilities in a public
right-of-way must comply with the following:



      (1)   Telecommunications facilities located within a
right-of-way must not negatively impact the public health, safety and
welfare, interfere with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel over
the right-of-way, or otherwise negatively impact the right-of-way or its
users. In determining compliance with this standard, the city may consider
one or more of the following factors:



         (a)   The extent to which right-of-way space where the
permit is sought is available, including the placement of the ground
equipment;



         (b)   The potential demands for the particular space in
the right-of-way;



         (c)   The availability of other locations in a
right-of-way that would have less public impact;



         (d)   The extent to which the placement of the
telecommunications facilities minimizes impacts on adjacent property; and



         (e)   The applicability of ordinances or other
regulations of the right-of-way that affect location of equipment in the
right-of-way.



      (2)   The facility, including attachments other than lightning
rods, may not exceed 60 feet in height measured from grade in residential and
commercial zones, or 75 feet in industrial zones. The City Council may waive
this height standard for a facility, used wholly or partially for essential
public services, such as public safety;



      (3)   The support structure for the antennas cannot exceed the
diameter of the closest public utility pole by more than 50%, but in no event
may exceed 18 inches in diameter;



      (4)   Antennas and other components must not project out from
the side of the support structure by more than two feet in residential and
commercial districts or three feet in industrial districts;



      (5)   The support structure for the antennas must match the
materials and color of the closest public utility structures in the
right-of-way, if required by the Director of Planning;



      (6)   Ground mounted equipment will be allowed only if:



         (a)   The equipment will not disrupt traffic or
pedestrian circulation;



         (b)   The equipment will not create a safety hazard;



         (c)   The location of the equipment minimizes impacts on
adjacent property; and



         (d)   The equipment will not adversely impact the
health, safety, or welfare of the community.



      (7)   Ground mounted equipment must be:



         (a)   Set back a minimum of ten feet from the existing
or planned edge of the pavement;



         (b)   Separated from a sidewalk or trail by a minimum of
three feet;



         (c)   Set back a minimum of 50 feet from the nearest
intersection right-of-way line;



         (d)   Set back a minimum of 50 feet from the nearest
principal residential structure;



         (e)   Separated from the nearest ground mounted
telecommunication facilities in a right-of-way by at least 330 feet;



         (f)   No larger than three feet in height above grade
and 27 cubic feet in size in residential districts;



         (g)   No larger than five feet in height above grade and
81 cubic feet in size in non-residential districts; and



         (h)   Screened by vegetative or other screening
compatible with the surrounding area if deemed necessary by the Director of
Planning.



      (8)   The antennas cannot interfere with public safety
communications;



      (9)   The telecommunication facility must be removed and
relocated when the road authority requires the removal and relocation of
public utility structures; and



      (10)   Telecommunications facilities within a right-of-way
must receive a right-of-way permit from the City Engineer.



   (M)   On-site employees. There must be no employees on the site on a
permanent basis. Occasional or temporary repair and service activities are
allowed.



   (N)   Landowner authorization. When applicable, the applicant must
provide written authorization from the property owner. The property owner
must sign the conditional use permit agreeing to the permit conditions,
agreeing to remove the telecommunication facilities when they are unused,
obsolete, or become hazardous, and agreeing to the city's right to assess
removal costs under division (O) below.



   (O)   Removal. Obsolete or unused telecommunications facilities and
all related equipment must be removed or made not hazardous within 30 days
after written notice to the current owner and to any separate landowner,
unless an exemption is granted by the City Council. Notice may be made to the
address listed in the application, unless another one has subsequently been
provided, and to the taxpayer of the property listed in the Wadena County tax
records. Telecommunications facilities and all related equipment not removed
within this time limit are declared to be public nuisances and may be removed
by the city. The city may assess its costs of removal against the property.



   (P)   Historic places. No telecommunication tower may be located
within 400 feet of the boundary of any property that contains a facility or
structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Antennas may be
located in this restricted area only if they are hidden from the public view.



(Ord. 212, 3rd Series, passed 11-15-2016)



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General.  Every person violates a section, division,
paragraph, or provision of this chapter when he or she performs an act
thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is
thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific
provisions hereof.



(2006 Code, § 11.99)



   (B)   Violation of §§ 152.70 through 152.72. A violation of any
provision of §§ 152.70 to 152.72 is a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 130, passed 12-24-1971; Ord. 204, 3rd Series, passed 4-19-2016)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   ADMINISTRATION



      II.   MUNICIPAL AUDITORIUM



      III.   CORPORATE LIMITS



      IV.   STREET NAME CHANGES



      V.   ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS



      VI.   ANNEXATIONS



      VII.   FRANCHISES



      VIII.   ADOPTION OF CODIFICATION



      IX.   ISSUANCE OF BONDS



      X.   HOUSING AND REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY



TABLE I:  ADMINISTRATION



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


90
 
8-13-1958
 
Abolishing the office of Village Constable and transfers powers to the
village police officers
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


148
 
6-11-1974
 
Providing for the date of the regular City election and extends the term of
Council members for one year where necessary
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


152
 
6-9-1975
 
Abolishing positions of Treasurer and Clerk and combines them in the position
of Clerk-Treasurer
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


83
 
8-22-1990
 
Superseding Ord. 148
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)



 



TABLE II:  MUNICIPAL AUDITORIUM



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


48
 
6-13-1934
 
Proving for the erection and maintenance of a gymnasium and auditorium in
recognition of the services performed by soldiers, sailors, marines, and war
veterans of the United States, and provides for the cost thereof
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE III:  CORPORATE LIMITS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


172, 3rd Series
 
11-30-2006
 
Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain land owned by
H.C. Harrison on behalf of Entrust Midwest, LLC
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE IV:  STREET NAME CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




4
 
5-11-1927
 
Changing the name of 3rd Street (2006 Code, Ch. 20)


83
 
4-27-1955
 
Changing the name of 4th Street (2006 Code, Ch. 20)


102
 
10-23-1963
 
Changing the name of 9th Street Southwest (2006 Code, Ch. 20)


108
 
4-14-1965
 
Changing the name of Verndale Avenue (2006 Code, Ch. 20)


143
 
11-28-1973
 
Changing the name of Oak Court to Bretz Lane (2006 Code, Ch. 20)


114, 3rd Series
 
10-2-1997
 
Changing the name of C.S.A.H. No. 4 to Sunnybrook Road (2006 Code, Ch. 20)


134, 3rd Series
 
1-11-2000
 
Changing the name of Back Nine Road and Tee Lane of Wadena Gold Course Lots
to Silo Heights Drive (2006 Code, Ch. 20)




 



TABLE V:  ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




135
 
7-17-1972
 
Changing to the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


139
 
3-28-1973
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


142
 
8-8-1973
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


145
 
1-9-1974
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


146
 
3-13-1974
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


149
 
6-26-1974
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


151
 
5-14-1975
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


162
 
6-14-1976
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


165
 
11-24-1976
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


166
 
1-12-1977
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


167
 
6-13-1977
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


172
 
1-25-1978
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


170
 
2-22-1978
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


7, Third Series
 
3-12-1980
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


9, Third Series
 
5-14-1980
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


10, Third Series
 
7-23-1980
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


11, Third Series
 
9-10-1980
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


25, Third Series
 
6-23-1982
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


63, Third Series
 
7-23-1986
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


78, Third Series
 
8-10-1988
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


99, Third Series
 
12-8-1993
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


100, Third Series
 
12-8-1993
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


101, Third Series
 
12-8-1993
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


103, Third Series
 
3-9-1994
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


105
 
6-22-1994
 
Changing the zoning map 
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


105, Third Series
 
6-22-1994
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


111
 
4-12-1995
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


111, Third Series
 
4-12-1995
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


138
 
4-11-2000
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


138, Third Series
 
4-11-2000
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


166
 
10-11-2005
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


166, Third Series
 
10-11-2005
 
Changing the zoning map
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


175, 3rd Series
 
4-14-2009
 
Changing the zoning map


178, 3rd Series
 
8-31-2009
 
Changing the zoning map


188, 3rd Series
 
7-10-2012
 
Changing the zoning map


201, 3rd Series
 
5-12-2015
 
Changing the zoning map


202, 3rd Series
 
5-12-2015
 
Changing the zoning map


210, 3rd Series
 
10-11-2016
 
Changing the zoning map


211, 3rd Series
 
11-15-2016
 
Changing the zoning map


221, 3rd Series
 
4-10-2018
 
Changing the zoning map


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VI:  ANNEXATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




133
 
- -
 
Repealing Ord. 132
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


132
 
1-12-1972
 
Lots 1 through 4, inclusive, Block l; Lots 1 through 4, Repealed inclusive,
Block 4 and Block 2 in Southbrook; Lots 1 through 4, inclusive, of Southbrook
Improvements; and, No. 133 Government Lot 1 and SE3, NW3, 18-134-35 and part
of NW3, NE3, 18-134-35
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


136
 
1-10-1973
 
Lots 1 through 6, inclusive, Block 3, Lots 9 through 13, inclusive, Block 4
of Southbrook, and all roads, streets, and alleys adjacent thereto
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


160
 
6-14-1976
 
Lots 7 through 16, inclusive, Block 3, Lots 1 through 8, inclusive, Block 4,
all of Block 5, all of Block 6 and including all adjacent streets and
roadways, all in Southbrook Addition
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


168
 
7-11-1977
 
NW3, 17-134-35, except that part platted as Pine View Acres, and except that
part lying westerly of the Great Northern Railway right of way, subject to
easement and reservation of record, if any
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


169
 
10-12-1977
 
Land platted as Oak Grove in N2, SE3, 12-134-36, Ottertail County
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


2, Third Series
 
4-25-1979
 
Part of W2 of NE3 of 17-134-35, lying East of Wadena County Aid Road No. 104
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


96, Third Series
 
3-10-1993
 
W2 of W2 of 4-134-35
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


97, Third Series
 
3-10-1993
 
Part of NE3 of NE3, 18-134-35; all of that portion of Burlington Northern
Railroad Company right of way across Sections 17 and 18 
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


135, Third Series
 
1-11-2000
 
North 40 feet of West 1,280 feet of East 2,000.00 feet of the S-1/2 of the
SE-1/4, 12-134-36
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


136, Third Series
 
1-11-2000
 
Part of South 2 of NW-1/4 of NW-112, 27-135-35
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


189, 3rd Series
 
8-18-2012
 
Annexing land located in Compton Township


219, 3rd Series
 
11-14-2017
 
Annexing certain portions of Block 5 of Pine Vew Acres


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VII:  FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




85
 
10-19-1955
 
Gas franchise for Minnesota Valley Gas Company
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


94
 
4-27-1960
 
Gas franchise for United Petroleum Gas Company
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


95
 
5-25-1960
 
Gas franchise for United Petroleum Gas Company
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


100
 
2-27-1963
 
Gas franchise for North Star Natural Gas Company
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


104
 
6-24-1964
 
Cable television franchise for Minnesota Television Company
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


106
 
8-26-1964
 
Repealing, among others, Ord. 85, described above
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


3, 3rd Series
 
7-25-1979
 
Granting an electric franchise to Todd-Wadena Electric Cooperative to operate
an electric distribution system for a period of ten years
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


12, 3rd Series
 
11-15-1980
 
Cable television franchise for Horizon Communications Corporation of
Minnesota for an initial franchise term of nine years and a renewal term of
15 years
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


45, 3rd Series
 
11-2-1984
 
Amending Ord. 12, 3rd Series
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


56, 3rd Series
 
6-26-1985
 
Amending Ord. 45, 3rds Series; adopting Minn. Rule 2315.0400A Cable
Communications Board Franchise Standards For Access Channels
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


74, Third Series
 
10-14-1987
 
Gas franchise for Northern Minnesota Utilities, for a period of 25 years
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


106, 3rd Series
 
9-21-1994
 
Granting a cable system franchise to WestMarc Communications of Minnesota,
Inc., for a period of 15 years
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


107, 3rd Series
 
11-22-1994
 
Amending Ord. 106, Third Series
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


155, 3rd Series
 
5-11-2004
 
Cable franchise for Tekstar Communications, Inc., d/b/a Arvig Communications
Systems to be in effect until September 21, 2009, the date on which the
existing franchise held by Charter Communications shall expire
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


156, 3rd Series
 
6-8-2004
 
Amending Ord. 106, Third Series
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


168, Third Series
 
6-13-2006
 
Gas franchise for Aquila, Inc., for a period of ten years
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


186, 3rd Series
 
4-10-2012
 
Granting a cable franchise to CCVII Operating, LLC


187, 3rd Series
 
4-10-2012
 
Granting a cable franchise to CCVII Operating, LLC


214, 3rd Series
 
12-13-2016
 
Extending gas franchise for Aquila, Inc. until June 1, 2017


215, 3rd Series
 
5-9-2017
 
Extending gas franchise for Aquila, Inc. until September 1, 2017


218, 3rd Series
 
8-30-2017
 
Granting a natural gas franchise to Minnesota Energy Resources, a subsidiary
of WEC Energy Group, for a period of ten years


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VIII:  ADOPTION OF CODIFICATION



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


1, 3rd Series
 
11-22-1978
 
Providing for adoption of codification of ordinances known as the “Wadena
City Code”
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


213, 3rd Series
 
11-15-2016
 
Providing for adoption of codification of ordinances known as the “Code of
Ordinances of the City of Wadena”


220, 3rd Series
 
2-13-2018
 
Providing for the adoption of the 2018 supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of Wadena


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE IX:  ISSUANCE OF BONDS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


76, 3rd Series
 
12-23-1987
 
Authorizing issuance of bonds by the Wadena Development Authority in the
principal amount of $275,000
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE X:  HOUSING AND REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


112, 3rd Series
 
8-9-1995
 
Authorizing the Housing and Redevelopment Authority (HRA) to enact a housing
plan on behalf of the city
(2006 Code, Ch. 20)


 
 
 
 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Minnesota Statutes





References to 2006 Code





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES



 

M.S. Section
 
Code Section




12
 
30.14


12.25
 
34.01, 34.03


12.37
 
34.06


13
 
35.02, 35.03


13.37, subd. 1(b)
 
91.16


14
 
121.999


15.73, subd. 3
 
91.02


65A.50
 
33.01


84.81—84.91
 
70.05


84.91
 
70.05


84.92
 
70.06


84.872
 
70.05


103F.101
 
152.32


116.07
 
92.11


144.391
 
116.01


146B.01
 
122.01, 122.03


146B.09
 
122.01


152.021—152.0262
 
115.03


161.242
 
92.02


168
 
70.01, 117.12


168.10
 
92.02


168A
 
117.08


168B
 
92.01


168B.035
 
92.02, 92.04


168B.09, subd. 2
 
92.01


169
 
70.01, 70.06, 130.16


169.01, subd. 40(a)
 
70.06


169.011, subd. 42
 
92.02


169.045
 
70.06


169.045, subd. 1(3)
 
70.06


169.045(7)
 
70.06


169.34
 
71.02


169.70
 
70.06


171
 
70.01


205.07
 
30.19


216D
 
91.06


216B.02
 
91.02


216B.02, subd. 4
 
91.02


216B.02, subd. 6
 
91.02


216B.02, subd. 5
 
91.01


216B.36
 
91.01


216D.01—215D.09
 
91.12, 91.19


222.37
 
91.01


237.16
 
91.01


237.162
 
91.02


237.163
 
91.02


238
 
91.02


260.015
 
130.99


299C.72
 
35.01—35.03


300.06
 
91.07


301B.01
 
91.01, 91.02


308A
 
91.02


325J.09
 
117.09


336
 
117.08


340.408
 
121.032


340A.101, subd. 17A
 
121.126


340A.285
 
121.123, 121.125


340A.301
 
121.121—121.126


340A.409
 
121.009


340A.414
 
33.16


340A.503, subd. 1(a)(1)
 
130.50


340A.504
 
121.068


343.22
 
130.05


343.29
 
130.05


364.03, subd. 2
 
122.07


364.03, subd. 3
 
122.07


364.06
 
35.02, 35.03


364.09
 
35.02, 35.03


383B.77
 
31.25


394.21—394.37
 
152.32


410.09
 
91.01


412.141
 
30.07


412.151
 
30.07


412.221
 
91.01


412.221, subd. 6
 
91.01


412.221, subd. 32
 
130.50


429
 
151.01


429.011
 
90.06


429.101
 
130.09, 130.10, 150.09


453
 
91.02


453A
 
91.02


461.12, subd. 2
 
116.99


461.12, subd. 3
 
116.99


462
 
152.32


462.357
 
152.09


462.358, subd. 2
 
151.31


469.001—469.047
 
31.25


469.048—469.068
 
31.24


469.190
 
33.30


471
 
151.01


500.30
 
152.72


505
 
151.01


609.283—609.353
 
115.03


609.365
 
115.03


617.23—617.299
 
115.03


624.20, subd. 1(c)
 
130.04


626.862
 
10.20


631.48
 
10.99


 
 





 



REFERENCES TO 2006 CODE



 



 

2006 Code Section
 
2016 Code Section




1.02
 
10.05


1.04
 
10.21


1.05
 
10.22


1.08
 
10.23


1.08
 
10.24


2.01
 
30.01


2.02
 
30.02


2.03
 
30.03


2.04
 
30.04


2.05
 
30.05


2.06
 
30.06


2.07
 
30.07


2.08
 
30.08


2.09
 
30.09


2.10
 
30.10, 30.11


2.12
 
30.12


2.13
 
30.13


2.14
 
30.14


2.15
 
30.15


2.16
 
30.16


2.17
 
30.17


2.18
 
30.18


2.19
 
30.19


2.30
 
31.01


2.31
 
31.02


2.32
 
31.03


2.33
 
31.04


2.34
 
31.05


2.35
 
31.06


2.36
 
31.07


2.50
 
31.20


2.52
 
31.21


2.53
 
31.22


2.55
 
31.23


2.57
 
31.24


2.58
 
31.25


2.70
 
30.20


2.71
 
123.01—123.05


2.72
 
32.01


2.73
 
32.02


2.74
 
32.03


2.75
 
33.01


2.76
 
33.15


2.99
 
30.99


3.01
 
50.01


3.02
 
50.02


3.03
 
50.03


3.04
 
50.04


3.05
 
50.05


3.06
 
50.06


3.30
 
51.01—51.08


3.40
 
52.01—52.11


3.50
 
53.01—53.03


3.60
 
54.01—54.06


3.99
 
50.99


4.03
 
150.01


4.04
 
150.02


4.05
 
150.03


4.06
 
150.04


4.10
 
150.05


4.30
 
150.06


4.31
 
150.07


4.50
 
150.08


4.51
 
150.09


4.99
 
150.99


5.01
 
121.001


5.02
 
121.030—121.037


5.03
 
121.002


5.04
 
121.003


5.05
 
121.004


5.06
 
121.005


5.07
 
121.006


5.08
 
121.007


5.10
 
121.008


5.11
 
121.009


5.13
 
121.010


5.14
 
121.011


5.15
 
121.012


5.16
 
121.013


5.17
 
121.014


5.18
 
121.015


5.19
 
121.016


5.30
 
121.050


5.32
 
121.051


5.33
 
121.052


5.34
 
121.053


5.35
 
121.054


5.50
 
121.065


5.52
 
121.066


5.53
 
121.067


5.54
 
121.068


5.55
 
121.069


5.56
 
121.070


5.57
 
121.071


5.60
 
121.017


5.61
 
121.018


5.70
 
121.085


5.71
 
121.086


5.72
 
121.087


5.73
 
121.088


5.80
 
121.100—121.105


5.90
 
121.019


5.99
 
121.999


6.01
 
110.01


6.02
 
110.02


6.03
 
110.03


6.04
 
110.04


6.05
 
110.05


6.06
 
110.06


6.07
 
110.07


6.08
 
110.08


6.09
 
110.09


6.10
 
110.10


6.11
 
110.11


6.12
 
110.12


6.13
 
110.13


6.20
 
111.01—111.13, 111.99


6.21
 
112.01—112.03


6.22
 
113.01—113.08


6.31
 
114.01—114.05, 114.20—114.22


6.33
 
115.01—115.10, 115.99


6.40
 
116.01—116.13, 116.99


6.43
 
117.01—117.13, 117.99


6.50
 
119.01—119.04


6.51
 
120.01—120.07


6.99
 
110.99


7.01
 
90.01


7.02
 
90.02


7.03
 
90.03


7.04
 
90.04


7.05
 
90.05


7.06
 
90.06


7.07
 
90.07


7.08
 
90.08


7.20
 
90.09, 90.99


7.21
 
90.10


7.22
 
90.11


7.23
 
90.12


7.24
 
90.13


7.25
 
90.14


7.99
 
90.99


8.01
 
70.01


8.10
 
70.02


8.11
 
70.03


8.12
 
70.04


8.30
 
70.05


8.32
 
70.07


8.99
 
70.99


9.01
 
71.01


9.02
 
71.02


9.03
 
71.03


9.04
 
71.04


9.05
 
71.05


9.06
 
71.06


9.07
 
71.07


9.08
 
71.08


9.30
 
71.09


9.31
 
71.10


9.32
 
71.11


9.33
 
71.12


9.34
 
71.13


9.35
 
71.14


9.36
 
71.15


9.37
 
71.16


9.38
 
71.17


9.39
 
71.18


9.99
 
71.99


10.01
 
130.01


10.02
 
130.35


10.03
 
130.02


10.04
 
130.03


10.20
 
130.04


10.21
 
130.05


10.22
 
130.36


10.23
 
130.37


10.24
 
130.38


10.25
 
130.39


10.26
 
130.40


10.28
 
130.06


10.29
 
130.07


10.40
 
130.08


10.41
 
130.09


10.42
 
130.42


10.43
 
130.43


10.44
 
130.44


10.45
 
130.45


10.46
 
130.46


10.47
 
130.47


10.48
 
130.48


10.49
 
130.49


10.61
 
130.11


10.62
 
130.12


10.64
 
130.14


10.65
 
130.15


10.66
 
130.16


10.67
 
130.17


10.69
 
130.18


10.70
 
130.19


10.71
 
130.20


10.72
 
130.21


10.73
 
130.22


10.74
 
130.23


10.99
 
130.99


11.01
 
152.01


11.02
 
152.02


11.03
 
152.25


11.04
 
152.26


11.05
 
152.27


11.06
 
152.28


11.07
 
152.29


11.08
 
152.30


11.09
 
152.31


11.10
 
152.32


11.11
 
152.33


11.20
 
152.45—152.58


11.21
 
152.03


11.25
 
152.05


11.30
 
152.06


11.40
 
152.07


11.50
 
152.08


11.60
 
152.09


11.61
 
152.10


11.62
 
152.11


11.99
 
152.99


12.01
 
151.01


12.02
 
151.02


12.03
 
151.03


12.04
 
151.04


12.05
 
151.25—151.31


12.06
 
151.05


12.07
 
151.06


12.08
 
151.07


12.09
 
151.08


12.10
 
151.09


12.11
 
151.10


12.99
 
151.99


13
 
33.30


14.01
 
91.01


14.02
 
91.02


14.03
 
91.03


14.04
 
91.04


14.05
 
91.05


14.10
 
91.06


14.11
 
91.07


14.12
 
91.08


14.13
 
91.40


14.14
 
91.41


14.15
 
91.42


14.16
 
91.43


14.30
 
91.09


14.40
 
91.10


14.41
 
91.11


14.42
 
91.12


14.43
 
91.44


14.50
 
91.13


14.60
 
91.14


14.61
 
91.45


14.62
 
91.15


14.63
 
91.46


14.70
 
91.16


14.71
 
91.17


14.72
 
91.18


14.73
 
91.19


14.74
 
91.20


14.75
 
91.21


14.76
 
91.22


14.90
 
91.23


14.91
 
91.24


14.92
 
91.25


14.99
 
91.99


20
 
TSO Tables I—X


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section


12-06-14
 
12-9-2014
 
31.16


02-03-16
 
2-9-2016
 
70.06


 
 
 
 
 



 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




133
 
- -
 
TSO Table VI


153, 3rd Series
 
- -
 
33.16


195, 3rd. Series
 
- -
 
152.59


4
 
5-11-1927
 
TSO Table IV


48
 
6-13-1934
 
TSO Table II


83
 
4-27-1955
 
TSO Table IV


85
 
10-19-1955
 
TSO Table VII


90
 
8-13-1958
 
TSO Table I


94
 
4-27-1960
 
TSO Table VII


95
 
5-25-1960
 
TSO Table VII


100
 
2-27-1963
 
TSO Table VII


102
 
10-23-1963
 
TSO Table IV


104
 
6-24-1964
 
TSO Table VII


106
 
8-26-1964
 
TSO Table VII


108
 
4-14-1965
 
TSO Table IV


110
 
6-23-1965
 
130.13


130
 
12-24-1971
 
152.01, 152.02, 152.06—152.08, 152.10, 152.25, 152.26, 152.28—152.31,
152.49, 152.55—152.57, 152.99


131
 
12-24-1971
 
151.04, 151.08, 151.99


132
 
1-12-1972
 
TSO Table VI


135
 
7-17-1972
 
TSO Table V


136
 
1-10-1973
 
TSO Table VI


139
 
3-28-1973
 
TSO Table V


142
 
8-8-1973
 
TSO Table V


143
 
11-28-1973
 
TSO Table IV


145
 
1-9-1974
 
TSO Table V


146
 
3-13-1974
 
TSO Table V


148
 
6-11-1974
 
TSO Table I


149
 
6-26-1974
 
TSO Table V


151
 
5-14-1975
 
TSO Table V


152
 
6-9-1975
 
TSO Table I


160
 
6-14-1976
 
TSO Table VI


162
 
6-14-1976
 
TSO Table V


165
 
11-24-1976
 
TSO Table V


166
 
1-12-1977
 
TSO Table V


167
 
6-13-1977
 
TSO Table V


168
 
7-11-1977
 
TSO Table VI


169
 
10-12-1977
 
TSO Table VI


172
 
1-25-1978
 
TSO Table V


170
 
2-22-1978
 
TSO Table V


171
 
5-17-1978
 
152.29, 152.30


1, 3rd Series
 
11-22-1978
 
TSO Table VIII


2, Third Series
 
4-25-1979
 
TSO Table VI


3, 3rd Series
 
7-25-1979
 
TSO Table VII


5, 3rd Series
 
1-17-1980
 
152.55, 152.56


6, 3rd Series
 
1-17-1980
 
152.33


7, Third Series
 
3-12-1980
 
TSO Table V


8, 3rd Series
 
4-17-1980
 
152.57


9, Third Series
 
5-14-1980
 
TSO Table V


10, Third Series
 
7-23-1980
 
TSO Table V


11, Third Series
 
9-10-1980
 
TSO Table V


12, 3rd Series
 
11-15-1980
 
TSO Table VII


17, 3rd Series
 
6-18-1981
 
121.017


18, 3rd Series
 
6-18-1981
 
110.02, 110.11, 119.01—119.04, 120.05


20, 3rd Series
 
6-18-1981
 
90.14


21, 3rd Series
 
6-18-1981
 
70.03


22, 3rd Series
 
6-18-1981
 
71.02


23, 3rd Series
 
6-18-1981
 
130.01, 130.05, 130.06, 130.10, 130.18, 130.22


24, 3rd Series
 
6-18-1981
 
151.04


25, Third Series
 
6-23-1982
 
TSO Table V


26, 3rd Series
 
7-29-1982
 
152.02, 152.58


27, 3rd Series
 
8-12-1982
 
130.03


30, 3rd Series
 
6-23-1983
 
151.10


14, 3rd Series
 
5-30-1984
 
152.11


33, 3rd Series
 
5-30-1984
 
31.05, 31.23


36, 3rd Series
 
5-30-1984
 
121.007, 121.010, 121.069,  121.009


39, 3rd Series
 
5-30-1984
 
71.17


40, 3rd Series
 
5-30-1984
 
130.11, 130.20, 130.23


43, 3rd Series
 
10-3-1984
 
130.03


44, 3rd Series
 
10-3-1984
 
30.18


45, 3rd Series
 
11-2-1984
 
TSO Table VII


46, 3rd Series
 
11-24-1984
 
121.085, 121.087


47, 3rd Series
 
11-24-1984
 
121.032, 121.033


48, 3rd Series
 
3-1-1985
 
32.03


50, 3rd Series
 
3-1-1985
 
121.004, 121.007—121.009, 121.053


53, 3rd Series
 
3-1-1985
 
71.09


54, 3rd Series
 
4-24-1985
 
152.03


55, 3rd Series
 
5-15-1985
 
152.55


56, 3rd Series
 
6-26-1985
 
TSO Table VII


58, 3rd Series
 
4-2-1986
 
121.001, 121.009, 121.013, 121.050, 121.052, 121.054, 121.065—121.067,
121.070, 121.088


60, 3rd Series
 
4-2-1986
 
130.04


63, Third Series
 
7-23-1986
 
TSO Table V


65, 3rd Series
 
4-22-1987
 
10.24


67, 3rd Series
 
4-22-1987
 
121.013, 121.015, 121.052, 121.101, 121.105


74, Third Series
 
10-14-1987
 
TSO Table VII


73, 3rd Series
 
11-20-1987
 
152.29—152.31


75, 3rd Series
 
12-18-1987
 
121.071


76, 3rd Series
 
12-23-1987
 
TSO Table IX


114A, 3rd Series
 
1-2-1988
 
116.01—116.13, 116.99


78, Third Series
 
8-10-1988
 
TSO Table V


83
 
8-22-1990
 
TSO Table I


83, 3rd Series
 
8-31-1990
 
30.19, 152.32


85, 3rdSeries
 
11-23-1990
 
30.07


84, 3rd Series
 
11-1-1991
 
71.18


86, 2nd Series
 
11-28-1991
 
30.03, 30.17, 31.04


88, 3rd Series
 
11-28-1991
 
50.05, 50.06, 50.99, 51.01—51.06, 51.08, 51.99, 52.01—52.11,
53.01—53.03, 54.01—54.06


90, 3rd Series
 
11-28-1991
 
121.011, 121.016, 121.068, 121.071, 121.086


91, 3rd Series
 
11-28-1991
 
110.12


89, 3rd Series
 
12-20-1991
 
150.04, 150.08


95, 3rd Series
 
5-1-1992
 
111.08, 110.10, 110.11


99, Third Series
 
12-8-1993
 
TSO Table V


100, Third Series
 
12-8-1993
 
TSO Table V


101, Third Series
 
12-8-1993
 
TSO Table V


96, Third Series
 
3-10-1993
 
TSO Table VI


97, Third Series
 
3-10-1993
 
TSO Table VI


98, 3rd Series
 
4-30-1993
 
152.55


102, Second Series
 
2-17-1994
 
111.10


103, Third Series
 
3-9-1994
 
TSO Table V


104, 3rd Series
 
3-17-1994
 
130.06


105
 
6-22-1994
 
TSO Table V


105, Third Series
 
6-22-1994
 
TSO Table V


06, 3rd Series
 
9-21-1994
 
TSO Table VII


107, 3rd Series
 
11-22-1994
 
TSO Table VII


108, 3rd Series
 
1-26-1995
 
130.06


110, 3rd Series
 
3-2-1995
 
130.06


111
 
4-12-1995
 
TSO Table V


111, Third Series
 
4-12-1995
 
TSO Table V


112, 3rd Series
 
8-9-1995
 
TSO Table X


114, 3rd Series
 
10-2-1997
 
TSO Table IV


113, 3rd Series
 
11-6-1997
 
33.30


116, 3rd Series
 
4-3-1998
 
31.22


117, 3rd Series
 
4-3-1998
 
130.49


118, 3rd Series
 
5-22-1998
 
90.04


119, 3rd Series
 
5-22-1998
 
152.50


120, 3rd Series
 
6-5-1998
 
30.20


121, 3rd Series
 
6-5-1998
 
33.01


123, Second Series
 
6-5-1998
 
150.05


124, 3rd Series
 
6-5-1998
 
121.001, 121.006, 121.013, 121.033, 121.037, 121.070, 121.102


125, Second Series
 
6-5-1998
 
111.01, 111.11


125, 3rd Series
 
6-5-1998
 
117.01—117.13, 117.99


127, 3rd Series
 
6-5-1998
 
71.09


128, 3rd Series
 
6-5-1998
 
130.05


128, 3rd Series
 
6-5-1998
 
130.07, 130.14


131, 3rd Series
 
7-24-1998
 
130.09


132, Second Series
 
7-24-1998
 
150.09


134, 3rd Series
 
1-11-2000
 
TSO Table IV


135, Third Series
 
1-11-2000
 
TSO Table VI


136, Third Series
 
1-11-2000
 
TSO Table VI


137, 3rd Series
 
4-7-2000
 
91.05, 91.09, 91.13, 91.22, 91.44, 91.46, 91.99


138
 
4-11-2000
 
TSO Table V


138, Third Series
 
4-11-2000
 
TSO Table V


139, 3rd Series
 
5-19-2000
 
152.55


141, 3rd Series
 
6-14-2000
 
130.06


142, 3rd Series
 
6-14-2000
 
130.05


143, 3rd Series
 
3-2-2001
 
120.03, 120.06


147, 3rd Series
 
12-20-2002
 
152.02, 152.55


145, 3rd Series
 
6-21-2002
 
33.30


148, 3rd Series
 
10-24-2003
 
115.01—115.10, 151.99, 152.05


149, 3rd Series
 
12-10-2003
 
130.04


150, 3rd Series
 
1-23-2004
 
111.09


151, 3rd Series
 
1-23-2004
 
150.03


152, 3rd Series
 
1-23-2004
 
30.11


153, 3rd Series
 
3-19-2004
 
130.11


155, 3rd Series
 
5-11-2004
 
TSO Table VII


156, 3rd Series
 
6-8-2004
 
TSO Table VII


158, 3rd Series
 
12-15-2004
 
70.07


159, 3rd Series
 
2-8-2005
 
70.05


200, 3rd Series
 
4-14-2005
 
130.09


161, 3rd Series
 
9-20-2005
 
10.05


162, 3rd Series
 
9-20-2005
 
31.20,  31.25, 50.05


163, 3rd Series
 
9-20-2005
 
50.05


164, 3rd Series
 
9-20-2005
 
70.01, 70.07


165, 3rd Series
 
10-11-2005
 
152.55


166
 
10-11-2005
 
TSO Table V


166, Third Series
 
10-11-2005
 
TSO Table V


167, 3rd Series
 
2-14-2006
 
110.13


168, Third Series
 
6-13-2006
 
TSO Table VII


169, 3rd Series
 
6-13-2006
 
33.15


170, 3rd Series
 
8-8-2006
 
116.06, 116.08


172, 3rd Series
 
11-30-2006
 
TSO Table III


173, 3rd Series
 
5-13-2008
 
122.01, 122.03—122.10, 122.99


174, 3rd Series
 
5-13-2008
 
114.04, 114.22


175, 3rd Series
 
4-14-2009
 
TSO Table V


176, 3rd Series
 
5-12-2009
 
152.04


177, 3rd Series
 
6-9-2009
 
53.04


178, 3rd Series
 
8-31-2009
 
TSO Table V


179, Third Series
 
6-8-2010
 
130.10


181, 3rd Series
 
2-8-2011
 
122.01—122.03, 122.06, 122.08


184, 3rd Series
 
8-9-2011
 
130.05


185, 3rd Series
 
9-13-2011
 
130.50, 130.99


186 3rd Series
 
4-10-2012
 
TSO Table VII


187 3rd Series
 
4-10-2012
 
TSO Table VII


188, 3rd Series
 
7-10-2012
 
TSO Table V


189, 3rd Series
 
8-10-2012
 
TSO Table VI


190, Third Series
 
10-9-2012
 
130.13


191 3rd Series
 
3-12-2013
 
114.03, 114.22


192 3rd Series
 
9-10-2013
 
30.15


194, Third Series
 
12-9-2014
 
152.50


196, Third Series
 
4-14-2015
 
91.01, 91.02,  91.12—91.14, 91.16, 91.43, 91.44, 91.46


197, 3rd Series
 
4-14-2015
 
121.999


198, 3rd Series
 
4-14-2015
 
130.05


199, 3rd Series
 
4-14-2015
 
118.01—118.06


201, 3rd Series
 
5-12-2015
 
TSO Table V


202, 3rd Series
 
5-12-2015
 
TSO Table V


203, 3rd Series
 
2-9-2016
 
70.05, 70.06, 70.99


204, 3rd Series
 
4-19-2016
 
152.70—152.72, 152.99


205, 3rd Series
 
5-10-2016
 
130.13


206, 3rd Series
 
6-7-2016
 
152.26


207, 3rd Series
 
8-8-2016
 
152.28, 152.29


208, 3rd Series
 
8-8-2016
 
121.120—121.127


210, 3rd Series
 
10-11-2016
 
TSO Table V


211, 3rd Series
 
11-15-2016
 
TSO Table V


212, 3rd Series
 
11-15-2016
 
152.80—152.84


213, 3rd Series
 
11-15-2016
 
Adopting Ordinance, TSO Table VIII


214, 3rd Series
 
12-13-2016
 
TSO Table VII


215, 3rd Series
 
5-9-2017
 
TSO Table VII


216, 3rd Series
 
6-6-2017
 
121.068


217, 3rd Series
 
6-6-2017
 
130.05


218, 3rd Series
 
8-30-2017
 
TSO Table VII


219, 3rd Series
 
11-14-2017
 
TSO Table VI


220, 3rd Series
 
2-13-2018
 
Adopting Ordinance, TSO Table VIII


221, 3rd Series
 
4-10-2018
 
TSO V


222, 3rd Series
 
5-8-2018
 
35.01—35.03


224, 3rd Series
 
12-11-2018
 
152.28—152.30


 
 
 
 
 




 


