AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Chapter 100
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 100.010. How Code Designated and Cited. [R.O. 2009 §1-1;
Code 1969 §1-1]
The ordinances embraced in this and the following Chapters and Sections
shall constitute and be designated as the "Brentwood City Code".
Section 100.020. Definitions and Rules of Construction.1 [R.O. 2009
§1-2; Code 1969 §1-2]
In the construction of this Code and of all other ordinances of the City, the
following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless it
shall be otherwise expressly provided in any Section or ordinance, or unless
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Board of Aldermen, or unless
the context clearly requires otherwise:
BOARD OF ALDERMEN — The words "Board of Aldermen" or "the Board"
shall mean the Board of Aldermen of Brentwood.
CERTIFIED MAIL or CERTIFIED MAIL WITH RETURN RECEIPT
REQUESTED — Includes certified mail carried by the United States Postal
Service or any parcel or letter carried by an overnight, express or ground
delivery service that allows a sender or recipient to electronically track its
location and provides a record of the signature of the recipient.
CITY — The words "the City" or "this City" shall mean the City of Brentwood,
Missouri.
CODE or THIS CODE — The Brentwood City Code as designated in Section
100.010.
COMPUTATION OF TIME — The time within which an act is to be done shall
be computed by excluding the first (1st) and including the last day and if the
last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, it shall be excluded.2
COUNTY — The words "the County" or "County" shall mean the County of
St. Louis, State of Missouri.
GENDER — When any subject matter, party or person is described or
referred to by words importing the masculine, females as well as males and
associations and bodies corporate as well as individuals shall be deemed to
be included.3
1. State Law Reference — Similar provisions, §1.020(9), RSMo.
2. State Law Reference — Similar provisions, §1.040, RSMo.
3. State Law Reference — Similar provisions, §1.030(2), RSMo.
AO:1
IMPRISONMENT — Wherever in this Code or other ordinances it is
provided as a part of punishment that one may be imprisoned, this shall be
construed to mean "imprisonment in the City Jail or in the jail of St. Louis
County".
JOINT AUTHORITY — Words importing joint authority to three (3) or more
persons shall be construed as authority to a majority of the persons, unless
otherwise declared in the law giving the authority.
MAY — The word "may" shall be construed as being permissive.
MAY NOT — The words "may not" state a prohibition.
MISDEMEANOR — Shall be construed to mean and to stand in lieu of the
words "a violation of ordinance".
MONTH — A calendar month.4
NUMBER — When any subject matter, party or person is described or
referred to by words importing the singular number or the masculine
gender, several matters and persons, and females as well as males, and
bodies corporate as well as individuals, are included.
OATH — Includes any affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath and in such cases the words
"swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed".
OWNER — The word "owner", applied to a building or land, shall include
any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety of the whole or a part of such building or land.
PERSON — The word "person" may extend and be applied to bodies politic
and corporate, and to partnerships and other unincorporated associations.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes money, goods, chattels, things in action
and evidences of debt.
PLACE OF RESIDENCE — The place where the family of any person
permanently resides in this State, and the place where any person having
no family generally lodges.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING — When used by way of reference to any
Section of the Statutes, mean the Section next preceding or next following
that in which the reference is made, unless some other Section is expressly
designated in the reference.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property.
PUBLIC WAY — Includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway,
sidewalk or other public thoroughfare.
REAL PROPERTY — The terms "real property", "premises", "real estate" or
"lands" is coextensive with lands, tenements and hereditaments.
RSMo. — The latest edition of the Revised Statutes of Missouri, as amended.
4. State Law Reference — Similar provisions, §1.020(9), RSMo.
Section
100.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
100.020
AO:2
SHALL — Shall be construed as being mandatory.
SIDEWALK — That portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line which is intended for the use of pedestrians.
SIGNATURE — Where the written signature of any person is required, the
proper handwriting of such person or his/her mark shall be intended.
STATE — The words "the State" and "this State" shall mean the State of
Missouri.
STREET — Includes any public way, highway, street, avenue, boulevard,
parkway, alley or other public thoroughfare and each of such words shall
include all of them.
TENANT, OCCUPANT — The words "tenant" and "occupant", applied to a
building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part
of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
TENSE — Words used in the past tense or present tense include the future
tense.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING AND WRITING WORD FOR WORD — Includes
printing, lithographing, or other mode of representing words and letters,
but in all cases where the signature of any person is required, the proper
handwriting of the person, or his/her mark, is intended.
YEAR — A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed and the word "year"
shall be equivalent to the words "year of our Lord".
Section 100.030. Catchlines of Sections. [R.O. 2009 §1-3; Code 1969
§§1-3, 1-7]
The catchlines of the several Sections of this Code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the Section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such Sections, nor as any part
of the Section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed
when any of such Sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
Section 100.040. Code a Continuation of Existing Ordinances. [R.O.
2009 §1-4; Code 1969 §1-3]
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those
of ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of "The Code of the City
of Brentwood, Missouri", shall be considered as a continuation thereof and
not as new enactments.
Section 100.050. Repeal of Ordinance Not to Affect Liabilities, Etc.
[R.O. 2009 §1-6; Code 1969 §1-5]
Whenever any ordinance or part of any ordinance shall be repealed or
modified, either expressly or by implication, by a subsequent ordinance,
the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall
Section
100.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.050
AO:3
continue in force until the ordinance repealing or modifying the same shall
go into effect unless therein otherwise expressly provided; but no suit,
prosecution, proceeding, right, fine or penalty instituted, created, given,
secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any
way be affected, released or discharged but may be prosecuted, enjoyed and
recovered as fully as if such ordinance or provisions had continued in force,
unless it shall be therein otherwise expressly provided.
Section 100.060. Repeal Not to Revive Former Ordinance. [R.O.
2009 §1-7; Code 1969 §1-6]
When an ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall
itself be repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former
ordinance, clause or provision unless it be expressly so provided and such
former ordinance, clause or provision is set forth at length.
Section 100.070. Severability. [R.O. 2009 §1-8; Code 1969 §1-4]
It is the intention of the Board of Aldermen that the Sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and if any phrase,
clause, sentence, paragraph or Section of this Code shall be declared
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any
court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall
not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs
and Sections of this Code since the same would have been enacted by
the Board of Aldermen without the incorporation in this Code of any such
unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or Section.
Section 100.080. General Penalty.
A. Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the City, or in any rule,
regulation, notice or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the
City under authority duly vested in him/her or it, any act is prohibited or
is declared to be unlawful or an offense, misdemeanor or ordinance
violation or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is
declared to be unlawful or an offense, misdemeanor or ordinance
violation, and no specific penalty is provided for the violation thereof,
upon conviction of a violation of any such provision of this Code or of
any such ordinance, rule, regulation, notice or order, the violator shall
be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
by imprisonment in the City or County Jail not exceeding three (3)
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment; provided, that in any
case wherein the penalty for an offense is fixed by a Statute of the State,
the statutory penalty, and no other, shall be imposed for such offense,
except that imprisonments may be in the City prison or workhouse
instead of the County Jail.
B. Every day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance or any such
rule, regulation, notice or order shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense.
Section
100.050
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
100.080
AO:4
Chapter 105
ELECTIONS
Section 105.010. Applicability. [R.O. 2009 §8-1; Code 1969 §11-1]
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all City elections, general or
special. All such elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with
the applicable Statutes of the State and in accordance with the regulations
of the Board of Election Commissioners of the County where authorized
by the Statutes of the State, anything in this Code to the contrary
notwithstanding.
Section 105.020. Election of Officers — Generally.5 [R.O. 2009 §8-2;
Code 1969 §11-7; Ord. No. 3559 §1, 9-15-1997; Ord. No. 4263 §1,
12-6-2010; Ord. No. 4590 §1, 12-1-2014]
The general municipal election shall be held in each ward on the first
Tuesday after the first Monday in April of an election year. Elective officers
of the City shall be elected every two (2) years beginning in the year 2015
with the election of a Mayor, Municipal Judge and one (1) Alderman each
from Wards 1, 2, 3, and 4. In the year 2016, one (1) Alderman shall be
elected each from Wards 1, 2, 3, and 4. The elective officers shall hold
office for a term of two (2) years and until his/her successor is elected and
qualifies.
Section 105.030. Wards.6 [R.O. 2009 §8-3; Code 1969 §11-2; Ord.
No. 4311 §1, 10-3-2011]
C. Whenever any act is prohibited by this Code, by an amendment thereof,
or by any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, such prohibition shall
extend to and include the causing, securing, aiding or abetting of
another person to do said act. Whenever any act is prohibited by this
Code, an attempt to do the act is likewise prohibited.
A. The City shall be divided into four (4) wards and the boundaries of the
several wards shall be as follows:
1. First Ward. Beginning at a point in the center line of Brentwood
Boulevard where the same would intersect an eastern prolongation
of the north line of White Avenue (west of Brentwood Boulevard),
thence westwardly along the north line of said White Avenue to the
northern prolongation of the east line of Annalee Avenue, thence
southwardly along the east line of Annalee Avenue to a point where
the east line of Annalee Avenue intersects the north line of
Harrison Avenue, thence westwardly along the north line of
5. Editor's Note — Ord. No. 4251 submitted to the voters propositions A and B which would
allow for four (4) year terms. The election was November 2, 2010, and both propositions
passed.
6. State Law Reference — Wards required, §79.060, RSMo.
Section
100.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
105.030
AO:5
Harrison Avenue to the east line of High School Drive, thence
southwardly along the east line of High School Drive to the
intersection of the north line of Litzsinger Road thence westwardly
along the north line to the east line of McKnight Road, thence
northwardly along the east line and a prolongation thereof to a
point where the prolongation of the east line would intersect a
prolongation of the south line of Eager Road thence eastwardly,
southwardly and eastwardly along the south, west and south line
of Eager Road to a point in the south line of Eager Road where
the same intersects the west boundary line of Audubon Park
Apartments, a subdivision of the City, thence generally
southwardly, eastwardly, southeastwardly, southwardly and
eastwardly along the boundary of the Audubon Park Apartments
and along a prolongation of the south boundary line of the Audubon
Park Apartments to a point where the prolongation of the south
boundary line would intersect the center line of Brentwood
Boulevard, thence southwardly along the center line of Brentwood
Boulevard to the point of beginning.
2. Second Ward. Beginning at a point in the center line of Brentwood
Boulevard where the same would intersect the north line of
Litzsinger Road, thence northwardly along the center line of
Brentwood Boulevard to a point where the center line of Brentwood
Boulevard would intersect an eastern prolongation of the north line
of Harrison Avenue, thence westwardly along the north line of
Harrison Avenue to a point where the north line of Harrison Avenue
would intersect the east line of Annalee Avenue, thence
northwardly along the east line of Annalee Avenue to a point where
the northern prolongation of the east line of Annalee Avenue would
intersect the north line of White Avenue, thence eastwardly along
the north line of White Avenue to the center line of Brentwood
Boulevard, thence in a straight line to a point in the center line of
Brentwood Boulevard where the center line intersects the north
boundary line of Summit Park Addition, a subdivision of the City,
thence eastwardly along the north boundary line and a
prolongation of the north boundary line to a point where the
prolongation would intersect the center line of a certain abandoned
right-of-way of the St. Louis Public Service Company commonly
referred to as the "Kirkwood 01 Right-of-Way," thence southwardly
along the center line of the right-of-way to a point where the center
line would intersect a prolongation of the center line of Florence
Avenue, thence eastwardly along such prolongation and along the
center line of Florence Avenue to a point where the center line of
Florence Avenue intersects the center line of Helen Avenue, thence
northwardly along the center line of Helen Avenue to a point in the
center line of Helen Avenue where the same intersects the center
line of that part of Florence Avenue east of Helen Avenue, thence
eastwardly along the center line of Florence Avenue to a point
where the center line intersects the center line of Cecelia Avenue,
thence northwardly along the center line of Cecelia Avenue to a
Section
105.030
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
105.030
AO:6
point where the center line intersects the center line of that part
of Litzsinger Avenue east of Cecelia Avenue, thence generally
eastwardly along the center line of Litzsinger Avenue to the west
line of Hanley Road, thence northwardly along the west line to
the south line of Eager Road, thence westwardly along the south
line to a point where the same intersects the east boundary line
of Evans Subdivision, a subdivision of the City, thence southwardly
along the east boundary line and a prolongation thereof to a point
where the prolongation would intersect a prolongation of the south
boundary line of Howard Place, a subdivision of the City, thence
westwardly along the prolongation and along the south boundary
line and along a further prolongation westwardly of the south
boundary line to a point where the same would intersect the center
line of Brentwood Boulevard, thence northwardly along the center
line to a point where the same would intersect a prolongation of the
common boundary line between Lot 4 and Lot 5 of the Subdivision
of Lot A of Kenilworth Lane, a subdivision of the City, thence
westwardly along the common boundary line to the west line of Lot
5, thence northwardly along the west line to the common boundary
line between Lots 36 and 37 of Kenilworth Lane, a subdivision
of the City, thence westwardly along the common boundary line
to the east line of Kenilworth Lane, thence in a straight line to
a point in the west line of Kenilworth Lane at its intersection
with the common boundary line between Lot 9 and Lot 10 of
Kenilworth Lane, a subdivision of the City, thence westwardly along
the common boundary line to the west boundary line of Kenilworth
Lane, a subdivision of the City, thence southwardly along the west
boundary line to the south boundary line of Audubon Park
Apartments, a subdivision of the City, thence eastwardly along a
prolongation of the south boundary line to a point where the same
would intersect the center line of Brentwood Boulevard, thence
southwardly along the center line of Brentwood Boulevard to the
point of beginning.
3. Third Ward. Beginning at a point in the center line of Brentwood
Boulevard where the same would intersect the north line of
Litzsinger Road, thence northwardly along the center line of
Brentwood Boulevard to a point where the center line of Brentwood
Boulevard would intersect an eastern prolongation of the north line
of Harrison Avenue, thence westwardly along the north line of
Harrison Avenue to a point where the north line of Harrison Avenue
would intersect the east line of High School Drive, thence
southwardly along the east line of High School Drive to a point
where the east line of High School Drive would intersect the north
line of Litzsinger Road, thence westwardly along the north line to a
point where the north line would intersect a prolongation of the
east line of Bremerton Road, thence southwardly along the east
line to its intersection with the north line of Manchester Road,
thence along a line south 34° 22" west to the center line of Deer
Creek (commonly known as the south leg of River Des Peres),
Section
105.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
105.030
AO:7
thence generally eastwardly along the center line of Deer Creek
and along the center line of the north branch thereof to a point
where the center line intersects the north line of Manchester Road,
thence eastwardly along the north line to the west line of Hanley
Road, thence northwardly along the west line to the center line
of Litzsinger Avenue, thence westwardly along the center line to
its intersection with the center line of Cecelia Avenue, thence
southwardly along the center line to its intersection with the center
line of Florence Avenue, thence westwardly along the center line
to its intersection with the center line of Helen Avenue, thence
southwardly along the center line to its intersection with the center
line of that portion of Florence Avenue lying west of Helen Avenue,
thence westwardly along the center line of Florence Avenue and
a prolongation thereof to its intersection with the center line of
a certain abandoned right-of-way of the St. Louis Public Service
Company, commonly referred to as the "Kirkwood 01 Right-of-Way"
thence northwardly along the center line of the right-of-way to a
point where the same would intersect a prolongation of the north
boundary line of Summit Park Addition, a subdivision of the City,
thence westwardly along the north boundary line to its intersection
with the east line of Brentwood Boulevard, thence in a straight line
to the point of beginning.
4. Fourth Ward. Beginning at a point in the center line of Brentwood
Boulevard where the same would intersect a prolongation of the
south boundary line of Audubon Park Apartments, a subdivision of
the City, thence generally westwardly, northwardly,
northwestwardly, westwardly, and northwardly along the boundary
line of Audubon Park Apartments to the south line of Eager Road,
thence eastwardly along the south line to the east boundary line of
Evans Subdivision, a subdivision of the City, thence southwardly
along the east boundary line and a prolongation thereof to a point
where the prolongation would intersect a prolongation of the south
boundary line of Howard Place, a subdivision of the City, thence
westwardly along the prolongation and along the south boundary
line and along a further prolongation westwardly of the south
boundary line to a point where the same would intersect the center
line of Brentwood Boulevard, thence northwardly along the center
line to a point where the same would intersect a prolongation of the
common boundary line between Lot 4 and Lot 5 of the subdivision
of Lot A of Kenilworth Lane, a subdivision of the City, thence
westwardly along the common boundary line to the west line of Lot
5, thence northwardly along the west line to the common boundary
line between Lot 36 and Lot 37 of Kenilworth Lane, a subdivision of
the City, thence westwardly along the common boundary line to the
east line of Kenilworth Lane, thence in a straight line to a point in
the east line of Kenilworth Lane at its intersection with the common
boundary line between Lot 9 and Lot 10 of Kenilworth Lane, a
subdivision of the City, thence westwardly along the common
boundary line to the west boundary line of Kenilworth Lane, a
Section
105.030
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
105.030
AO:8
Section 105.040. Time for Filing for Office. [R.O. 2009 §8-4; Ord.
No. 4211 §1, 11-16-2009]
The name of no candidate for any City office at an election held under this
Chapter shall be printed upon any official ballot unless filed beginning at
8:00 A.M. the sixteenth (16th) Tuesday prior to the election and ending at
5:00 P.M. on the eleventh (11th) Tuesday prior to the election of the year in
which the candidate seeks election to such City office. The candidate shall
have filed with the office of the City Clerk written declaration stating his/
her intention to be a candidate and that, if elected to such office, he/she will
qualify.
Section 105.050. Filing Fee — Exemptions. [R.O. 2009 §8-5; Code
1969 §11-10]
Each candidate for any City office, at the time of filing a written declaration,
shall pay to the office of the City Clerk/Administrator a filing fee of five
dollars ($5.00) which shall be paid into the General Revenue Fund of the
City. Provided however, if a candidate files a sworn affidavit with the City
Clerk/Administrator stating he/she is financially unable to pay the filing fee,
the candidate shall not be required to pay the fee.
Section 105.060. Order of Names on Ballot. [R.O. 2009 §8-7; Code
1969 §11-10; Ord. No. 4058 §1, 2-5-2007; Ord. No. 4683 §1,
12-7-2015]
The City Clerk shall be responsible for the oversight of the filing of
candidates and shall clearly designate where candidates shall form a line
to effectuate such filings and determine the order of such filings; except
that, in the case of candidates who file a declaration of candidacy with
the City prior to 5:00 P.M. on the first day for filing, the City Clerk shall
determine by random drawing the order in which such candidates' names
shall appear on the ballot. Any drawing conducted pursuant to this Section
shall be conducted so that each candidate, or candidate's representative if
the candidate filed under Subsection 2 of Section 115.355.2 of the Missouri
Revised Statutes, may draw a number at random at the time of filing. If
such drawing is conducted, the number drawn shall be recorded with the
candidate's declaration of candidacy. If such drawing is conducted, the
names of candidates filing on the first day of filing for each office on each
ballot shall be listed in ascending order of the numbers so drawn.
subdivision of the City, thence southwardly along the west
boundary line to the south boundary line of Audubon Park
Apartments, a subdivision of the City, thence eastwardly along a
prolongation of the south boundary line to the point of beginning.
Section
105.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
105.060
AO:9
Chapter 110
MAYOR AND BOARD OF ALDERMEN
Cross References — As to commission on human rights, §§240.020 et seq.;
as to discriminatory practices, §§240.070 et seq.; as to offenses involving
smoking, §§215.1820 et seq.; as to municipal court, ch. 125.
Section
105.060
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
105.060
AO:10
Article I
In General
Section 110.010. General Status of City. [R.O. 2009 §2-1]
The City is a City of the Fourth Class organized under Chapter 79, RSMo.
Section 110.020. through Section 110.060. (Reserved)
Section
110.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.020
AO:11

Article II
Mayor7
Section 110.070. Bond.8 [R.O. 2009 §2-21; Code 1969 §2-135; Ord.
No. 3159 §1, 8-19-1991]
The Mayor, before entering upon the duties of office, shall furnish to the
City a certificate of insurance issued by some surety company authorized to
issue surety and fidelity bonds in the State, to be approved by the Ways and
Means Committee, indicating coverages in the following minimum amounts:
Public employee dishonesty
coverage
$1,000,000.00
Deductible $10,000.00
Forgery or alteration
coverage
$25,000.00
Deductible $500.00
Computer crime $1,000,000.00
Deductible $10,000.00
Funds transfer $1,000,000.00
Deductible $10,000.00
The cost of such bond shall be paid for by the City.
Section 110.080. Appointment of Certain Officers.9 [R.O. 2009
§2-22; Code 1969 §2-142]
The Mayor, with the consent and approval of the majority of the members
of the Board of Aldermen, is hereby authorized and empowered to appoint
a City Clerk/Administrator, Police Chief, and such other positions that are
not otherwise provided for under this Code, all of whom shall hold their
respective offices for such terms as may be prescribed by law or ordinance
and if such terms are not so prescribed, then at the will of the Board of
Aldermen. The Mayor, with the consent and approval of the majority of the
members of the Board of Aldermen, shall also have power to appoint such
other officers as he/she may be authorized by ordinance to appoint.
Section 110.090. Vacancies in Certain Offices — How Filled.
If a vacancy occurs in any elective office, the Mayor or the person exercising
the duties of the Mayor shall cause a special meeting of the Board of
Aldermen to convene where a successor to the vacant office shall be
selected by appointment by the Mayor with the advice and consent of a
7. Cross Reference — As To Elections, Ch. 105. State Law References — Mayor Generally,
§§79.080 Et Seq., RSMo.
8. State Law Reference — Bond required, §79.260, RSMo.
9. State Law Reference — Appointed officers, §79.230, RSMo.
Section
110.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.090
AO:13
majority of the remaining members of the Board of Aldermen. If the vacancy
is in the office of Mayor, nominations of a successor may be made by
any member of the Board of Aldermen and selected with the consent of a
majority of the members of the Board of Aldermen. The Board of Aldermen
may adopt procedures to fill vacancies consistent with this Section. The
successor shall serve until the next regular municipal election. If a vacancy
occurs in any office not elective, the Mayor shall appoint a suitable person
to discharge the duties of such office until the first (1st) regular meeting
of the Board of Aldermen thereafter, at which time such vacancy shall be
permanently filled.
Section 110.100. through Section 110.140. (Reserved)
Section
110.090
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
110.100
AO:14
Article III
Board Of Aldermen10
DIVISION I
Generally
Section 110.150. Regular Meetings. [R.O. 2009 §2-41; Code 1969
§2-13; Ord. No. 3309 §1, 11-15-1993; Ord. No. 3680 §1, 3-6-2000;
Ord. No. 3739 §1, 12-18-2000; Ord. No. 4653 §1, 8-17-2015]
The regular meetings of the Board of Aldermen shall be held on the first
and third Mondays of each month from September through May and on the
third Mondays in June, July and August at 7:00 P.M. In the event that any
regular meeting of the Board of Aldermen shall fall upon a legal holiday,
such meeting shall be held at 7:00 P.M. on the next day which is neither
a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday. All regular meetings of the Board
of Aldermen shall be held in City Hall or at such other publicly accessible
location located in the City of Brentwood that is sufficient to accommodate
the anticipated attendance of the meeting.
Section 110.160. Special Meetings.11 [R.O. 2009 §2-42; Code 1969
§2-14;Ord. No. 4620 §1, 4-6-2015]
A. Special meetings may be called by the Mayor at any time. Unless notice
of such meeting is waived by each member of the Board of Aldermen,
such meetings shall be called by giving notice thereof to the City Clerk/
Administrator who shall make out a written notice of such special
meeting stating therein the time, place and purpose of such meeting. A
copy of the City Clerk/Administrator's notice shall immediately
thereafter be delivered to each Alderman or to some member of his/her
family over the age of fifteen (15) years at his/her usual place of abode
by the Chief of Police or his/her designee and by e-mail at an
established e-mail address of the member. If the Alderman and his/her
family are not available for such service of notice, it shall be sufficient
to post such notice at the door of his/her address. The Chief of Police or
his/her designee shall make return of their service of such notices to the
City Clerk/Administrator on the same day on which such notices were
delivered, and the City Clerk/Administrator shall enter upon the journal
of the Board of Aldermen a copy of the return of service by the Chief of
Police or his/her designee. In case of a waiver of notice, the same shall
be made a part of the records of the City Clerk/Administrator.
B. The Mayor shall also call special meetings of the Board of Aldermen
upon the written request of any four (4) members of the Board of
Aldermen.
10.Cross Reference — As To Elections, Ch. 105. State Law References — Board Of Aldermen
Generally, §§79.070, 79.150 Et Seq., RSMo.
11.State Law Reference — Notice of special meetings, §610.020, RSMo.
Section
110.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.160
AO:15
Section 110.170. Quorum. [R.O. 2009 §2-43; Code 1969 §2-15; Ord.
No. 3298 §1, 8-16-1993]
There being four (4) wards in the City and each of such wards having
two (2) members on the Board of Aldermen, making a total of eight (8)
members exclusive of the Mayor, no meeting of the Board of Aldermen shall
be commenced or held unless there are present either five (5) Aldermen and
the Mayor or five (5) Aldermen exclusive of the Mayor, either of which shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of any City business.
Section 110.180. Rulings on Questions — Use of Robert's Rules of
Order.12 [R.O. 2009 §2-45; Code 1969 §2-17]
The Mayor shall rule on all questions arising in meetings of the Board of
Aldermen and his/her ruling shall be final, except when an appeal from such
ruling shall be voted by a two-thirds (?) majority of the members of the
Board of Aldermen. Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised and all future
editions thereof, shall be followed when in doubt or in the absence of a
specific rule.
Section 110.190. Publication of Semi-Annual Statements.13 [R.O.
2009 §2-46; Code 1969 §2-19]
The Board of Aldermen shall semi-annually in February and August of each
year make out and spread upon their records a full and detailed account and
statement of the receipts and expenditures and indebtedness of the City for
the half-year ending December thirty-first (31st) and June thirty-first (31st)
preceding the date of such report, which account and statement shall be
published in some newspaper in the City.
Section 110.200. Compensation. [R.O. 2009 §2-221; Ord. No. 2430
§2, 4-2-1979; Ord. No. 2715 §2, 12-17-1984; Ord. No. 3280 §1,
6-7-1993; Ord. No. 4701 §1, 3-7-2016]
The Board of Aldermen shall fix the compensation of all officers and
employees on an annual basis in connection with its adoption of the City's
annual budget. As to officials elected or appointed to a fixed term of office,
compensation shall be specified in a separate ordinance dealing only with
that subject; provided, however, that in accord with Section 79.270, RSMo.,
the salary of an officer elected or appointed for a fixed term shall not be
changed during the time for which he or she was elected or appointed.
Section 110.210. through Section 110.260. (Reserved)
C. Notice of special meetings shall also be given as required by State law.
12.State Law Reference — Authority to adopt rules for the conduct of business, §79.150,
RSMo.
13.State Law Reference — Publication of semi-annual statements, §79.160, RSMo.
Section
110.160
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
110.210
AO:16
DIVISION II
Standing Committees
Section 110.270. Generally.14 [R.O. 2009 §2-56; Code 1969 §2-43;
Ord. No. 3277 §1, 5-3-1993]
Section 110.280. Public Safety Committee. [R.O. 2009 §2-58; Code
1969 §§2-42, 2-44]
Section 110.290. Public Works Committee. [R.O. 2009 §2-59; Code
1969 §§2-42, 2-44]
Section 110.300. Ways and Means Committee. [R.O. 2009 §2-60;
Code 1969 §§2-42, 2-44]
A. Appointment. At the first (1st) meeting of the Board of Aldermen after
each annual election, the Mayor shall appoint the Chairmen and
members of all standing committees. Such appointments shall be made
with the advice and consent of a majority of the members of the Board
of Aldermen.
B. Members — Number And Requirements. The number of members of
each committee shall be as provided by the Mayor and Board of
Aldermen at the time of appointment. Only members of the Board of
Aldermen shall be eligible to serve on the following standing
committees: Public Safety, Public Works and Ways and Means.
Members of the Board of Aldermen and any resident of the City who is a
qualified voter under the laws and Constitution of this State and this
City may serve on all other standing committees, whether now existing
or hereafter created.
C. Notice. Notice of meetings of any standing committee shall be given as
required by applicable law.
A. There is established a Public Safety Committee.
B. The Committee shall review all ordinances relating to the Police
Department, Fire Department, public safety and fire safety and shall
have legislative oversight over all matters relating to public safety. The
Committee shall have such other functions as may be provided by the
Board of Aldermen.
A. There is established a Public Works Committee.
B. The Public Works Committee shall have legislative oversight over all
matters relating to sewers and sewage disposal, streets, sidewalks,
parks and recreation, planning, zoning and development. The
Committee shall have such other functions as may be provided by the
Board of Aldermen.
14.State Law Reference — Notice of special meetings, §610.020, RSMo.
Section
110.270
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.300
AO:17
Section 110.310. Communications Committee.
The Communications Committee reviews all ordinances, strategy, and
policies that directly impact City Government as a whole. Brentwood's
communication tools and resources are:
Brentwood TV: AT&T U-verse channel 99 and Charter channel 993
City website: www.brentwoodmo.org
City of Brentwood newsletter: "Bulletin Board"
Brentwood Board and Planning and Zoning meetings aired on YouTube
Section 110.320. through Section 110.380. (Reserved)
A. There is established a Ways and Means Committee.
B. The Ways and Means Committee shall have legislative oversight over
the financial affairs of the City and shall review all ordinances relating
to licenses and occupational regulations. The Committee shall have
such other functions as may be provided by the Board of Aldermen.
Section
110.300
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
110.320
AO:18
Article IV
Ordinances15
Section 110.390. Preparation by City Attorney — Delivery of Copies
of Bills to City Clerk/Administrator. [R.O. 2009 §2-76; Code 1969
§2-7]
It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to prepare and execute all bills
or proposed ordinances that he/she has been requested to draw in as
expeditious a manner as is reasonably possible under all the circumstances.
As soon as the City Attorney has completed the drafting and execution of
any such bill or proposed ordinance, he/she shall deliver or cause to be
delivered the same to the City Clerk/Administrator who shall then prepare
copies as aforesaid.
Section 110.400. Introduction and Reading of Bills. [R.O. 2009
§2-77; Code 1969 §2-8; Ord. No. 3120 §1, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 4636
§1, 5-18-2015]
The style of the ordinances of the City shall be: "Be it ordained by the Board
of Aldermen of the City of Brentwood, Missouri, as follows:" No ordinance
shall be passed except by bill and no bill shall become an ordinance unless
on its final passage a majority of the members elected to the Board of
Aldermen shall vote for it and the "ayes" and "nays" be entered on the
journal. Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced to the Board of
Aldermen in writing and shall be read by title or in full two (2) times prior
to passage. Both readings may occur at a single meeting of the Board of
Aldermen. If the proposed ordinance is read by title only, copies of the
proposed ordinance shall be available for public inspection prior to the
time the bill is under consideration by the Board of Aldermen. No bill shall
become an ordinance until it shall have been signed by the Mayor or person
exercising the duties of the Mayor's office.
Section 110.410. Binding of Original Copies. [R.O. 2009 §2-78; Code
1969 §2-11]
The City Clerk/Administrator shall periodically bind or cause to be bound
the original copy of all ordinances, general or special, the same to be bound
in numerical order.
15.Cross References — As To Zoning Changes And Amendments, §§400.540 Et Seq. State Law
References — Ordinances Generally, §§79.130 Et Seq., RSMo.
Section
110.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.410
AO:19
Chapter 115
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Cross References — As to excise commissioner, §§600.030 et seq.; as to
municipal judge, §§125.100 et seq.; as to zoning administrator, §400.130.
Section
110.410
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
110.410
AO:20
ARTICLE I
Generally
Section 115.005. Removal of Officers.
Section 115.010. Indemnification of Officers and Employees. [R.O.
2009 §2-106; Ord. No. 2903 §1, 1-4-1988]
A. The Mayor may, with the consent of a majority of all the members
elected to the Board of Aldermen, remove from office, for cause shown,
any elective officer of the City, such officer being first given opportunity,
together with his/her witnesses, to be heard before the Board of
Aldermen sitting as a Board of Impeachment. Any elective officer,
including the Mayor, may in like manner, for cause shown, be removed
from office by a two-thirds (?) vote of all members elected to the Board
of Aldermen, independently of the Mayor's approval or
recommendation. The Mayor may, with the consent of a majority of all
the members elected to the Board of Aldermen, remove from office any
appointive officer of the City at will, and any such appointive officer
may be so removed by a two-thirds (?) vote of all the members elected
to the Board of Aldermen, independently of the Mayor's approval or
recommendation. The Board of Aldermen may pass ordinances
regulating the manner of impeachments and removals.
B. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to authorize the Mayor, with
the consent of the majority of all the members elected to the Board of
Aldermen, or the Board of Aldermen by a two-thirds (?) vote of all its
members, to remove or discharge any chief, as that term is defined in
Section 106.273, RSMo.
A. To the extent permitted by law, the City may, in its discretion, purchase
and maintain insurance on behalf of the City and/or any person who is
or was an elected or appointed public official, officer, employee or agent
of the City and/or its boards or commissions or is or was serving on any
other public board or commission at the request of the City against
claims or causes of action for damages, property damage or personal
injuries, including death, caused by such officer, employee or board or
commission member while in the exercise of government functions.
B. The City may, in its discretion and in accord with the provisions set
forth in this Section, indemnify any person who was or is a party or is
threatened to be made a party to any action, suit or proceeding,
whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative, other than an
action brought by or in the right of the City, by reason of the fact that
such person is or was an elected or appointed public official, officer,
employee or agent of the City and/or its boards or commissions or was
serving at the request of the City on any other public board or
commission.
C. The nature and extent of such indemnification may include expenses,
attorney fees, judgments, fines and/or amounts paid in settlement or
Section
115.005
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.010
AO:21
compromise and actually and reasonably incurred in connection with
such action, suit or proceeding. Provided however, that the City shall
not be obligated to pay any claim, judgment or expense, including
attorney fees, unless and until the benefits of any insurance, whether
provided by the City or by the person seeking indemnification, have
been exhausted, and provided further, in no event in excess of one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any one (1) claimant or
any aggregate of one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) for
all claims arising out of and upon the same act or an aggregate of
one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) during any one (1)
calendar year.
D. The City may, in its discretion, provide indemnification if, based upon
the information available to the City at the time a determination of
indemnification is made, it is found by the City that:
1. The public official, officer, agent, employee or board or commission
member acted in good faith; and
2. In a manner he/she reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to
the best interest of the City; and
3. Such person has no reasonable cause to believe his/her conduct
was unlawful or unconstitutional.
E. If the City has made a determination to provide indemnification to any
public official, officer, agent, employee or board or commission member
and thereafter believes that reason may exist to find that such person
did not act in accord with one (1) or more of the three (3) criteria set
forth above, the City shall notify such person that a hearing shall be
conducted at a time and place fixed by the City to determine whether
such person shall be further indemnified as provided herein. If, at such
hearing and based upon the evidence and information then available to
the City, it shall be determined that such person did not act in accord
with one (1) or more of the criteria listed above, the City shall terminate
further indemnification forthwith and the City shall not thereafter be
liable for any expenses or payments for which indemnity would
otherwise have been available under this Section. Expenses or
obligations incurred by the City prior to any such determination of
ineligibility as provided herein shall not be affected thereby.
The termination of any action, suit or proceeding by judgment, order,
settlement, conviction or upon a plea of nolo contendere or its
equivalent shall not, of itself, create a presumption that the person
did not act in good faith or not in a manner which he/she reasonably
believed to be in or not opposed to the best interest of the City or
had reasonable cause to believe that his/her conduct was unlawful or
unconstitutional.
F. Expenses incurred in defending a civil or criminal action, suit or
proceeding may be paid by the City in advance of the final disposition of
Section
115.010
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
115.010
AO:22
Section 115.020. Drug and Alcohol Policy for City Employees. [R.O.
2009 §2-107; Ord. No. 3408 §1, 6-5-1995; Ord. No. 3471 §1,
3-18-1996]
The City hereby adopts a drug and alcohol policy for the employees of the
City, to read in words and figures as provided in Exhibit "A" to Ordinance
No. 3471. Said exhibit is not set out herein but is on file and available for
inspection in the office of the City Clerk.
Section 115.030. Conflicts of Interest. [Ord. No. 4713 §1,
5-16-2016]
the action, suit or proceeding as authorized by the Board of Aldermen
in the specific case.
G. Any person seeking indemnification from the City shall, in the event of
any occurrence or upon receipt of notice of any claim, suit, action or
proceeding, promptly notify in writing the City Clerk/Administrator of
the City of the identity of the person seeking indemnification and all
reasonably obtainable information with respect to the time, place and
circumstance that give rise to the claim, including the name and
address of the injured party and of any witnesses.
H. The person seeking indemnification shall cooperate with the City in any
investigation, defense, negotiation or compromise of any claim, suit or
action, even if any of the allegations of the suit are groundless, false or
fraudulent. The City may make such investigation and settlement of any
claim or suit as it deems expedient.
I. Any investigation, defense, negotiation or compromise covered by this
Section shall be conducted by the City Attorney or his/her designees.
J. The indemnification provided herein is intended for the protection and
welfare of the City, its public officials whether elected or appointed, its
employees or agents as herein set forth and no such person can assign,
sell, pledge, hypothecate or in any other manner anticipate or dispose
of any such right to indemnification. No party recovering any judgment,
fines, amounts paid in settlement or compromise of claim or cause of
action or expense, including attorney fees, against a person eligible for
indemnification can sue the City to recover or enforce any claim for
indemnification.
K. Nothing herein shall be construed to broaden the liability of the City, its
public officials whether elected or appointed, its employees or agents,
nor to abolish or waive any defense at law which might otherwise be
available to the City, its public officials whether elected or appointed, its
employees or agents.
L. The payment of such amounts as may be necessary for the benefit of
any person covered hereby are deemed necessary and proper public
purposes for which funds of this City may be expended.
Section
115.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.030
AO:23
A. Purpose And Declaration Of Policy. The purpose of Section 115.030(A)
through (H) is to set forth standards of conduct for elected and
appointed officials as well as employees of the City of Brentwood. This
Section also provides references to certain State statutes that define
and regulate the conduct of officers and employees of municipal
government. The proper operation of municipal government requires
that public officials and employees be independent, impartial, and
responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be
made in the proper channels of the government structure; that public
office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence
in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, there is
hereby established a procedure for disclosure and/or recusal of officials
and employees faced with financial or personal conflicts of interest in
matters affecting the City. This Section also sets out the penalty for
violation.
B. Definitions. As used in Section 115.030(A) through (H), unless the
context clearly requires otherwise, the following terms mean:
BUSINESS ENTITY — A corporation, association, firm, partnership,
proprietorship, or business entity of any kind or character;
BUSINESS WITH WHICH A PERSON IS ASSOCIATED —
DEPENDENT CHILD or DEPENDENT CHILD IN THE PERSON'S
CUSTODY — All children, stepchildren, foster children and wards
under the age of eighteen (18) residing in the person's household and
who receive in excess of fifty percent (50%) of their support from the
person;
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Includes husband, wife, son, daughter, father,
mother, brother, sister, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, father-in-law,
mother-in-law, uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, stepparent and stepchild.
SUBSTANTIAL INTEREST — Ownership by the individual, the
individual's spouse, or the individual's dependent children, whether
Any sole proprietorship owned by himself or herself, the person's
spouse or any dependent child in the person's custody;
a.
Any partnership or joint venture in which the person or the
person's spouse is a partner, other than as a limited partner of a
limited partnership, and any corporation or limited partnership in
which the person is an officer or director or of which either the
person or the person's spouse or dependent child in the person's
custody whether singularly or collectively owns in excess of ten
percent (10%) of the outstanding shares of any class of stock or
partnership units; or
b.
Any trust in which the person is a trustee or settlor or in which
the person or the person's spouse or dependent child whether
singularly or collectively is a beneficiary or holder of a reversionary
interest of ten percent (10%) or more of the corpus of the trust;
c.
Section
115.030
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
115.030
AO:24
singularly or collectively, directly or indirectly, of ten percent (10%) or
more of any business entity, or of an interest having a value of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more, or the receipt by an individual,
the individual's spouse or the individual's dependent children, whether
singularly or collectively, of a salary, gratuity, or other compensation
or remuneration of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more per year
from any individual, partnership, organization, or association within
any calendar year;
SUBSTANTIAL PERSONAL OR PRIVATE INTEREST IN ANY
MEASURE, BILL, ORDER OR ORDINANCE — Any interest in a
measure, bill, order or ordinance which results from a substantial
interest in a business entity.
C. Compliance With State Law. All elected and appointed officials as well
as employees of the City of Brentwood shall comply with Sections
105.452 and 105.454, RSMo., on conflicts of interest as well as any
other State law governing official conduct.
D. Circumstances Requiring Disclosure. [Ord. No. 4732 § 1, 9-6-2016]
1. Each elected official of the City of Brentwood, each member of the
Brentwood Architectural Review Board, Board of Adjustment
(including alternate members) and Planning and Zoning
Commission, the City Administrator, Assistant City Administrator,
Finance Director, and City Attorney shall disclose the following
information annually by May 1, if any such transactions were
engaged in during the calendar year ending with the immediately
preceding December 31:
a. Any transaction with the City in excess of five hundred dollars
($500.00) which involved the official or employee and any and
all persons within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity
of that person. Transactions exempted from disclosure include
compensation received as an employee or elected official,
payment of any tax, fee or penalty, or any transfers for no
consideration to the City.
b. Any transaction with the City in excess of five hundred dollars
($500.00) which involved any business entity in which such
person had a substantial personal or private interest.
Transactions exempted from disclosure include compensation
received as an employee or elected official, payment of any tax,
fee or penalty, or any transfers for no consideration to the City.
2. The City Administrator, Assistant City Administrator, and Finance
Director also shall disclose by May 1 for the calendar year ending
with the immediately preceding December 31 the following
information:
a. The names and addresses of each of the employers of such
person from whom income of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
Section
115.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.030
AO:25
or more was received during the year covered by the
statement;
b. The names and addresses of each sole proprietorship owned;
the name, address and the general nature of the business
conducted of each general partnership and joint venture in
which he/she was a partner or participant; the name and
address of each partner or coparticipant for each partnership
or joint venture unless such names and addresses are filed by
the joint venture or partnership with the Secretary of State;
the name, address and general nature of the business
conducted of any closely held corporation or limited
partnership in which the person owned ten percent (10%) or
more of any class of the outstanding stock or limited
partnership units; the name of any publicly traded corporation
or limited partnership that is listed on a regulated stock
exchange or automated quotation system in which the person
owned two percent (2%) or more of any class of outstanding
stock, limited partnership units or other equity interests;
c. The name and address of each corporation for which such
person served in the capacity of a director, officer, or receiver.
3. Each elected official of the City of Brentwood and each member of
the Brentwood Architectural Review Board, Board of Adjustment
(including alternate members) and Planning and Zoning
Commission shall disclose by May 1 for the calendar year ending
with the immediately preceding December 31 the following
information, and shall file supplementary or revised disclosures
within thirty (30) days of a change to relevant information:
a. The address of any real estate located in the City of Brentwood
in which the elected official or a member of the elected
official's immediate family has an ownership or leasehold
interest;
b. The name and address of any business with which the official is
associated or in which the official has a substantial interest
that:
(1) Has an ownership or leasehold interest in any real estate
in the City of Brentwood; or
(2) Is located in the City of Brentwood; or
(3) Does business with the City of Brentwood.
4. Each candidate (as defined in § 130.011, RSMo.) for election to a
Brentwood municipal office and each committee (as defined in
§ 130.011, RSMo.) that accepts any contribution or makes any
expenditure for the primary or incidental purpose of influencing or
attempting to influence the action of voters with regard to any
Section
115.030
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
115.030
AO:26
Brentwood municipal candidate or issue election shall file a copy of
each report filed with the Missouri Ethics Commission and/or with
the St. Louis County Board of Election Commissioners with the City
Clerk within twenty-four (24) hours of filing with the Commission
or Board.
E. Disclosure Reports. [Ord. No. 4732 § 1, 9-6-2016]
1. The disclosure reports, on a form acceptable to the Missouri Ethics
Commission and supplemented as necessary to accommodate any
information required by the City but not the Commission, shall be
made available by the office of the City Clerk for distribution
electronically, by telephone, fax, and by regular mail. The City
Clerk will send a notice in the month of January every year
reminding the elected and appointed officials, as well as the City
employees, of their obligations under Section 115.030(A) through
(H). Completed disclosure reports shall be filed with the City Clerk
and with the Missouri Ethics Commission in accordance with the
Commission's requirements. The reports shall be available for
public inspection and copying during normal business hours. The
disclosure reports shall be filed at the following times:
a. Elected and appointed officials covered by this Section shall
file their initial report as required within thirty (30) days of
their election or appointment.
b. Every person covered by Section 115.030(A) through (H) and
required to file any report or disclosure shall do so annually not
later than May 1 covering the calendar year ending with the
immediately preceding December 31 and periodically as to any
additional reports or disclosures required by Section
115.030(C) and (D), above.
c. Every person covered by Section 115.030(A) through (H) at the
time of adoption of the ordinance enacting this Subsection16
and required to file any report or disclosure shall file such
report or disclosure as may be required of them within sixty
(60) days of the adoption of the ordinance enacting this
Subsection.
d. Any person appointed or elected to an office covered by
Section 115.030(A) through (H) after the date of adoption of
the ordinance enacting this Subsection17 shall file such report
or disclosure as may be required of them within sixty (60) days
of appointment or election to such office.
16.Editor's Note: "The ordinance enacting this Subsection" refers to Ord. No. 4732, adopted
9-6-2016.
17.Editor's Note: "The ordinance enacting this Subsection" refers to Ord. No. 4732, adopted
9-6-2016.
Section
115.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.030
AO:27
2. If the official or employee covered by this Section has no conflicts
of interest as described herein, a disclosure report is not required,
except that an elected official shall be required to file a report
attesting that none of the circumstances requiring disclosure under
this Section exist as to such person. In no event shall any person
covered by this Section be required to file more than one (1) report
per calendar year except as may be required by Section
115.030(D)(3) and (4), above; however, elected or appointed
officials may file supplemental disclosure reports describing
additional interests acquired after December 31 of the covered
year until the date of the filing of the disclosure report.
F. Conflicts Of Interest Requiring Recusal. [Ord. No. 4732 § 1,
9-6-2016]
1. The Mayor or any member of the Board of Aldermen who has a
substantial personal or private interest in any measure, bill, order,
ordinance or matter of any kind proposed or pending before the
Board of Aldermen shall disclose that interest to the City Clerk so
that such disclosure can be recorded in the records of the Board of
Aldermen and shall further recuse him- or herself from deliberation
and voting or acting on any matters relating to this self-interest.
2. Each member of the Brentwood Architectural Review Board, Board
of Adjustment (including alternate members) and Planning and
Zoning Commission who has a substantial personal or private
interest in any measure, bill, order, ordinance or matter proposed
or pending before the board, commission or governmental body on
which such person serves shall disclose that interest to the City
Clerk so that such disclosure can be recorded in the records of the
body and shall further recuse him- or herself from deliberation and
voting or acting on any matters relating to this self-interest.
G. Contracts And Agreements.
1. No elected official or other official of the City having any power of
review or approval of any of the undertakings contemplated by an
agreement or contract under consideration by the City of
Brentwood shall knowingly participate in any decision(s) relating to
terms or approval of such agreement or contract which affect his/
her personal interests or those of his/her immediate family or those
of any corporation or partnership in which he/she or a member of
his/her immediate family is directly or indirectly interested.
2. The City shall not knowingly, after due inquiry, employ or contract
with any person if a member of his/her immediate family is a
member of the Board of Aldermen or is employed by the City in an
executive or administrative capacity as to the subject of the
agreement or contract (i.e., those who have selection, hiring or
supervisory or operational responsibility for the work to be
performed pursuant to the agreement or contract); provided,
Section
115.030
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
115.030
AO:28
Section 115.040. through Section 115.070. (Reserved)
however, that the foregoing shall not apply to temporary or
seasonal employment.
3. The City shall not knowingly, after due inquiry, employ or contract
with any business entity if it is a business with which any of the
following is associated (as "business with which a person is
associated" is defined above): an elected official of the City or a
person employed by the City in an executive or administrative
capacity (as defined in the foregoing subsection).
H. Penalty. Any person violating any part of Section 115.030(A) through
(H) shall be prosecuted under the general penalty ordinance of the City
of Brentwood as set forth at Section 100.080 of the Brentwood
Municipal Code. In addition, any person subject to the requirements of
Section 115.030(A) through (H) shall be subject to removal from office
if such person shall fail or refuse to comply with the requirements
thereof or shall file any false, incomplete, misleading or fraudulent
statement or information in any report or disclosure filed pursuant to
Section 115.030(A) through (H). [Ord. No. 4732 § 1, 9-6-2016]
Section
115.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.040
AO:29

ARTICLE II
City Clerk/Administrator18
Section 115.080. Qualifications.19 [R.O. 2009 §2-116; Code 1969
§2-108-2; Ord. No. 3224 §1, 6-29-1992; Ord. No. 3225 §1, 7-6-1992;
Ord. No. 3232 §1, 7-20-1992]
Section 115.090. Appointment and Tenure.20 [R.O. 2009 §2-117;
Code 1969 §2-108-1; Ord. No. 3225 §2, 7-6-1992; Ord. No. 3232 §2,
7-20-1992]
The Mayor shall appoint a qualified person to the position of City Clerk/
Administrator with the approval of a majority of the members of the Board
of Aldermen. The City Clerk/Administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the
appointing authority.
Section 115.100. Bond. [R.O. 2009 §2-118; Code 1969 §2-108-3;
Ord. No. 3159 §2, 8-19-1991]
The City Clerk/Administrator, before entering upon the duties of office, shall
furnish to the City a certificate of insurance issued by some surety company
A. The City Clerk/Administrator must be at least twenty-five (25) years old.
The City Clerk must be a graduate of an accredited university or college
with a major in public or municipal administration or with equivalent
qualifications and experience in financial, business, administration and/
or public relations. He/she shall also possess, but not be limited to, the
following:
1. Knowledge of accounting principles and procedures;
2. Knowledge of modern office procedures, practices and standard
techniques;
3. Knowledge of modern data processing equipment and procedures;
4. Knowledge of governmental accounting, purchasing and related
systems and procedures;
5. Ability to apply accounting principles to the maintenance of fiscal
and accounting records;
6. Ability to present ideas effectively, orally and in writing, so others
will understand; and
7. Ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships
with all elected officials, subordinates, department heads and the
general public.
18.State Law References — City clerk/administrator, §§77.042 et seq., RSMo.
19.State Law Reference — Qualifications of administrator, §77.044, RSMo.
20.State Law References — Authority to employ administrator, §77.042, RSMo.; term of
administrator, §77.044, RSMo.
Section
115.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.100
AO:31
authorized to issue surety and fidelity bonds in the State, to be approved
by the Board of Aldermen, indicating coverages in the following minimum
amounts:
Public employee dishonesty
coverage
$1,000,000.00
Deductible $10,000.00
Forgery or alteration coverage $25,000.00
Deductible $500.00
The cost of such bond shall be paid for by the City.
Section 115.110. Duties. [R.O. 2009 §2-119; Code 1969 §§2-55,
2-108-6; Ord. No. 3049 §1, 2-5-1990; Ord. No. 3225 §3, 7-6-1992;
Ord. No. 3232 §3, 7-20-1992; Ord. No. 3728 §1, 10-16-2000; Ord. No.
4023 §2, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 4201 §2, 8-17-2009]
A. Function. To serve as Chief Administrative Officer of the City, reporting
to the Mayor and Board of Aldermen. He/she shall administer
established policies. He/she shall serve as custodian of records, sign
documents, maintain records of Board of Aldermen proceedings and
serve as general accountant of the City.
1. General. The City Clerk/Administrator shall serve as chief fiscal
and administrative officer of the City with responsibility for the
City's finances, including the collection and disbursement of all
funds and signing documents. Any and all funds invested must be
one hundred percent (100%) protected and insured against any
possible loss of the funds.
2. Clerk. The City Clerk/Administrator shall also serve as the City
Clerk and shall have all the authority, rights and duties thereof and
perform those duties.
3. Finance Department. The City Clerk/Administrator shall have
supervisory control over the finance office and is responsible for
the operation of that office and is hereby designated as Finance
Director.
4. Assistant to Mayor. The City Clerk/Administrator shall be the Chief
Administrative Assistant to the Mayor. He/she shall direct, organize
and supervise all administrative employees of the City. He/she can
administer official oaths.
5. Appointments. The City Administrator/Clerk shall make all
appointments and when deemed necessary for the good of the City,
suspend or remove the department heads, except the following:
Chief of Police and the Fire Chief.
6. Purchasing. The City Clerk/Administrator shall be the purchasing
agent for the City. All purchases, contractual services and
Section
115.100
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
115.110
AO:32
insurance required by any department with the exception of
acquisition of real estate or professional services shall be under
the direct supervision and responsibility of the City Clerk/
Administrator. All purchases shall be made in accordance with
the Purchasing Code, Sections 135.010 to 135.210. Purchases
amounting to less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) within
the budget shall be made under the direction and/or supervision of
the City Clerk/Administrator.
7. Budget. The City Clerk/Administrator shall be the budget officer of
the City and shall assemble estimates of financial needs and
resources of the City for each ensuing year and shall prepare a
program of activities in cooperation with standing committees and
department heads, embodying in it a budget document with proper
supporting schedules and an analysis to be submitted to the Mayor,
Ways and Means Committee and Board of Aldermen for their final
approval. This information shall be presented to the Mayor, the
Ways and Means Committee and Board of Aldermen, no later than
November first (1st), annually. The City Clerk/Administrator shall
also maintain a physical inventory of all City property in
cooperation with the department heads.
8. Financial reports. The City Clerk/Administrator shall make monthly
reports to the Mayor, Board of Aldermen and department heads
relative to the financial condition of the City. Such reports shall
show expenditures on a monthly and year-to-date basis as well as
the amount budgeted on a monthly and year-to-date basis. He/she
shall cause such reports to be published as required by State law.
9. Annual report. The City Clerk/Administrator shall prepare and
present to the Mayor and Board of Aldermen an annual report of
the City's affairs, including in such report a summary of reports of
department heads and such other reports as the Mayor and Board
of Aldermen may require. The audited financial statements shall be
presented to the Board of Aldermen on or before the sixtieth (60th)
day after the close of the fiscal year.
10. Policy formation and administration. The City Clerk/Administrator
shall recommend to the Mayor, appropriate committees and Board
of Aldermen adoption of such measures as he/she may deem
necessary or expedient for health, safety or welfare of the City or
for the improvement of administrative services for the City and
shall administer said policies.
11. Board of Aldermen agenda. The City Clerk/Administrator shall
submit to the Mayor and Board of Aldermen a proposed agenda for
each Board of Aldermen meeting at least two (2) working days
before the time of the regular Board meeting.
12. Boards and committees. The City Clerk/Administrator shall work
with City boards and committees as directed by the Mayor, the
Section
115.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.110
AO:33
committees and Board of Aldermen to help coordinate the work of
each.
13. Attend Board of Aldermen meetings. The City Clerk/Administrator
shall attend all meetings of the Board of Aldermen, call the roll,
keep the records and perform any and all other duties or functions
prescribed by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen.
14. Conference attendance. The City Clerk/Administrator may attend
State and regional conferences and programs applicable to his/her
office and the business of the City. Attendance shall be requested
by the City Clerk/Administrator and approved by the Mayor,
appropriate committee and Board of Aldermen. Funds supplied by
the City to reimburse the City Clerk/Administrator for his/her
expense will be decided on an individual basis.
15. Bid specifications. The City Clerk/Administrator shall collect all
appropriate specifications for service and equipment and solicit
and receive sealed bids for presentation to the Board of Aldermen.
16. State and Federal aid programs. The City Clerk/Administrator shall
coordinate Federal and State programs which have application to
the City.
17. Press releases. The City Clerk/Administrator shall be responsible,
with approval of the Mayor, for keeping the public informed in the
purpose and methods of the City Government through all available
news media and all City press releases.
18. Record keeping. The City Clerk/Administrator shall be the
custodian of all records made by him/her or under his/her direction
and supervision that are deemed public records by the Statutes of
the State. Additionally, all official personnel records shall be
maintained by the City Clerk/Administrator.
19. City property. The City Clerk/Administrator shall have
responsibility for maintaining inventory records including values,
with the cooperation of department heads, for all City property. The
City Clerk/Administrator shall make or cause to be made an
inventory of all personal property over five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) annually before December thirty-first (31st) and
develop values for property. Personal property may be sold by the
City Clerk/Administrator only with the approval of the Board of
Aldermen. Real property may be sold with the approval of the
Board of Aldermen by ordinance.
20. Recommendations and representations. The City Clerk/
Administrator shall make recommendations on City capital
improvements and equipment expenditures, recommend projects,
assist in the selection of consultants and direct and participate in
negotiating easements. He/she shall also represent the City's
Section
115.110
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
115.110
AO:34
interests with contractors and utilities, before the media and with
other public jurisdictions and shall lobby on the City's behalf.
21. Complaints. The City Clerk/Administrator shall either handle or
direct to the proper department head or other authority all
complaints received by the City. The City Clerk/Administrator shall
demonstrate the ability to establish and maintain effective working
relationships with City Officials, department heads, employees,
community and business representatives, the media and the
general public.
22. Notice of special meetings. The City Clerk/Administrator shall
prepare written notice of special meetings and file copies of the
return of service from the Police Chief in the Board journal.
23. Bill and ordinance preparation. The City Attorney may prepare and/
or review bills and ordinances at the direction of the Mayor or
Board of Aldermen. The City Clerk/Administrator shall prepare
appropriate copies thereof.
24. Ordinance binding. The City Clerk/Administrator shall periodically
bind or cause to be bound, the original copies of all ordinances in
numerical order.
25. Ordinance file. The City Clerk/Administrator shall make a topical
file of all ordinances not being a general ordinance of the City, in
addition to binding per Section 110.410.
26. Physical examination scheduling. The City Clerk/Administrator
shall determine the time for exams for all City employees.
27. Exam authorization collection. The City Clerk/Administrator shall
collect and file all reports of exams on employees as official records
of the City.
28. Indemnification seekers. The City Clerk/Administrator shall be
available to receive notification from those seeking City
indemnification.
29. Warrant processing. The City Clerk/Administrator shall sign checks
with the Mayor that are presented to the finance officer for
payment.
30. Roster of professionals. The City Clerk/Administrator shall keep a
roster of qualified professionals the City may hire on a limited
basis.
31. Election declaration collection. The City Clerk/Administrator shall
collect written declarations from candidates as prescribed by City
Code Section 105.040.
Section
115.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.110
AO:35
Section 115.120. Public Emergency. [R.O. 2009 §2-120; Code 1969
§2-110; Ord. No. 3225 §4, 7-6-1992; Ord. No. 3232 §4, 7-20-1992]
The City Clerk/Administrator shall, in the case of accident, disaster or
other circumstances creating a public emergency, have the power to award
contracts and make purchases for the purpose of alleviating the emergency.
He/she shall immediately notify the Mayor or acting Mayor of the
emergency and shall file a report with the Board of Aldermen covering
such emergency action, the necessity for same, together with an itemized
accounting of all expenditures incurred.
Section 115.130. Rules and Regulations. [R.O. 2009 §2-121; Code
1969 §2-110; Ord. No. 3225 §5, 7-6-1992; Ord. No. 3232 §5,
7-20-1992]
The City Clerk/Administrator shall have the power to prescribe rules and
regulations as he/she shall deem necessary or expedient for the conduct of
those people subject to his/her authority, with approval of the appropriate
committee and the Board of Aldermen.
Section 115.140. Deputy City Clerk. [R.O. 2009 §2-124; Ord. No.
2905 §2, 1-4-1988; Ord. No. 3159 §3, 8-19-1991]
32. Time requirement and salary. The City Clerk/Administrator shall
devote full time to his/her duties. His/her salary shall be set by
ordinance.
33. Draft attestation. When the Mayor signs a check drawn on the City
Treasury, the City Clerk/Administrator may attest the same and
affix his/her signature and keep an accurate record thereof.
34. Insurance. The City Clerk/Administrator shall handle insurance
matters as directed by the Mayor and/or the Board of Aldermen.
35. Personnel Code. The City Clerk/Administrator shall meet with the
appropriate committees to coordinate personnel codes. He/she
shall administer the City Personnel Code, recommend adoption and
implementation of new personnel policies, review reclassification
and pay requests and performance evaluations, ensuring consistent
application of personnel and payroll issues for City employees.
36. Other. The City Clerk/Administrator shall perform any and all other
duties or functions prescribed by the Mayor, appropriate
committees and the Board of Aldermen.
A. Duties. The duties of the Deputy City Clerk shall be as follows:
1. The Deputy City Clerk shall act as the City Clerk in the absence of
the City Clerk pursuant to the provisions of Section 115.110(2).
2. The Deputy City Clerk shall keep a journal of the proceedings of the
Board of Aldermen.
Section
115.110
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
115.140
AO:36
Section 115.150. Interim City Clerk/Administrator. [R.O. 2009
§2-125; Ord. No. 3129 §1, 3-22-1991]
Section 115.160. through Section 115.210. (Reserved)
3. The Deputy City Clerk shall safely and properly keep all the records
and papers belonging to the City of Brentwood which may be
entrusted to the Deputy City Clerk's care.
4. The Deputy City Clerk shall be empowered to administer official
oaths and oaths to persons certifying the demands or claims
against the City of Brentwood pursuant to Section 79.320, RSMo.
5. The Deputy City Clerk shall engage in the preparation of
ordinances and resolutions.
6. The Deputy City Clerk shall arrange for the publishing of requests
for bids, notices of hearing, ordinances and other official notices.
7. The Deputy City Clerk shall have all duties in administering City of
Brentwood elections.
8. The Deputy City Clerk shall perform all of the duties required by
ordinance or orders of the Board of Aldermen.
B. Bond. The Deputy City Clerk, before entering upon the duties of office,
shall file with the City a certificate of insurance issued by some surety
company authorized to issue surety and fidelity bonds in the State, to be
approved by the Board of Aldermen, indicating coverages in the
following minimum amounts:
Public employee dishonesty
coverage
$1,000,000.00
Deductible $10,000.00
Forgery or alteration
coverage
$25,000.00
Deductible $500.00
The cost of such bond shall be paid for by the City.
A. Appointment And Tenure. In the absence of a City Clerk/Administrator,
the Mayor may appoint a qualified person to act as interim City Clerk/
Administrator to fulfill the duties of the City Clerk/Administrator. Such
appointment shall be approved by a majority of the elected members of
the Board of Aldermen. The person so appointed shall serve only until
such time as the City Clerk/Administrator is appointed or until
terminated pursuant to Section 79.240, RSMo.
B. Duties And Powers. The interim City Clerk/Administrator shall have the
obligations, duties and powers enumerated in Sections 115.110
through 115.130 of the City Code.
Section
115.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.160
AO:37

ARTICLE III
City Attorney, Prosecutor and Public Defender
Section 115.220. Appointment and Term of Certain Officers. [R.O.
2009 §2-216; Code 1969 §2-31]
The City Attorney, City Prosecutor and Public Defender shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the consent of the majority of the members of the Board
of Aldermen and shall hold office during the pleasure of the Mayor and
Board of Aldermen.
Section 115.230. City Attorney — Qualifications and Duties. [R.O.
2009 §2-217; Code 1969 §2-32; Ord. No. 3275 §1, 5-3-1993]
A. The City Attorney shall be a person who has been admitted to practice
law in the State and a qualified voter under the laws and Constitution of
the State. The duties which the City Attorney shall perform shall consist
of:
1. Attendance at all meetings of the Board of Aldermen;
2. Advising the various City Officials upon legal questions pertaining
to municipal affairs;
3. Preparation and drafting of all ordinances, easements, contracts,
bonds, deeds of the City and other legal papers relating to the
affairs of the City;
4. Except as specifically provided in Section 115.250, the prosecution
or defense of litigation involving the City in any court of this State,
whether not of record or of record, including pretrial preparation
and investigation and legal research, as well as appellate
procedures;
5. Appearing before the Public Service Commission or other similar
bodies on municipal affairs;
6. Traveling out of the City on municipal business or affairs;
7. The performance of such other duties of a legal nature as may be
directed by motion duly passed and approved by the Board of
Aldermen;
8. Make recommendations, from time to time, to the Board of
Aldermen for revising and modernizing this Code and its
provisions;
9. Perform the duties charged to the City Prosecutor under this
Article whenever the City Prosecutor is temporarily absent or
unable to perform his/her duties;
10. Perform such other duties of a legal nature as may be directed by
motion duly passed by the Board of Aldermen; and
Section
115.220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.230
AO:39
Section 115.240. City Attorney — Payment of Expenses — Hiring
Another Attorney for Special Legal Work. [R.O. 2009 §2-218; Code
1969 §2-33]
The reasonable expenses of the City Attorney incurred in the performance
of any of the duties specified in this Article shall be paid by the City. It
shall be the duty of the City Attorney, as far as it is reasonably possible, to
apprise the members of the Board of Aldermen of the nature and amount of
such expenses in advance of their incurrence. If the Board of Aldermen shall
desire the undertaking of some legal work which the Board of Aldermen
shall deem extraordinary and not reasonably within the scope or
contemplation of such duties, the Mayor shall designate, with the approval
of the Board of Aldermen, an attorney to perform such work and the Board
of Aldermen shall establish a reasonable fee to be paid for such legal
services.
Section 115.250. City Prosecutor — Qualifications and Duties. [R.O.
2009 §2-219; Code 1969 §2-34]
Section 115.260. Public Defender. [R.O. 2009 §2-220; Code 1969
§2-36; Ord. No. 4084 §1, 8-20-2007]
The Public Defender shall be a person who has been admitted to practice
law in the State, a resident of the City and a qualified voter under the
laws and Constitution of the State, this Code and other ordinances of the
City. The duties which the Public Defender shall perform shall consist of
11. Perform such additional duties as are prescribed by the Mayor and
the Board of Aldermen.
A. The City Prosecutor shall be a person who has been admitted to
practice law in the State, a resident of the City and a qualified voter
under the laws and Constitution of the State, this Code or other
ordinances of the City. The duties which the City Prosecutor shall
perform shall consist of:
1. Supervision of the preparation of all complaints, dockets, affidavits
and recognizances, transcripts and other papers arising out of any
case in the Municipal Court;
2. Attendance at and prosecution of all violations of this Code or other
City ordinances of the Municipal Court;
3. Preparation for trial of Municipal Court matters, including advising
Police Officers relative to Municipal Court matters;
4. Perform such additional duties as the Mayor and the Board of
Aldermen may prescribe;
5. Perform the duties charged to the City Attorney under this Article
whenever the City Attorney is temporarily absent or unable to
perform his/her duties.
Section
115.230
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
115.260
AO:40
defending persons in the Municipal Court, where it has been determined by
the judge of that court that the defendant is without means to retain counsel
and that justice requires that such defendant be represented by counsel.
Section 115.270. through Section 115.320. (Reserved)
Section
115.260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.270
AO:41

ARTICLE IV
City Treasurer21
Section 115.330. Appointment — Term of Office — Removal From
Office. [R.O. 2009 §2-142; Code 1969 §2-117]
The City Treasurer, who shall be appointed in the manner prescribed in
Section 110.080, shall hold office during the pleasure of the Mayor and
Board of Aldermen.
Section 115.340. City Treasurer — Qualifications.22 [R.O. 2009
§2-141; Code 1969 §2-118]
The City Treasurer shall be a resident of the City and a qualified voter under
the laws and Constitution of the State, this Code and other ordinances of
the City. No person shall be appointed City Treasurer who shall at the time
be in arrears for any unpaid City taxes or forfeiture or defalcation in office.
Section 115.350. Powers and Duties — Generally.23 [R.O. 2009
§2-143; Code 1969 §2-120]
It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer to serve and advise the Ways and
Means Committee and to serve on the Pension Board.
Section 115.360. through Section 115.410. (Reserved)
21.Cross References — As to licenses, taxation and miscellaneous business regulations, ch.
605; as to deposits for restoration of streets, etc., §§505.600 et seq.
22.State Law Reference — Similar provisions, §79.250, RSMo.
23.State Law Reference — General duties of treasurer, §79.300, RSMo.
Section
115.330
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.360
AO:43
Chapter 120
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, DEPARTMENTS, DIVISIONS, ETC.
Cross References — As to fire department, §§205.080 et seq.; as to police
department, §§200.010 et seq.; as to municipal court, ch. 125; as to board
of appeals, see 2009 building code adoption and amendments, §500.200.
Section
115.360
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
115.360
AO:44
ARTICLE I
Generally
Section 120.010. through Section 120.100. (Reserved)
Section
120.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
120.010
AO:45

ARTICLE II
Department of Planning and Development24
Section 120.110. Established — Director.
There is hereby established the Department of Planning and Development,
the Director of which shall be the Director of Planning and Development.
Section 120.120. through Section 120.160. (Reserved)
24.Cross References — As to buildings and building regulations, ch. 410; as to signs, ch. 410;
as to subdivisions, ch. 405; as to zoning, ch. 400.
Section
120.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
120.120
AO:47

ARTICLE III
Boards, Commissions, Etc.25
Section 120.170. Residency Requirements of Members of
Committees, Boards and Commissions. [R.O. 2009 §2-501; Code
1969 §2-2; Ord. No. 3286 §1, 6-7-1993]
Section 120.180. through Section 120.190. (Reserved)
A. Each voting member and officer of all committees, boards and
commissions appointed by the Mayor, with the consent and approval of
a majority of the Board of Aldermen, shall either be a resident of the
City or duly appointed as City Clerk/Administrator, Chief of Police or
Chief of the Fire Department (irrespective of whether said City Clerk/
Administrator, Chief of Police or Chief of the Fire Department is a
resident of the City). No member of any such committee, board or
commission shall be entitled to hold office thereon or cast any ballot on
issues before such committee, board or commission unless he/she shall
either be a resident of the City or the duly appointed and acting City
Clerk/Administrator, Chief of Police or Chief of the Fire Department.
B. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent a non-resident of
the City from serving in an advisory capacity on any such committee,
board or commission appointed by the Mayor with the consent and
approval of a majority of the members of the Board of Aldermen.
25.Cross References — As to library board, §140.020; as to planning and zoning commission,
§§400.220 et seq.; as to board of adjustment, §§400.320 et seq.; as to architectural review
board, §§400.420 et seq.
Section
120.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
120.180
AO:49

ARTICLE IV
Tax Increment Financing Commission26
Section 120.200. Tax Increment Financing Commission —
Establishment — Duties. [Ord. No. 3375 §§1 — 5, 1-24-1995; Ord.
No. 3586 §§1 — 5, 2-17-1998; Ord. No. 4177 §§1 — 4, 4-20-2009]
A. There is hereby established the Tax Increment Financing Commission
of the City of Brentwood, Missouri (the "TIF Commission"). The TIF
Commission shall consist of twelve (12) members to be appointed as
follows:
1. Six (6) members appointed by the St. Louis County Executive;
2. Three (3) members appointed by the Cities, Towns, or Villages in
St. Louis County which have tax increment financing districts, in a
manner in which the chief elected officers of such Cities, Towns or
Villages agree;
3. Two (2) members appointed by the school boards whose districts
are included in St. Louis County, in a manner in which the school
boards agree; and
4. One (1) member appointed by all other districts levying ad valorem
taxes in the proposed redevelopment area, in a manner in which all
such districts agree.
B. Members appointed to the TIF Commission, except those six (6)
members appointed by the St. Louis County Executive, shall serve on
the TIF Commission for a term to coincide with the length of time a
redevelopment project, redevelopment plan, designation of a
redevelopment area, or any amendment thereto is considered for
approval by the TIF Commission, The six (6) members appointed by the
St. Louis County Executive shall serve on the TIF Commission until
replaced.
C. The TIF Commission shall have the following duties:
1. To hold public hearings required by the TIF Act on any proposed
redevelopment plan, redevelopment project, designation of a
redevelopment area or any amendments thereto. The TIF
Commission shall fix a time and place for such public hearing
within fifteen (15) days from receipt of a redevelopment plan
meeting the minimum requirements of Section 99.810 of the TIF
Act, as determined by counsel to the City. Such public hearing shall
take place no later than seventy-five (75) days from receipt of the
redevelopment plan.
2. Provide all notices as required by the TIF Act.
26.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 4302, adopted September 19, 2011, sets out the procedure
concerning blighted property and redevelopment, these provisions are on file in the city
offices.
Section
120.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
120.200
AO:51
3. Vote and make recommendations to the Board of Aldermen on all
proposed redevelopment plans, redevelopment projects,
designations of redevelopment areas, and amendments thereto
within thirty (30) days following the completion of the public
hearing. If the TIF Commission fails to vote within thirty (30) days
following the completion of the public hearing referred to in
Section 99.825 of the TIF Act concerning the proposed
redevelopment plan, redevelopment project, or designation of
redevelopment area, or any amendments thereto, such plan,
project, designation, or amendment thereto shall be deemed
rejected by the TIF Commission.
D. As of the effective date of this Section, the TIF Commission, established
pursuant to this Section shall assume all outstanding obligations of any
previously established Tax Increment Financing Commission of the City
and any such previously established Tax Increment Financing
Commission shall cease to exist, except as may be necessary to
complete a public hearing for which notice under Section 99.830 of the
TIF Act has been provided prior to August 28, 2008 and to vote or make
recommendations relating to the redevelopment plans, redevelopment
projects, designation of redevelopment areas, or amendments thereto
that are the subject of such public hearing.
Section
120.200
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
120.200
AO:52
ARTICLE V
Missouri Clean Energy District
Section 120.210. Participation By City. [Ord. No. 4790 §§ 1 — 6,
8-21-2017]
A. The City hereby approves and authorizes joining and participating in
the Missouri Clean Energy District based on the following:
1. Title And Definitions.
a. Title. This Section shall be known and may be cited as "The
City of Brentwood, MCED Missouri Property Assessed Clean
Energy Ordinance."
b. Definitions. Except as specifically defined below, words and
phrases used in this Section shall have their customary
meanings. Words and phrases defined in Section 67.2800.2 of
the Missouri Revised Statutes, as amended, shall have their
defined meanings when used in this Section. As used in this
Section, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings indicated.
MCED or DISTRICT — The Missouri Clean Energy District.
PACE ASSESSMENT — A special assessment made against
qualifying property in consideration of PACE Funding.
PACE FUNDING — Funds provided to the owner(s) of
Qualifying Property by the District for an energy efficiency or
renewable energy improvement.
QUALIFYING PROPERTY — Real property located in the City
of Brentwood, Missouri, that satisfies the criteria set forth in
the PACE Act.
2. Program Administration. MCED shall administer the functions of
its PACE program for its projects within the City on a non-exclusive
basis by:
a. Providing property owners with an application to apply for
PACE Funding;
b. Developing standards for the approval of projects submitted by
Qualifying Property owners;
c. Reviewing applications and selecting qualified projects;
d. Entering into Assessment Contracts with Qualifying Property
owners;
e. Providing a copy of each executed Notice of Assessment to the
County Assessor and causing a copy of each such Notice of
Assessment to be recorded in the real estate records of the
Recorder of Deeds for the County;
Section
120.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
120.210
AO:53
f. Authorizing and disbursing PACE Funding to the Qualifying
Property owners;
g. Receiving the PACE Assessment from the County Collector;
h. Recording any lien, if needed, due to non-payment of a PACE
Assessment;
i. Exercising all powers granted by Section 67.2810.2 of the
Missouri Revised Statutes, as amended, including, but not
limited to, the power to levy and collect the PACE Assessment
pursuant to an Assessment Contract with a Qualifying Property
owner; and
j. To protect the rights of property owners who participate in the
PACE Programs, and to ensure the integrity of the PACE
Programs and the good name of the City of Brentwood. City of
Brentwood hereby authorizes and requires that the District
and/or any PACE Program which operates in the City of
Brentwood shall adhere to the then current Consumer
Protection Policy adopted by the District.
3. Liability Of City Officials; Liability Of City. Notwithstanding any
other provision of law to the contrary, the City and St. Louis County
and their employees, officers and elected and appointed officials,
shall not be liable in either their personal or official capacity to any
person for claims, of whatever kind or nature, under or related to
the City's participation in the PACE program, including, without
limitation, claims for or related to uncollected PACE Assessments.
The City of Brentwood, Missouri, has no liability to a property
owner for or related to energy savings improvements funded under
a PACE Program. Pursuant to the PACE Act, the District is a
separate political subdivision and is in all respects and for all
purposes an independent entity and shall not be considered and is
not a unit of the City of Brentwood, Missouri.
4. Existing Laws Not Superseded. Any project or improvement at any
Qualifying Property which is funded in whole or in part of PACE
Funding shall be subject to all laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations in effect at that time.
5. City As A Non-Party. The City of Brentwood, Missouri, shall not be a
party to any PACE Funding agreement, loan, or other commitment,
however denominated, executed between the District and the
owner(s) (or their representatives, together with any successors
and assigns) of any Qualifying Property.
B. The City of Brentwood, Missouri, declares its intent that the provisions
of this Section shall be in conformity with Federal and State laws. The
City enacts this Section pursuant to Sections 67.2800 to 67.2835 of the
Missouri Revised Statutes, as amended. The City of Brentwood,
Missouri, reserves the right and authority to withdraw from ongoing
Section
120.210
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
120.210
AO:54
participation in MCED upon written notice, subject to the continuation
of any outstanding Assessment Contracts until expiration or
termination thereof.
C. Brentwood, Missouri, does hereby request that it be approved by the
Board of Directors of MCED as a duly authorized participant in the
District.
D. The election of the City of Brentwood, Missouri, to join the Districts
shall in no way constitute an obligation of the City necessitating any
corresponding appropriation.
E. The City Clerk is hereby authorized to deliver a duly executed copy of
this Section to the Board of Directors of MCED or its designee, together
with the jurisdictional and geographic boundaries of the City for
inclusion in the jurisdictional and geographic boundaries of the District.
F. The officials and agents of the City are hereby authorized and directed
to take such actions and execute such other documents, certificates and
instruments as may be necessary or desirable to carry out and comply
with the intent of this Section.
Section
120.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
120.210
AO:55
Chapter 125
MUNICIPAL COURT
Cross References — As to penalty for violation of code, §100.080; as to
police, ch. 200.
State Law Reference — Municipal court, ch. 479, RSMo.
Section
120.210
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
120.210
AO:56
ARTICLE I
In General
Section 125.010. Reports.27 [R.O. 2009 §15-1; Code 1969 §23-7]
The Municipal Judge shall direct the Clerk of the Court or Deputy Court
Clerk, following the holding of each Court, to make a list of all cases heard
or tried before him/her during the preceding Court date, giving in each case
the name of the defendant, the fine imposed, if any, the amount of costs, the
names of the defendants committed and the cases appealed, respectively.
These lists shall be given to the City Clerk/Administrator by the Deputy
Court Clerk. The City Clerk/Administrator shall lay such reports and lists
before the Board of Aldermen upon their request thereafter.
Section 125.020. Service of Warrants and Summons — Service
Charge.28 [R.O. 2009 §15-2; Code 1969 §§23-10, 23-11]
Section 125.030. Court Costs.
A. The service of warrants and summons within the County, issued by the
Municipal Judge, shall be distributed as completely and evenly as
practicable among the Police Officers in the City in which the warrant
must be served. The City shall recoup the costs associated with the
issuance and service of a warrant. The Judge shall set the fee from time
to time. The fee for the warrant is to be collected by the City at the time
of the payment of fines by the subject arrested. When paid, it is to be
paid into the general funds of the City.
B. If warrants issued by the Municipal Judge within the State but outside
the County, then the costs taxed for the service of such warrant shall,
when paid, be delivered and paid into the general funds of the City.
A. In addition to any fine that may be imposed by the Municipal Judge in
any case filed in the Brentwood Municipal Division of the 21st Judicial
Circuit Court, and in addition to all other fees authorized or required by
law, there shall be assessed as costs the following:
1. Costs of Court in the amount of twelve dollars ($12.00).
2. Police Officer training fee. A fee of three dollars ($3.00) is hereby
established and assessed as additional Court costs in each Court
proceeding, except that no such fee shall be collected when the
proceedings against the defendant have been dismissed.
a. Two dollars ($2.00) of each such Court cost shall be
transmitted monthly to the Treasurer of the City and used to
pay for Police Officer training as provided by Sections 590.100
to 590.180, RSMo. The City shall not retain for training
27.State Law Reference — Duty of municipal judge to keep records, §479.070, RSMo.
28.State Law Reference — Service of warrants, §479.100, RSMo.
Section
125.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.030
AO:57
purposes more than one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) of such funds for each certified Law Enforcement
Officer or candidate for certification employed by the City.
Any excess funds shall be transmitted quarterly to the City's
General Fund.
b. One dollar ($1.00) of each such Court cost shall be sent to the
State Treasury to the credit of the Peace Officers Standards
and Training Commission Fund created by Section 590.178,
RSMo.
3. Crime Victims' Compensation Fund. An additional sum of seven
dollars fifty cents ($7.50) shall be assessed and added to the basic
costs in Subparagraph (1) of this Section, provided that no such
cost shall be collected in any proceeding when the proceeding or
the defendant has been dismissed by the Court. All sums collected
pursuant to this Subparagraph shall be paid at least monthly as
follows:
a. Ninety-five percent (95%) of such fees shall be paid to the
Director of Revenue of the State of Missouri for deposit as
provided in Section 595.045.5, RSMo.
b. Five percent (5%) shall be paid to the City Treasury.
4. There may also be assessed a cost of up to four dollars ($4.00) per
case for each criminal case, including violations of any County or
municipal ordinance, for the purpose of providing operating
expenses for shelters for battered persons as set out in Section
488.607, RSMo.
5. Other costs, such as for the issuance of a warrant, a commitment or
a summons, as provided before the Associate Circuit Judge in
criminal prosecutions.
6. Actual costs assessed against the City by the County Sheriff for
apprehension or confinement in the County Jail or costs assessed
against the City by any other detention facility.
7. Mileage, in the same amount as provided to the Sheriff in criminal
violations, for each mile and fraction thereof the officer must travel
(both directions) in order to serve any warrant or commitment or
order of this Court.
8. Any other reasonable cost as may be otherwise provided by
ordinance including, but not limited to, costs of confinement,
including any necessary transportation related thereto, medical
costs incurred by the City while a defendant is in City custody, and
costs related to the arrest and testing of any person for any
intoxication-related traffic offense as set out in Section 125.030(9)
hereof.
Section
125.030
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
125.030
AO:58
9. Reimbursement of certain costs of arrest.
a. Upon a plea or a finding of guilty of violating the provisions of
Sections 342.020 or 342.030 of this Code or any ordinance of
the City of Brentwood involving alcohol- or drug-related traffic
offenses, the Court may, in addition to imposition of any
penalties provided by law, order the convicted person to
reimburse the Police Department for the costs associated with
such arrest.
b. Such costs hereby authorized shall include the reasonable cost
of making the arrest, including the cost of any chemical test
made as authorized or required by law or ordinance to
determine the alcohol or drug content of the person's blood,
and the costs of processing, charging, booking and holding
such person in custody.
c. The Chief of Police may establish a schedule of such costs
hereby authorized and shall submit the same to the Municipal
Judge. However, the Court may order the costs reduced if it
determines that the costs are excessive.
10. Judicial Education Fund. Cities by ordinance may provide for fees
in an amount per case to be set pursuant to Sections 488.010 to
488.020, RSMo., for each municipal ordinance violation case filed
before a Municipal Judge, and in the event a defendant pleads
guilty or is found guilty, the Judge may assess costs against the
defendant except in those cases where the defendant is found by
the Judge to be indigent and unable to pay the costs. The fees
authorized in this Subsection are in addition to service charges,
witness fees and jail costs that may otherwise be authorized to be
assessed, but are in lieu of other court costs. The fees provided by
this Subsection shall be collected by the Municipal Division Clerk in
municipalities electing or required to have violations of municipal
ordinances tried before a Municipal Judge pursuant to Section
479.020, RSMo., or to employ judicial personnel pursuant to
Section 479.060, RSMo., and disbursed as provided in Subsection
(1) of Section 479.080, RSMo. Any other court costs required in
connection with such cases shall be collected and disbursed as
provided in Sections 488.010 to 488.020, RSMo.; provided that,
each Municipal Court may establish a Judicial Education Fund and
an Appointed Counsel Fund, each in separate accounts under the
control of the Municipal Court to retain one dollar ($1.00) of the
fees collected on each case. The fees collected shall be allocated
between the two (2) funds as determined by the court. The Judicial
Education Fund shall be used only to pay for:
a. The continuing education and certification required of the
Municipal Judges by law or Supreme Court Rule; and
Section
125.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.030
AO:59
Section 125.040. through Section 125.090. (Reserved)
b. Judicial education and training for the Court Administrator and
Clerks of the Municipal Court.
The Appointed Counsel Fund shall be used only to
pay the reasonable fees approved by the court for the
appointment of an attorney to represent any defendant
found by the Judge to be indigent and unable to pay
for legal representation, and where the Supreme Court
rules or the law prescribes such appointment. Provided
further, that no Municipal Court shall retain more than
one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) in the
Judicial Education Fund for each Judge, Administrator
or Clerk of the Municipal Court and no more than five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in the Appointed Counsel
Fund. Any excess funds shall be transmitted quarterly
to the General Revenue Fund of the County or
Municipal Treasury.
Section
125.030
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
125.040
AO:60
ARTICLE II
Municipal Judge29
Section 125.100. Qualifications.30 [R.O. 2009 §15-16; Code 1969
§23-2]
The Municipal Judge shall be a resident of the City.
Section 125.110. Election.31 [R.O. 2009 §15-17; Code 1969 §23-1]
The Municipal Judge of the City shall be elected for the term and in the
manner provided by law.
Section 125.120. Rules of Court. [R.O. 2009 §15-19; Code 1969
§23-26]
The Municipal Judge shall establish such rules of procedure for the
Municipal Court as he/she shall deem necessary to ensure justice to all
parties and witnesses appearing in the Court.
Section 125.130. Paroles, Stays and Remittances. [R.O. 2009
§15-20; Code 1969 §1-11]
A. The Municipal Judge shall have the power, in his/her discretion, when
satisfied that any person against whom a fine has been assessed or a jail
sentence imposed by the Municipal Judge, will, if permitted to go at
large, not again violate the law, parole such person and permit him/her
to go at large upon such conditions and under such restrictions as the
Municipal Judge shall see fit to impose. The Municipal Judge may at any
time, without notice to such person, terminate such parole by simply
directing execution to issue on the judgment, or, in case the person
shall have been actually confined in the holding facility, the parole may
be terminated by directing the Chief of Police or any Police Officers of
the City to retake such person under the commitment already in his/her
hands. After a parole has been terminated as above provided, the
Municipal Judge may, in his/her discretion, after the payment of all
costs in the case, grant a second (2nd) parole, but not more than two (2)
paroles shall be granted the same person under the same judgment of
conviction. If a parole shall be terminated, the time such person shall
have been at large on parole shall not be deducted from the time he/she
will be required to serve; but the full amount of the fine shall be
collected or the full time in the holding facility be served the same as if
no parole had been granted.
29.Cross References — As to officers and employees generally, ch. 115; as to elections, ch.
105.
30.State Law References — Qualifications of municipal judge, §§79.250, 479.020, RSMo.;
authority to require the judge to be a resident, §479.020(4), RSMo.
31.State Law Reference — Selection of municipal judge, §479.020, RSMo.
Section
125.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.130
AO:61
Section 125.140. Provisional Municipal Judge — Selection. [R.O.
2009 §15-21; Ord. No. 3572 §1, 11-3-1997]
There shall be a second (2nd) Municipal Judge of the City's Municipal
Court, to be known as the Provisional Judge, who shall be appointed to
his/her position by the Mayor, subject to the confirmation of the Board of
Aldermen, to serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen.
The qualifications for the Provisional Judge shall be those of the Municipal
Judge elected pursuant to Article II of Chapter 125.
Section 125.150. Provisional Municipal Judge — When to Preside
Over Case or at Court Sessions. [R.O. 2009 §15-22; Ord. No. 3572
§1, 11-3-1997]
Whenever an application for a change of Judge is sustained or the Municipal
Judge disqualifies himself/ herself or in the event that for any reason the
Municipal Judge is unable to attend or preside at the sessions of the
Municipal Court, he/she shall refer the case to the Presiding Judge of the
21st Judicial Circuit and request the appointment of the Provisional Judge to
hear the case. The Provisional Judge shall preside over such case or docket
of cases to which the Municipal Judge is thus unable to attend.
Section 125.160. Provisional Municipal Judge — Powers and Duties
Generally. [R.O. 2009 §15-23; Ord. No. 3572 §1, 11-3-1997]
The Provisional Municipal Judge shall be subject to and have the powers
and duties affecting the elected Municipal Judge as provided in this Code.
Section 125.170. Provisional Municipal Judge — Compensation.
[R.O. 2009 §15-24; Ord. No. 3572 §1, 11-3-1997]
The compensation of the Provisional Judge shall be set by the Board of
Aldermen from time to time.
B. The Municipal Judge shall also have the power to grant a stay of
execution or to remit all or any part of any fine assessed by him/her or
any jail sentence imposed by him/her against any person, when, in the
opinion of such Municipal Judge, the circumstances involved in the
particular case are such as justify the granting of such stays or
remittances; provided that the Municipal Judge shall exercise this
power only in those cases where it appears necessary to prevent the
imposition of undue hardship or injustices against the person before the
Court; and provided further, that in granting any such stays or
remittances the Municipal Judge may impose any reasonable conditions
or restrictions and if the person receiving such stay or remittance shall
fail to comply with such conditions or restrictions, the original fine or
jail sentence shall immediately be collected or imposed against such
person.
Section
125.130
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
125.180
AO:62
Section 125.180. Superintending Authority. [R.O. 2009 §15-25; Ord.
No. 3572 §1, 11-3-1997]
The Municipal Court of the City shall be subject to the rules of the Circuit
Court of which it is a part and to the rules of the State Supreme Court. The
Municipal Court shall be subject to the general administrative authority of
the Presiding Judge of the Circuit Court and the Judge, whether elected or
appointed provisionally, and Court personnel of said Court shall obey his/
her directives.
Section 125.190. Municipal Judge — Powers and Duties Generally.
Section 125.200. Jury Trials.
Any person charged with a violation of a municipal ordinance of this City
shall be entitled to a trial by jury as in prosecutions for misdemeanors
before an Associate Circuit Court Judge. Whenever a defendant accused of
a violation of a municipal ordinance has a right to and demands such trial
by jury, the Municipal Court shall certify the case to the Presiding Judge of
the Circuit Court for reassignment.
A. The Municipal Judge shall be and is hereby authorized to:
1. Establish a Violations Bureau as provided for in the Missouri Rules
of Practice and Procedure in Municipal and Traffic Courts and
Section 479.050, RSMo.
2. Administer oaths and enforce due obedience to all orders, rules and
judgments made by him/her and may fine and imprison for
contempt committed before him/her while holding Court in the
same manner and to the same extent as a Circuit Judge.
3. Stay execution of any fine or sentence, suspend any fine or
sentence, and make such other orders as the Municipal Judge
deems necessary relative to any matter that may be pending in the
Municipal Court.
4. Make and adopt such rules of practice and procedure as are
necessary to implement and carry out the provisions of this
Chapter, and to make and adopt such rules of practice and
procedure as are necessary to hear and decide matters pending
before the Municipal Court, and to implement and carry out the
provisions of the Missouri Rules of Practice and Procedure in
Municipal and Traffic Courts.
5. The Municipal Judge shall have such other powers, duties and
privileges as are or may be prescribed by the laws of this State, this
Code or other ordinances of this City.
Section
125.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.210
AO:63
Section 125.210. Duties of the City's Prosecuting Attorney.
It shall be the duty of an attorney designated by the City to prosecute the
violations of the City's ordinances before the Municipal Judge or before
any Circuit Judge hearing violations of the City's ordinances. The salary
or fees of the attorney and his/her necessary expenses incurred in such
prosecutions shall be paid by the City. The compensation of such attorney
shall not be contingent upon the number of cases tried, the number of guilty
verdicts reached, or the amount of fines imposed or collected.
Section 125.220. Parole and Probation.
Section 125.230. Failure to Appear in Municipal Court.
A. Any Judge hearing violations of municipal ordinances may, when in his/
her judgment it may seem advisable, grant a parole or probation to any
person who shall plead guilty or who shall be convicted after a trial
before such Judge. When a person is placed on probation, he/she shall
be given a certificate explicitly stating the conditions on which he/she is
being released.
B. In addition to such other authority as exists to order conditions of
probation, the Court may order conditions which the Court believes will
serve to compensate the victim of the crime, any dependent of the
victim, or society in general. Such conditions may include, but need not
be limited to:
1. Restitution to the victim or any dependent of the victim in an
amount to be determined by the Judge; and
2. The performance of a designated amount of free work for a public
or charitable purpose or purposes as determined by the Judge.
C. A person may refuse probation conditioned on the performance of free
work. If he/she does so, the Court shall decide the extent or duration of
sentence or other disposition to be imposed and render judgment
accordingly. Any County, City, person, organization or agency or
employee of a County, City, organization or agency charged with the
supervision of such free work or who benefits from its performance
shall be immune from any suit by the person placed on parole or
probation or any person deriving a cause of action from him/her if such
cause of action arises from such supervision of performance, except for
intentional torts or gross negligence. The services performed by the
probationer or parolee shall not be deemed employment within the
meaning of the provisions of Chapter 288, RSMo.
D. The Court may modify or enlarge the conditions of probation at any
time prior to the expiration or termination of the probation term.
A. A person commits the offense of failure to appear in Municipal Court if:
Section
125.210
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
125.230
AO:64
Section 125.240. Administrative Search Warrants.
1. He/she has been issued a summons for a violation of any ordinance
of the City of Brentwood and fails to appear before the Judge of the
Municipal Court at the time and on the date on which he/she was
summoned, or at the time or on the date to which the case was
continued;
2. He/she has been released upon recognition of bond and fails to
appear before the Judge of the Municipal Court at the time and on
the date on which he/she was summoned, or at the time or on the
date to which the case was continued;
3. He/she has been placed on Court supervised probation and fails to
appear before the Judge of the Municipal Court at the time
specified by said Judge as a condition of the probation.
B. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the exercise of the Municipal
Court of its power to punish for contempt.
A. Search Warrant Defined — Who May Issue, Execute.
1. An administrative search warrant is a written order of the
Municipal Judge permitting the entry of City Officials on or into
private property, structure or improvement to enforce the City's
housing, zoning, health and safety regulations when government
entry on or into such property is otherwise authorized by Missouri
law. A warrant may issue only in conformance with this Section and
only for the enforcement of the City's housing, zoning, health and
safety regulations, specifically:
a. To inspect private property to determine or prove the existence
of physical conditions in violation of a specified regulation,
b. To seize property or photograph, copy or record evidence of
property or physical conditions found thereon or therein, and
c. To abate such physical conditions.
2. The Municipal Judge having original and exclusive jurisdiction to
determine violations against the ordinances of the municipality
may issue an administrative warrant when:
a. The property to be entered is located within the City, and
b. The owner or occupant of the property or place to be entered:
(1) Has refused to allow same after official request by the City,
or
(2) Is not available, after reasonable investigation and effort,
to consent to such search or inspection.
Section
125.230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.240
AO:65
3. Any such warrant shall be directed to the Chief of Police or any
other Police Officer of the City and shall be executed by the Chief of
Police or said Police Officer in conjunction with the Code
Enforcement Officer or other appropriate City Official within the
City limits and not elsewhere.
B. Who May Apply For Warrant — Contents Of Application.
1. Any code enforcement officer, police officer or attorney of the City
may make application to the Municipal Judge for the issuance of an
administrative warrant.
2. The application shall:
a. Be in writing;
b. State the time and date of the making of the application;
c. Identify the property or places to be entered, searched,
inspected or seized in sufficient detail and particularity that
the officer executing the warrant can readily ascertain it;
d. State that the owner or occupant of the property or places to
be entered, searched, inspected or seized:
(1) Has been requested by the City to allow such action and
has refused to allow such action, or
(2) Is not available, after reasonable investigation and effort,
to consent to such search or inspection;
e. State facts sufficient to show probable cause for the issuance
of a search warrant as provided in Subsection (C) of this
Section to:
(1) Search or inspect for violations of an ordinance or Code
Section specified in the application; or
(2) Show that entry or seizure is authorized and necessary to
enforce an ordinance or Code Section specified in the
application and/or abate an ordinance violation and that
due process has been afforded prior to the entry or
seizure;
f. Be verified by the oath or affirmation of the applicant; and
g. Be signed by the applicant and filed in the Municipal Court.
3. The application may be supplemented by a written affidavit verified
by oath or affirmation. Such affidavit shall be considered in
determining whether there is probable cause for the issuance of a
search warrant and in filling out any deficiencies in the description
of the property or place to be searched or inspected. Oral testimony
shall not be considered.
Section
125.240
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
125.240
AO:66
4. The application may be submitted by hand delivery, mail or
facsimile or other electronic means.
C. Determination Of Probable Cause — Issuance — Contents Of Warrant —
Execution And Return.
1. Determination of probable cause/issuance.
a. The Municipal Judge shall determine whether probable cause
exists to inspect or search for the purposes noted herein.
b. In doing so the Municipal Judge shall determine whether the
action to be taken by the City is reasonable in light of the facts
stated. The Municipal Judge shall consider the goals of the
ordinance or Code Section sought to be enforced and such
other factors as may be appropriate including, but not limited
to, the physical condition of the specified property, the age and
nature of the property, the condition of the area in which the
property is located, the known violation of any relevant City
ordinance or Code Section, the passage of time since the
property's last inspection and the authority authorizing
government entry onto private property. The standard for
issuing a warrant need not be limited to actual knowledge of an
existing violation of a City ordinance or Code Section.
c. If it appears from the application and any supporting affidavit
that there is probable cause to inspect or search the private
property for the enforcement of the City's housing, zoning,
health and safety regulations, a search warrant shall
immediately be issued.
d. The warrant shall issue in the form of an original and two (2)
copies and the application, any supporting affidavit and one (1)
copy of the warrant as issued shall be retained in the records of
the Municipal Court.
e. A search warrant shall expire if it is not executed within ten
(10) days after the date of the making of the application.
2. Contents of search warrant. The search warrant shall:
a. Be in writing and in the name of the City;
b. Be directed to any Police Officer in the City;
c. State the time and date the warrant was issued;
d. Identify the property or places to be searched, inspected or
entered upon in sufficient detail and particularity that the
officer executing the warrant can readily ascertain it;
e. Identify the regulation sought to be enforced;
Section
125.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.240
AO:67
f. Command that the described property or places be entered
upon for one (1) or more specified enforcement purposes as
provided herein, including inspection or abatement;
g. Direct that any evidence of any suspected ordinance violations
be seized, recorded or photographed and a description of such
property be returned within ten (10) days after issuance of the
warrant to the Clerk of the Municipal Court to be dealt with
according to law;
h. Be signed by the Judge with his or her title of office indicated.
3. Execution. A search warrant issued under this Section shall be
executed only by a City Police Officer, provided however, that one
(1) or more designated City Officials may accompany the officer
and the warrant shall be executed in the following manner:
a. Copies of the warrant shall be given to the officer executing the
warrant. Copies may be transmitted by hand delivery, mail or
by facsimile or other electronic means.
b. The warrant shall be executed by conducting the search,
inspection, entry, abatement or seizure as commanded and
shall be executed as soon as practicable and in a reasonable
manner but in no less than ten (10) days after issuance of the
warrant.
c. The officer may summon as many persons as he or she deems
necessary to assist him or her in executing the warrant and
such persons shall not be held liable as a result of any illegality
of the search and seizure.
d. The officer shall give the owner or occupant of the property
searched, inspected or entered upon a copy of the warrant or
shall leave a copy of the warrant at the property if the owner or
occupant is not available.
e. In the event that a warrant authorizes abatement of a nuisance
or other conditions, the Police Officer is not required to stay on
the property during the entire length of time that it takes for
the abatement to be completed.
4. Itemized receipt/disposition of seized property.
a. If any property is seized incident to the search or abatement,
the officer shall give the person from whose possession it was
taken, if the person is present, an itemized receipt for the
property taken. If no such person is present, the officer shall
leave the receipt at the site of the search or abatement in a
conspicuous place.
Section
125.240
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
125.240
AO:68
b. A copy of the itemized receipt of any property taken shall be
delivered to an attorney for the City within two (2) working
days of the search.
c. The disposition of property seized pursuant to a warrant under
this Section shall be in accordance with an applicable City
ordinance or Code Section, but in the absence of same, then
with Section 542.301, RSMo.
5. Return required after execution of search warrant.
a. After execution of the search warrant, the warrant, with a
return thereon signed by the officer making the search, shall
be delivered to the Municipal Court.
b. The return shall show the date and manner of execution and
the name of the possessor and of the owner, when not the same
person, if known, of the property or places searched or seized.
c. The return shall be accompanied by any photographs, copies or
recordings made and by any property seized, along with a copy
of the itemized receipt of such property required by this
Section; provided however, that seized property may be
disposed of as provided herein and, in such a case, a
description of the property seized shall accompany the return.
d. The Court Clerk, upon request, shall deliver a copy of the
return to the possessor and the owner, when not the same
person, of the property searched or seized.
D. Warrant Invalid, When.
1. A search warrant shall be deemed invalid:
a. If it was not issued by the Municipal Judge;
b. If it was issued without a written application having been filed
and verified;
c. If it was issued without sufficient probable cause in light of the
goals of the ordinance to be enforced and such other factors as
provided in Subsection (C) hereof;
d. If it was not issued with respect to property or places in the
City;
e. If it does not describe the property or places to be searched,
inspected, entered upon or seized with sufficient certainty;
f. If it is not signed by the Judge who issued it; or
g. If it was not executed within ten (10) days after the date of the
issuance of the warrant.
Section
125.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.240
AO:69
Section 125.250. through Section 125.290. (Reserved)
2. An officer making a search pursuant to an invalid warrant, the
invalidity of which is not apparent on its face, may use such force as
he or she would be justified in using if the warrant were valid.
Section
125.240
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
125.250
AO:70
ARTICLE III
Clerk of Court
Section 125.300. Position Created — Designation.32 [R.O. 2009
§15-31; Code 1969 §23-17]
There is hereby created the position of Clerk of the Municipal Court for the
City. The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall be designated by the Municipal
Judge.
Section 125.310. Duties. [R.O. 2009 §15-32; Code 1969 §23-18]
Section 125.320. Fines — Disposition. [R.O. 2009 §15-33; Code 1969
§23-13(d)(1)]
The Deputy Court Clerk shall collect all fines paid in conformity with any
judgment of the Municipal Court and, immediately following each Court
session held, shall pay into the City Treasury the full amount of all fines
collected during the preceding Court session. The Deputy Court Clerk shall
A. The duties of the Clerk of the Municipal Court and any Deputy Clerk
serving under him/her shall be to:
1. Prepare, under the supervision of the City Attorney, complaints
under this Code or other City ordinances, trial dockets, all
necessary appeal and recognizance forms, transcripts of records
and any and all other forms necessary in any action pending in the
Municipal Court;
2. Maintain permanent files and records of the Municipal Court
proceedings and have the care and custody of same;
3. Prepare, under the supervision of the Municipal Judge, all reports
required of the Municipal Judge or of the Municipal Court by State
Statutes, this Code or other City ordinances;
4. Keep complete records regarding fines, penalties, costs and any
other charges arising out of any action in the Municipal Court;
5. Assist the Chief of Police in the preparation of any reports or
records required of the Marshal in connection with the operation of
the Municipal Court;
6. Tax all costs, make out all bills and executions and make out and
issue all processes of the Municipal Court;
7. Keep an appeal docket in which shall be recorded the proceedings
in any Municipal Court case appealed to the Circuit Court;
8. Fulfill such other duties as may be assigned to him/her by the
Mayor or Board of Aldermen.
32.State Law Reference — Municipal clerk generally, §479.060, RSMo.
Section
125.300
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.320
AO:71
take duplicate receipts for all such money paid in, one (1) of which shall be
filed with the City Clerk/Administrator.
Section 125.330. Powers. [R.O. 2009 §15-34; Code 1969 §23-19]
A. The Clerk of the Municipal Court and any Deputy Clerk serving under
him/her shall be and is hereby authorized to:
1. Take oaths and affirmations;
2. Accept and sign complaints signed and sworn to or affirmed before
him/her;
3. Sign and issue warrants;
4. Sign and issue commitments to the holding facility;
5. Sign and issue subpoenas requiring the attendance of a witness
and sign and issue subpoenas duces tecum;
6. Fix the amount of bail and admit to bail;
7. Accept the appearance, waiver of trial and plea of guilty and
payment of fine and costs in Traffic Violations Bureau cases or as
directed by the Municipal Judge; generally act as Violations Clerk
of the Traffic Violations Bureau;
8. Perform such other duties as provided for by ordinance, by rules of
practice and procedure adopted by the Municipal Judge and as
provided for by the Missouri Rules of Practice and Procedure in
Municipal and Traffic Courts.
Section
125.320
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
125.330
AO:72
Chapter 130
FINANCIAL AFFAIRS
Cross Reference — As to licenses, taxation and miscellaneous business
regulations, ch. 605.
Section
125.330
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.330
AO:73

ARTICLE I
Generally
Section 130.010. Fiscal Year. [R.O. 2009 §2-401; Code 1969 §2-52]
The fiscal year of the City shall commence on January first (1st) of each year
and continue until December thirty-first (31st) of the same year.
Section 130.020. through Section 130.060. (Reserved)
Section
130.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
130.020
AO:75

ARTICLE II
Budget
Section 130.070. Budget Required — Contents — Expenditures Not
to Exceed Revenues.
Section 130.080. Budget Officer.
A. Prior to the commencement of each fiscal year, a budget for the City
shall be prepared and the same will be presented to and approved by
the Board of Aldermen.
B. The annual budget shall present a complete financial plan for the
ensuing fiscal year and shall include at least the following information:
1. A budget message describing the important features of the budget
and major changes from the preceding year;
2. Estimated revenues to be received from all sources for the budget
year, with a comparative statement of actual or estimated revenues
for the two (2) years next preceding, itemized by year, fund and
source;
3. Proposed expenditures for each department, office, commission,
and other classification for the budget year, together with a
comparative statement of actual or estimated expenditures for the
two (2) years next preceding, itemized by year, fund, activity and
object;
4. The amount required for the payment of interest, amortization and
redemption charges on the debt of the City; and
5. A general budget summary.
C. In no event shall the total proposed expenditures from any fund exceed
the estimated revenues to be received plus any unencumbered balance
or less any deficit estimated for the beginning of the budget year;
provided, that nothing herein shall be construed as requiring the City to
use any cash balance as current revenue or to change from a cash basis
of financing its expenditures.
A. The budget shall be prepared under the direction of a Budget Officer.
Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, the Budget Officer
shall be designated by the Board of Aldermen of the City. All officers
and employees shall cooperate with and provide to the Budget Officer
such information and such records as he/she shall require in developing
the budget. The Budget Officer shall review all the expenditure
requests and revenue estimates, after which he/she shall prepare the
proposed budget as defined herein.
B. After the Budget Officer has prepared the proposed budget, he/she
shall submit it, along with such supporting schedules, exhibits, and
Section
130.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
130.080
AO:77
Section 130.090. Board of Aldermen May Revise Budget, Limits —
Approval.
The Board of Aldermen may revise, alter, increase or decrease the items
contained in the proposed budget, subject to such limitations as may be
provided by law; provided, that in no event shall the total authorized
expenditures from any fund exceed the estimated revenues to be received
plus any unencumbered balance or less any deficit estimated for the
beginning of the budget year. Except as otherwise provided by law, the
Board of Aldermen shall, before the beginning of the fiscal year, approve
the budget and approve or adopt such orders, motions, resolutions or
ordinances as may be required to authorize the budgeted expenditures and
produce the revenues estimated in the budget.
Section 130.100. Increase of Expenditure Over Budgeted Amount to
Be Made Only on Formal Resolution.
After the City has approved the budget for any year and has approved
or adopted the orders, motions, resolutions or ordinances required to
authorize the expenditures proposed in the budget, the City shall not
increase the total amount authorized for expenditure from any fund, unless
the Board of Aldermen adopts a resolution setting forth the facts and
reasons making the increase necessary and approves or adopts an order,
motion, resolution or ordinance to authorize the expenditures.
Section 130.110. through Section 130.150. (Reserved)
other explanatory material as may be necessary for the proper
understanding of the financial needs and position of the City, to the
Board of Aldermen. He/she shall submit at the same time complete
drafts of such orders, motions, resolutions or ordinances as may be
required to authorize the proposed expenditures and produce the
revenues necessary to balance the proposed budget.
Section
130.080
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
130.110
AO:78
ARTICLE III
Depositories
Section 130.160. Contract. [R.O. 2009 §2-437; Code 1969 §13-16]
Upon the selection of a depository as provided in Section 95.355, RSMo.,
and prior to the depositing by the City of its public funds in such depository,
the Mayor is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enter into a
satisfactory depository agreement with the depository and with a trustee to
be named therein or as provided by ordinance.
Section 130.170. Depository Bond. [R.O. 2009 §2-438; Code 1969
§13-21]
Before depositing its public funds in the depository, the Board of Aldermen
shall require the depository to give, execute and deliver to the City a
satisfactory depository bond in such amount as may be prescribed, by
motion, by the Board of Aldermen. Furthermore, the Board of Aldermen
shall require the depository, as security for the faithful performance of
the bond and for the safe keeping and accounting for and payment of all
public funds of the City, according to law, and to guarantee the faithful
and full performance of all the duties and obligations developing upon the
depository and provided by this Code or other ordinances of the City and
laws of the State, to give satisfactory evidence of its full compliance with
the terms and provisions of Sections 130.190 and 130.200.
Section 130.180. Term of Relationship — Termination of
Agreement. [R.O. 2009 §2-439; Code 1969 §13-15]
The depository designated and selected shall continue to be and act as such
during the pleasure of the Board of Aldermen; provided that if either the
City or the depository shall be desirous of terminating such relationship,
either the City or the depository shall serve or cause to be served, upon
the other via United States registered mail a written notice advising such
other party that the depository relationship existing between the City and
the banking corporation, individual banker or trust company will cease and
terminate upon the expiration of sixty (60) days from the date such notice is
deposited in the United States mail; and provided further, that any breach
on the part of such depository of any of the provisions of this Article or of
any of the applicable provisions of the Statutes of the State, or any of the
provisions of any contract or agreement to which the City is an interested
party, shall authorize the Board of Aldermen to terminate such depository
relationship forthwith.
Section 130.190. Procedure for Securing of Deposits. [R.O. 2009
§2-440; Code 1969 §13-17]
All public funds of the City, which are initially or subsequently deposited
with any banking corporation, individual banker or trust company which has
been selected and designated as the depository of the public funds of the
Section
130.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
130.190
AO:79
City, shall be secured by the depository making deposit of securities of the
same character as are required by Sections 110.010 and 110.020, RSMo.
The securities shall, at the option of such depository, be delivered either to
the Treasurer of the City or to the Board of Aldermen or be deposited with
such disinterested banking institution or safe depository as trustee as may
be satisfactory to both parties to the depository agreement; provided that
if the depository shall deposit bonds or securities with the trustee as above
provided and the City shall give notice in writing to the trustee that there
has been a breach of depository contract and shall make demand in writing
on the trustee for the securities or any part thereof, then the trustee shall
forthwith surrender to the City a sufficient amount of such securities as may
fully protect the City from loss and the trustee shall thereby be discharged
of all further responsibility in respect to the securities so surrendered.
Section 130.200. Amount of Security Required.33 [R.O. 2009 §2-441;
Code 1969 §13-18]
The value of the securities deposited and maintained as provided in Section
130.190 by the depository of the public funds of the City shall be at all times
not less than one hundred percent (100%) of the actual amount of funds on
deposit with the depository, less the amount, if any, insured by the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation.
Section 130.210. Continuation of Contract Following Termination of
Agreement. [R.O. 2009 §2-442; Code 1969 §13-19]
Upon the termination of the depository relationship existing between the
City and the banking corporation, individual banker or trust company
selected by the City as the depository of its public funds by the service of a
written notice prescribed and as set forth in Section 130.180, the contract
or agreement existing between the City and the depository shall be and
remain in full force and effect until the expiration of sixty (60) days from the
date such notice is deposited in the United States mail and thereafter until
the successor depository is selected and qualified and until such contracting
depository shall have fully accounted for and paid over to the City all of
the public funds so deposited with it and shall have faithfully and fully
discharged all of its duties and obligations devolving upon it as such City
depository according to law.
33.State Law Reference — Similar provisions, §110.020, RSMo.
Section
130.190
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
130.210
AO:80
Chapter 135
PURCHASING CODE
Section 135.010. Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §2-451; Code 1969 §13-29]
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish rules and procedures governing
the procurement of materials, supplies, equipment and services for the City
and to maintain a high ethical standard for all officers and employees of the
City in connection therewith.
Section 135.020. Purchasing Agent. [R.O. 2009 §2-452; Code 1969
§13-30]
Section 135.030. Gifts and Rebates. [R.O. 2009 §2-453; Code 1969
§13-31]
The purchasing agent and every officer, agent and employee of the City
are hereby prohibited from soliciting, accepting or agreeing to accept any
benefit, directly or indirectly, in return for his/her official vote, opinion,
recommendation, judgment, decision, action or exercise of discretion as a
public servant in the purchasing process.
Section 135.040. Regulations. [R.O. 2009 §2-454; Code 1969
§13-32]
The purchasing agent is hereby authorized and directed to adopt such
written regulations, purchasing records, forms and procedures as may be
necessary for the implementation of this Chapter. Any such regulations,
records, forms and procedures adopted by the purchasing agent shall
become effective within thirty (30) days after submission to the Board of
Aldermen unless they are disapproved by the Board of Aldermen within
A. The City Clerk/Administrator shall act as the purchasing agent. The
purchasing agent shall, in accordance with and subject to the rules,
regulations and procedures in this Chapter and all applicable laws and
ordinances:
1. Direct, supervise and be responsible for the procurement and
acquisition of all materials, supplies and equipment and all
contractual service and all insurance required by any department,
agency or office of the City and by any other governmental
department, agency or office with respect to any procurement by
such department, agency or office funded wholly or partially, either
directly or indirectly, by City funds; provided however, the
purchasing agent shall not be responsible for contracts for the
acquisition of real estate or for professional services, except as
provided in this Chapter;
2. Sell or dispose of all obsolete or unusable personal property of the
City.
Section
130.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.040
AO:81
such thirty (30) day period. Copies of such regulations, records, forms and
procedures shall be on file at the office of the purchasing agent and shall be
available for public inspection.
Section 135.050. Requisitions and Estimates. [R.O. 2009 §2-455;
Code 1969 §13-33]
Each agency shall present to the purchasing agent in such manner, at
such times and for such periods as the purchasing agent shall prescribe,
detailed estimates of its requirements for supplies, materials, equipment
and contractual services. Each agency may also present to the purchasing
agent at any time a requirement for any materials, supplies, equipment or
services for which the need was not foreseen when the agency's detailed
estimate was presented. The purchasing agent shall examine each estimate
or requirement and he/she shall have the authority to revise it as to quantity,
quality or estimated cost after consulting with the head of the using agency.
Section 135.060. Availability of Funds. [R.O. 2009 §2-456; Code
1969 §13-34; Ord. No. 3591 §1, 3-16-1998]
A purchase order or contract in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00)
shall be issued and become valid only when approved by the Board of
Aldermen, who shall have determined that there is a sufficient
unencumbered balance in the appropriation account of the using agency to
fund such purchase order or contract, except where otherwise provided in
the budget.
Section 135.070. Formal Competitive Bidding. [R.O. 2009 §2-457;
Code 1969 §13-35; Ord. No. 2790 §1, 4-7-1986; Ord. No. 3016 §1,
7-17-1989; Ord. No. 3082 §1, 8-20-1990; Ord. No. 3092 §1,
10-1-1990; Ord. No. 3158 §1, 8-5-1991; Ord. No. 3453 §1,
11-20-1995]
A. Supplies, materials, equipment, public improvements and contractual
services (except for professional services subject to City Code Section
135.120) shall be procured only after obtaining formal written bids
when the value of the proposed procurement is in excess of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or when directed by the Board of
Aldermen or when required by the laws of the State. The procurement
of several items of the same type at substantially the same time is a
single purchase for the purpose of this Chapter and the total cost of all
such items will determine whether the formal competitive bidding
procedure must be followed. No contract or purchase shall be
subdivided to avoid competitive bidding procedures. The procurement
of professional services subject to City Code Section 135.120 are
expressly excluded from the operation of this Section.
B. Such bids shall be invited through a notice to be published in at least
one (1) local newspaper of general circulation in the City, not less than
one (1) time if published in a weekly newspaper or not less than two (2)
Section
135.040
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
135.070
AO:82
consecutive issues if published in a daily newspaper. The publication
shall be at least ten (10) days prior to the date specified for submission
of bids. A public notice shall also be posted in a prominent and public
place at the City Hall. Such notice shall include a general description of
the item or items to be purchased, the conditions of such purchase, the
place where specifications and bid forms may be secured, the time and
place for submitting such bids and the time and place for acceptance
of bids. The purchasing agent may also solicit bids by mailing copies of
the specifications and bidding documents to prospective vendors.
C. Any and all bids for any contract or purchase may be rejected with or
without reason and a provision to this effect shall be included in all
notices or advertisements.
D. The purchasing agent may advertise for sealed bids for any item for
which an appropriation has been made in the annual budget of the City
or upon resolution of a majority of the members of the Board of
Aldermen.
E. All bids shall be sealed, identified as bids on the envelope and
submitted within the time and at the place stated in the public notice
inviting bids. The time of receipt of each bid shall be entered by the
receiving employee on the envelope containing such bid.
F. All bid documents will include an insurance clause as follows:
1. All bids shall include and cover the cost of Workers' Compensation
insurance for all employees of the bidder and for all employees of
all subcontractors. It is agreed that the successful contractor shall
furnish the City with a certificate of insurance from an insurance
company with a Best's rating of at least B+/VII or greater if
required by the Board of Aldermen, indicating statutory Workers'
Compensation coverage and the minimum coverage amounts
stated in Subsection (F)(2) of this Section. The policy of insurance
shall have endorsed on it a requirement of at least thirty (30) days'
written notice mailed to the City indicating any cancellation or
material change in coverage. The Board of Aldermen may increase
or decrease the minimum coverage amounts on a per project basis.
2. Minimum coverage amounts.
a. General liability.
(1) General aggregate: $2,000,000.00.
(2) Product, completed operations aggregate: $2,000,000.00.
(3) Personal injury: $1,000,000.00.
(4) Each occurrence: $1,000,000.00.
(5) Fire legal liability damage: $100,000.00.
Section
135.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.070
AO:83
(6) Medical expense: $10,000.00.
b. Automobile combined single limit: $1,000,000.00.
c. Excess liability.
(1) Each occurrence: $1,000,000.00.
(2) Aggregate: $2,000,000.00.
d. Employer's liability.
(1) Each accident: $100,000.00.
(2) Disease, policy limit: $500,000.00.
(3) Disease, each employee: $100,000.00.
e. Other liability. Contractual liability limits as indicated in
Subsection (F)(2)(a) above.
f. Special items. Per project endorsement.
3. The contractor shall indemnify and hold harmless the municipality
and its elected and appointed officials and employees from and
against all claims, damages, losses and expenses, including
attorneys' fees arising out of or resulting from the performance of
the work, provided that any such claim, damage, loss or expense is:
a. Attributable to bodily injury, sickness, disease or death or to
injury to or destruction of tangible property, other than the
work itself, including the loss of use resulting therefrom, and
b. Caused in whole or in part by any negligent act or omission of
the contractor, any subcontractor, anyone directly or indirectly
employed by any of them or anyone for whose acts any of them
may be liable, regardless of whether or not it is caused in part
by a party indemnified under this Chapter.
In any and all claims against the municipality or any
of its agents or employees by any employee of the
contractor, any subcontractor, anyone directly or
indirectly employed by any of them or anyone for
whose acts any of them may be liable, the
indemnification obligation under this Subsection shall
not be limited in any way by any limitation on the
amount or type of damages, compensation or benefits
payable by or for the contractor or any subcontractor
under Worker's Compensation acts, disability benefit
acts or other employee benefit acts.
G. All bids received pursuant to this Section shall be opened and read on
the date set for receiving said bids by the City Clerk/Administrator or
his/her duly authorized representative in an open public session. The
Section
135.070
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
135.070
AO:84
Board of Aldermen will receive tabulated bids at the Board meeting
following the time to submit bids has expired. Then the appropriate
committee shall in conjunction with purchasing agent and the head of
the using agency, prior to the next regular meeting of the Board of
Aldermen after the bid time expires, prepare a written summary of all
bids, including a review of the facts. All bids received shall be made
available for inspection as a public record. Results of the bidding and
awarding of contracts shall be posted in a prominent and public place
at the City Hall.
H. After presentation of the available data, the Board of Aldermen, at a
regular or special meeting, shall award the contract to the lowest and
best, responsible, timely bidder for the goods or services to be
procured; provided however, the Board of Aldermen shall have the right
and the authority to reject any and all bids. The Board of Aldermen may
also confer the right of awarding the bid to the appropriate committee
with such committee's action concerning the bid reported back to the
full Board at the next regular meeting. The Board of Aldermen shall
have authority to give City businesses, having paid taxes for two (2)
consecutive years prior to such bid, a preference in its discretion, if the
bid of such business is within three percent (3%) of the lowest
responsible, timely bidder for the goods or services to be procured.
I. Subsequent to the award by the Board of Aldermen, the purchasing
agent shall, by purchase order or formal contract authorized by
ordinance, enter into an agreement with the bidder selected by the
Board of Aldermen for procurement of the goods and services to be
procured.
J. When deemed necessary by the purchasing agent, bid deposits may be
required. The deposits may be required to be in the form of a certified
check or bid bond and may be for an amount of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or ten percent (10%) of the amount of the bid, whichever is
greater. Bonds shall be from a bonding company with a Best's rating of
at least B+/VII or greater if required by the Board of Aldermen.
K. The successful bidder may be required to post a performance bond
whenever the same is deemed appropriate by the purchasing agent;
provided however, such requirement is set forth in the conditions of
bidding. The performance bond may be in the form of a specified
amount or a percentage of the value of the proposed purchase and shall
be from a bonding company with a Best's rating of at least B+/VII or
greater if required by the Board of Aldermen. The purchasing agent
shall establish, in the conditions of bidding, such terms as may be
deemed appropriate to protect the interest of the City.
L. All bids shall contain a provision substantially in the form that follows:
"Neither the final payment nor any of the retained percentage shall
become due until the contractor shall deliver to the City a complete
release of all liens and claims arising out of the contract."
Section
135.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.080
AO:85
Section 135.080. Open Market Purchases. [R.O. 2009 §2-458; Ord.
No. 1969 §13-36; Ord. No. 3082 §1, 8-20-1990; Ord. No. 3453 §1,
11-20-1995]
The purchasing agent may, without prior authority, acquire in the open
market all goods and services with a value of less than two thousand dollars
($2,000.00). Such acquisition shall be based upon sound procurement
principles. Formal bids shall not be required, but whenever practicable,
purchases of the value between five hundred dollars ($500.00) and ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be based upon quotations from two (2)
or more vendors.
Section 135.090. Absence or Rejection of Bids. [R.O. 2009 §2-459;
Code 1969 §13-37; Ord. No. 3453 §1, 11-20-1995]
The Board of Aldermen may by resolution approve negotiated procurement
of goods or services of a value in excess of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) if there have been no responsive bids to an advertisement for
bids or if the Board of Aldermen has rejected all bids.
Section 135.100. Sole Source — Specialized and Non-Standard
Items. [R.O. 2009 §2-460; Code 1969 §13-38; Ord. No. 3453 §1,
11-20-1995]
The Board of Aldermen may by resolution approve negotiated procurement
of goods or services of a value in excess of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) without requiring formal competitive bids if the Board of
Aldermen determines from all information submitted to it by the purchasing
agent and/or the using agency that such goods or services are of such
specialized or non-standard nature that they can be acquired only from a
sole source of supply and that no similar standard goods or provider would
reasonably satisfy the City's requirements.
Section 135.110. Professional Services. [R.O. 2009 §2-461; Code
1969 §13-39]
When professional services in addition to those provided by the City's
officers and employees are required by the City, investigation shall be made
in the manner directed or approved by the Board of Aldermen concerning
persons or companies who perform the required service. On the basis of
such investigation, the Board of Aldermen may then by ordinance approve
a contract for the required professional service.
Section 135.120. Selection of Professional Services. [R.O. 2009
§2-462; Code 1969 §13-39-1]
A. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
Section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection
(A), except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Section
135.080
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
135.120
AO:86
FIRM — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association or
other legal entity permitted by law to practice architecture,
engineering or land surveying in the State or to provide professional
services as described herein.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — Those services within the scope of
practice of architecture, engineering or land surveying, as defined by
the laws of the State, or those performed by any architect, professional
engineer or registered land surveyor in connection with this
professional employment or practice. The term "professional services"
may also encompass the services provided by planning consultants,
accountants, public improvements, tax collections and consultants for
all legal, insurance, safety, the City Attorney, the Prosecuting Attorney
and other persons or firms providing consulting services, when certain
expertise is not available from City Officers and employees.
B. Roster Of Consultants.
1. The City Clerk/Administrator will maintain a roster, classified by
category of professional service, of qualified firms interested in
performing professional services for the City.
2. Publications by professional organizations which list the qualified
firms in a specific field may be incorporated in the roster.
C. General Procedures And Responsibilities.
1. Project initiation. When a department of the City identifies a
project for which professional services will be necessary, the
department will draft a scope of services for the specific project.
This scope of services will be submitted to the City Clerk/
Administrator for authorization to initiate the project and for
submittal to the Board of Aldermen. The scope of services should
include the following:
a. A description of the work required and its objectives;
b. The nature of specific tasks and services to be accomplished;
c. The type and amount of assistance to be given by the City
department involved;
d. Required time frame; and
e. Financial conditions or limitations — grant programs involved.
2. Expressions of interest. After authorization the administering
department will contact those firms on the roster and those firms
responding to advertisements for a written expression of interest in
the specific project. The request should invite comment as to
special experience in the project being considered, describe
previous experience with similar projects and the availability of the
firm to provide required service within any time limitations.
Section
135.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.120
AO:87
3. Initial screening and requests for proposals. The expressions of
interest will then be presented to the appropriate screening and
selection committee for initial screening. Factors to be determined
in the initial screening will include:
a. Specialized experience in the type of work required;
b. Record of the firm in accomplishing work on other projects in
the required time;
c. Quality of work previously performed by the firm for the City;
d. Recent experience showing accuracy of cost estimates;
e. Community relations including evidence of sensitivity to citizen
concerns;
f. Geographic location of the office of the firm which would serve
the project.
The screening committee will designate at least three
(3) firms who will be requested to present detailed
proposals on the project.
4. Detailed proposals. Firms submitting detailed proposals will be
asked to provide the following:
a. A resume of the firm principal who will be responsible for the
project;
b. A resume of the proposed project supervisor;
c. Resumes of key project personnel;
d. A statement of the ability of the firm to meet required time
schedules;
e. A description of how the project would be conducted;
f. A schedule of hourly rates for various services offered and a
proposed project fee range;
g. A list of municipal references for similar types of projects;
h. Any other pertinent information the firm wishes to present.
5. Interview and selection. Upon receipt of the detailed proposals, the
selection and screening committee will be convened to review the
proposals, interview the prospective firms and make the final
selections as to the firm for the project. Written interview and
selection criteria utilizing a point system that has been agreed
upon by the committee shall be established prior to receiving
detailed proposals on a project. The prime factors to be rated in the
final screening are the firm's:
Section
135.120
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
135.120
AO:88
a. Management capabilities;
b. Technical capabilities;
c. Approach to the project;
d. Understanding of City's objectives;
e. Proposed work schedule;
f. Staff to be assigned;
g. Fee and/or schedule of hourly rates;
h. Knowledge of local situation;
i. Ability to communicate;
j. Presentation and attitude;
k. Confidence factor.
6. Contract negotiation. The selected firm will then be requested to
come in for a final conference with the screening and selection
committee to define precisely the scope of service to be provided
and to finalize the compensation requirements for the work. A
contract is prepared and submitted to the City Clerk/Administrator
for presentation to the Mayor and Board of Aldermen for approval
by ordinance.
If, after reasonable effort, a contract cannot be negotiated, the
negotiations with the designated firm shall be terminated and
negotiations shall be started with the next firm recommended.
7. Exceptions.
a. In view of the fact that special conditions will occasionally arise
that make use of this policy impractical, there can be
exceptions made. Reasons for exceptions may include an
emergency situation which precludes a selection time frame of
at least two (2) months or an extremely specialized need in
which there is only one (1) feasible source of expertise. If it
appears there is a need or an exception to the policy, the City
Clerk/Administrator will inform the Mayor and Board of
Aldermen to allow them the opportunity to deny the exception.
b. If the number of firms willing and available to perform a
specific task is small, the step involving initial screening may
be skipped and the selection process will go directly to detailed
proposals.
D. Compensation Or Fee. The amount will include all services to be
rendered to the City by the firm, with the exception of certain pass
through expenses that will be identified by contract, if applicable, and it
Section
135.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.120
AO:89
Section 135.130. Real Estate. [R.O. 2009 §2-463; Code 1969 §13-40]
Real estate shall only be acquired or sold by the City pursuant to a contract
authorized and approved by an ordinance enacted by the Board of
Aldermen.
Section 135.140. Public Improvements. [R.O. 2009 §2-464; Code
1969 §13-41]
Section 135.150. Insurance. [R.O. 2009 §2-465; Code 1969 §13-42;
Ord. No. 4201 §2, 8-17-2009]
will be calculated by one (1) of the following methods, at the preference
of the City:
1. Lump sum or fixed fee;
2. Cost per unit; or
3. Hourly basis with total not to exceed a fixed amount.
E. Prohibition Against Contingent Fees.
1. Each contract entered into by the Board of Aldermen for
professional services shall contain a prohibition against contingent
fees as follows:
"No firm shall retain a person to solicit or secure a City contract
for professional services upon an agreement or understanding for
a commission, percentage, brokerage or contingent fee, except
for retention of bona fide employees or bona fide established
commercial selling agencies for the purpose of securing business."
2. For the breach or violation of the foregoing provision, the Mayor
and Board of Aldermen shall have the right to terminate the
agreement without liability and, at its discretion, to deduct from
the contract price or otherwise recover the full amount of such fee,
commission, percentage, gift or consideration.
F. Waiver. The Mayor and Board of Aldermen may waive any and all
aforementioned procedural requirements in the best interest of the
City.
A. Public improvements covered by ordinance of the City shall be
contracted for in the manner provided in this Chapter.
B. Emergency work or repairs requiring prompt attention, ordinary
maintenance work, work to be paid out of the general fund of the City
for which specific provision was made in the budget and work to be paid
out of the appropriated proceeds of any bond issue authorized by vote
of the people shall be procured as provided by the provisions of this
Chapter applicable to the type of procurement involved.
Section
135.120
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
135.150
AO:90
Section 135.160. Inspection and Testing. [R.O. 2009 §2-466; Code
1969 §13-43]
A. When the City needs new or replacement insurance or the Board of
Aldermen directs that a comprehensive study be made of any insurance
requirements, the following procedure will be followed:
1. The purchasing agent shall advise the Board of Aldermen of
pending expiration of existing policies at least one hundred eighty
(180) days in advance of any such expiration.
2. The purchasing agent will review with the insurance consultant
and establish needed specifications and present same to the Board
of Aldermen for approval.
3. The insurance consultant acting on behalf of the City or purchasing
agent shall advertise the need for such new or replacement
insurance or such insurance study by advertisements in at least one
(1) local newspaper of general circulation within the County, not
less than two (2) times and the first (1st) publication at least ninety
(90) days prior to the expiration date of existing policies.
4. The insurance consultant acting on behalf of the City or purchasing
agent shall make available to any duly licensed insurance agency or
company all available specifications and data concerning the
insurance requirements in question.
5. The purchasing agent, in consultation with the insurance
consultant, will review and evaluate all proposals for insurance
coverage.
6. The purchasing agent and insurance consultant will, at least fortyfive
(45) days in advance of policy expiration dates or the effective
dates of new policies, recommend to the Board of Aldermen an
agency or company, or both, for selection to provide the proposed
insurance coverage. The recommendation shall include all relevant
details and the advantages and disadvantages of the various
proposals.
7. The Board of Aldermen shall then select the agency or company or
both to provide required insurance coverage.
A. The purchasing agent or his/her agent shall inspect or supervise the
inspection of all deliveries of supplies, materials, equipment or
contractual services to determine their conformance with the
specifications set forth in the order or contract.
B. The purchasing agent may authorize using agencies or departments
having the staff and facilities for adequate inspection to inspect all
deliveries made to such using agencies under rules and regulations
which the purchasing agent shall prescribe.
Section
135.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.160
AO:91
Section 135.170. Cooperative Purchasing. [R.O. 2009 §2-467; Code
1969 §13-44]
The purchasing agent, with the approval of the Board of Aldermen, shall
have the authority to join with any other governmental units in cooperative
purchasing when the best interests of the City would be served by such
cooperative purchasing.
Section 135.180. Disposition of Surplus Supplies, Materials and
Equipment. [R.O. 2009 §2-468; Code 1969 §13-45; Ord. No. 4449 §1,
7-15-2013]
C. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to require chemical and
physical tests of bid and delivery samples to determine their quality and
conformance with the specifications. In the performance of such tests,
the purchasing agent shall have the authority to make use of laboratory
facilities of any outside laboratory at the contractor's expense.
A. Generally. All department heads shall submit to the Purchasing Agent,
at such time and in such form as the Purchasing Agent shall prescribe,
reports showing stocks of all supplies, materials and equipment that are
no longer used or that have become obsolete, worn out or scrapped.
B. Transfers. The Purchasing Agent is hereby authorized to transfer
surplus or excess stock to other departments.
C. Sales. The Purchasing Agent is hereby authorized to sell all supplies,
materials or equipment having an estimated value of greater than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) that have become unsuitable for public
use, or to exchange the same for, or trade in the same, on new supplies,
materials or equipment. Sales under this Subsection shall be made to
the highest bidder. Sales of surplus supplies, materials or equipment
having an estimated value of less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
shall be sold or traded in the open market.
D. Avoidance Of Conflicts. No employee of a disposing department shall
directly or indirectly purchase or agree with another person to
purchase surplus or excess stock if the employee is, or has been,
directly or indirectly involved in the purchase, disposal, maintenance,
operation or preparation for sale of the surplus or excess stock. The
Purchasing Agent is authorized to waive this prohibition when the sale
of surplus stock is implemented by competitive sealed bidding or by
public auction.
E. Disposal. The Purchasing Agent is hereby authorized to dispose of
surplus supplies, materials or equipment that have been determined to
have no appreciable value.
F. Auctions. The use of an auction company, including auction by
electronic means, is hereby authorized to facilitate the sale of surplus
stock.
Section
135.160
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
135.190
AO:92
Section 135.190. Unauthorized Purchases. [R.O. 2009 §2-469; Code
1969 §13-46]
Except as provided in this Chapter and in regulations that may be
prescribed by the Board of Aldermen, it shall be unlawful for any officer or
employee of the City other than the purchasing agent to purchase material,
supplies or equipment or to enter into contracts for any goods or services
and the City shall not be bound by any purchase ordered or any contract
made in violation of the provisions of this Chapter.
Section 135.200. Liability of Officer Violating Chapter. [R.O. 2009
§2-470; Code 1969 §13-47]
If any officer or employee of the City shall knowingly violate any provision
of this Chapter, he/she shall be personally liable to the City and liable under
his/her bond, if any, for any damages suffered by the City.
Section 135.210. (Reserved)34
Chapter 140
LIBRARY
Section 140.010. Free Public Library Established — Location. [R.O.
2009 §11-1; Code 1969 §19-1]
A free public library for the use of the citizens of this City is hereby
established, pursuant to Sections 182.140 et seq., RSMo., the same to be
located at such place within the City as may be designated by the Board of
Aldermen, and the City may levy and collect a tax for the maintenance of
the library and reduce or increase the tax in the manner provided in Section
182.140, RSMo.
Section 140.020. Trustees, Number, Appointment.
The Mayor, with the approval of the Board of Aldermen, shall proceed to
appoint a Library Board of nine (9) trustees, chosen from the citizens at
large, with reference to their fitness for the office. No member of the City
Government shall be a member of the board.
Section 140.025. Vacancies, How Filed — Three Terms Disqualifies
— Nepotism Forbidden.
Vacancies in the Board of Trustees, occasioned by removals, resignations
or otherwise, shall be reported to the proper official and be filled in like
manner as original appointments, except that if the vacancy is an unexpired
term, the appointment shall be made for only the unexpired portion of that
34.Editor’s Note: Former Section 135.210, Financial Interests, adopted 8-5-1991 by Ord. No.
3153 §1, as amended, was repealed 5-16-2016 by Ord. No. 4713 §2. See now Section
115.030, Conflicts of Interest.
Section
135.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
140.025
AO:93
term. No member of the board shall serve for more than three (3) successive
full terms and shall not be eligible for further appointment to the board
until two (2) years after the expiration of the third (3rd) term. No trustee
shall receive compensation as such, and no person shall be employed by the
board who is related either by blood or by marriage to any trustee of the
board.
Section 140.030. Library Fund. [R.O. 2009 §11-2; Code 1969 §19-6]
A Library Fund is hereby established and all money received by the City or
Board of Library Directors for the benefit of the library shall be deposited
in such fund in some bank in the County, to be designated by the Library
Board, and all withdrawals or payments made out of such fund shall be
made by monies drawn on the fund, signed by the president and countersigned
by the secretary of the Library Board.
Section 140.040. Organization of Board — General Powers and
Duties.
A. The Trustees, immediately after appointment, shall meet and organize
by the election of one of their number as President, and by the election
of such other officers as they may deem necessary.
B. They shall make and adopt such by-laws, rules and regulations for their
own guidance, and for the government of the library, as may be
expedient, and not inconsistent with Sections 182.140 to 182.301,
RSMo.
C. They shall appoint a properly qualified librarian who shall be the Chief
Executive and Administrative Officer for the library.
D. They shall have the exclusive control of the expenditure of all monies
collected to the credit of the Library Fund, and of the construction of
any library building, and of the supervision, care and custody of the
grounds, rooms or buildings constructed, leased or set apart for that
purpose. All monies received for the library shall be deposited in the
City Treasury to the credit of the City Library Fund, and shall be kept
separate and apart from other monies of the City, and drawn upon by
the proper officers of the City, upon the properly authenticated
warrants of the Library Board.
E. The Board, as a body corporate, may sue and be sued, complain and
defend, and make and use a common seal, purchase or lease grounds,
purchase, lease, occupy or erect an appropriate building or buildings
for the use of the Public Library and branches thereof, sell and convey
real estate and personal property for and on behalf of the public library
and branches thereof, receive gifts of real and personal property for the
use and benefit of the public library and branch libraries thereof, the
same when accepted to be held and controlled by the Board of Trustees,
according to the terms of the deed, gift, devise or bequest of such
property.
Section
140.025
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
140.040
AO:94
Chapter 145
OPEN MEETINGS AND RECORDS POLICY
F. The Board may extend the privileges and use of the library to nonresidents
through agreements with other existing libraries allowing for
exchanges of services, upon such terms and conditions as the Boards of
the Libraries, from time to time, may prescribe.
Section
140.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
140.040
AO:95

ARTICLE I
In General
Section 145.010. Definitions. [Ord. No. 4872, 3-18-2019]
As used in this Article, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following
terms mean:
CLOSED MEETING, CLOSED RECORD or CLOSED VOTE — Any meeting,
record or vote closed to the public.
COPYING — If requested by a member of the public, copies provided
as detailed in the provisions of this Chapter, if duplication equipment is
available.
PUBLIC BUSINESS — All matters which relate in any way to the
performance of the City's functions or the conduct of its business.
PUBLIC GOVERNMENTAL BODY — Any legislative, administrative,
governmental entity created by the Constitution or Statutes of this State,
orders or ordinance of the City, judicial entities when operating in an
administrative capacity or by executive order, including:
PUBLIC MEETING — Any meeting of a public governmental body subject
to this Chapter at which any public business is discussed, decided or
public policy formulated, whether such meeting is conducted in person
or by means of communication equipment, including, but not limited to,
conference call, video conference, Internet chat or Internet message board.
The term "public meeting" shall not include an informal gathering of
members of a public governmental body for ministerial or social purposes
when there is no intent to avoid the purposes of this Chapter, but the
term shall include a public vote of all or a majority of the members of a
public governmental body, by electronic communication or any other means,
conducted in lieu of holding a public meeting with the members of the
public governmental body gathered at one (1) location in order to conduct
public business.
Any advisory committee or commission appointed by the Mayor or
Board of Aldermen;
1.
Any other legislative or administrative governmental deliberative body
under the direction of three (3) or more elected or appointed members
having rulemaking or quasi-judicial power;
2.
Any committee appointed by or at the direction of any of the entities
and which is authorized to report to any of the above named entities,
any advisory committee appointed by or at the direction of any of the
named entities for the specific purpose of recommending, directly to
the Mayor, Board of Aldermen or the City Administrator, policy or policy
revisions or expenditures of public funds. The custodian of the records
of any public governmental body shall maintain a list of the policy
advisory committees described in this Subsection; and
3.
4. Any quasi-public governmental body.
Section
145.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
145.010
AO:97
PUBLIC RECORD — Any record, whether written or electronically stored,
retained by or of any public governmental body including any report, survey,
memorandum, or other document or study prepared for the public
governmental body by a consultant or other professional service paid for in
whole or in part by public funds, including records created or maintained by
private contractors under an agreement with a public governmental body
or on behalf of a public governmental body. The term "public record" shall
not include any internal memorandum or letter received or prepared by or
on behalf of a member of a public governmental body consisting of advice,
opinions and recommendations in connection with the deliberative decisionmaking
process of said body, unless such records are retained by the public
governmental body or presented at a public meeting. Any document or
study prepared for a public governmental body by a consultant or other
professional service as described in this Section shall be retained by the
public governmental body in the same manner as any other public record.
PUBLIC VOTE — Any vote, whether conducted in person, by telephone or
by any other electronic means, cast at any public meeting of any public
governmental body.
QUASI-PUBLIC GOVERNMENTAL BODY — Any person, corporation or
partnership organized or authorized to do business in this State pursuant
to the provisions of Chapters 352, 353 or 355, RSMo., or unincorporated
association which either:
Section 145.020. Meetings, Records And Votes To Be Public —
Exceptions. [Ord. No. 4872, 3-18-2019]
Has as its primary purpose to enter into contracts with public
governmental bodies or to engage primarily in activities carried out
pursuant to an agreement or agreements with public governmental
bodies; or
1.
Performs a public function, as evidenced by a statutorily based capacity,
to confer or otherwise advance, through approval, recommendation or
other means, the allocation or issuance of tax credits, tax abatement,
public debt, tax exempt debt, rights of eminent domain or the
contracting of lease-back agreements on structures whose annualized
payments commit public tax revenues; or any association that directly
accepts the appropriation of money from the City, but only to the extent
that a meeting, record or vote relates to such appropriation.
2.
A. All meetings, records and votes of a public governmental body of the
City of Brentwood are open to the public, except that any meeting,
record, minutes or vote relating to one (1) or more of the following
matters, as well as other materials designated elsewhere in this
Chapter, shall be closed unless the public governmental body votes to
make them public:
1. Legal actions, causes of action or litigation involving a public
governmental body and any confidential or privileged
communications between a public governmental body or its
Section
145.010
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
145.020
AO:98
representatives and its attorneys. However, any minutes, vote or
settlement agreement relating to legal actions, causes of action
or litigation involving a public governmental body or any agent
or entity representing its interests or acting on its behalf or with
its authority, including any insurance company acting on behalf
of a public government body as its insured, shall be made public
upon final disposition of the matter voted upon or upon the signing
by the parties of the settlement agreement, unless, prior to final
disposition, the settlement agreement is ordered closed by a court
after a written finding that the adverse impact to a plaintiff or
plaintiffs to the action clearly outweighs the public policy
considerations of Section 610.111, RSMo., however, the amount
of any monies paid by, or on behalf of, the public governmental
body shall be disclosed; provided, however, in matters involving
the exercise of the power of eminent domain, the vote shall be
announced or become public immediately following the action on
the motion to authorize institution of such a legal action. Legal
work product shall be considered a closed record.
2. Leasing, purchase or sale of real estate by a public governmental
body where public knowledge of the transaction might adversely
affect the legal consideration therefor. However, any minutes or
vote or public record approving a contract relating to the leasing,
purchase or sale of real estate by a public governmental body shall
be made public upon execution of the lease, purchase or sale of the
real estate.
3. Hiring, firing, disciplining or promoting of particular employees by
a public governmental body when personal information about the
employee is discussed or recorded. However, any vote on a final
decision, when taken by a public governmental body, to hire, fire,
promote or discipline an employee of a public governmental body
shall be made available with a record of how each member voted to
the public within seventy-two (72) hours of the close of the meeting
where such action occurs; provided, however, that any employee so
affected shall be entitled to prompt notice of such decision during
the seventy-two (72) hour period before such decision is made
available to the public. As used herein, the term "personal
information" means information relating to the performance or
merit of individual employees.
4. Non-judicial mental or physical health proceedings involving
identifiable persons, including medical, psychiatric, psychological
or alcoholism or drug dependency diagnosis or treatment.
5. Testing and examination materials, before the test or examination
is given or, if it is to be given again, before so given again.
6. Welfare cases of identifiable individuals.
Section
145.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
145.020
AO:99
7. Preparation, including any discussions or work product, on behalf
of a public governmental body or its representatives for
negotiations with employee groups.
8. Software codes for electronic data processing and documentation
thereof.
9. Specifications for competitive bidding, until either the
specifications are officially approved by the public governmental
body or the specifications are published for bid.
10. Sealed bids and related documents, until the bids are opened; and
sealed proposals and related documents or any documents related
to a negotiated contract until a contract is executed or all proposals
are rejected.
11. Individually identifiable personnel records, performance ratings or
records pertaining to employees or applicants for employment,
except that this exemption shall not apply to the names, positions,
salaries and lengths of service of officers and employees of public
agencies once they are employed as such. It is the policy of the City
that no information relating to present or past employees other
than names, positions, salaries and lengths of service shall be
provided to any person or agency other than:
a. As specifically requested, in writing, by the employee in
question in accord with applicable provisions of the City's
personnel policies;
b. As may be required in response to a subpoena lawfully issued
by a court of competent jurisdiction; or
c. As otherwise may be required by law.
12. Records which are protected from disclosure by law.
13. Meetings and public records relating to scientific and technological
innovations in which the owner has a proprietary interest.
14. Records relating to municipal hotlines established for the reporting
of abuse and wrongdoing.
15. Confidential or privileged communications between a public
governmental body and its auditor, including all auditor work
product; however, all final audit reports issued by the auditor are to
be considered open records pursuant to this Chapter.
16. Operational guidelines and policies developed, adopted or
maintained by any public agency responsible for law enforcement,
public safety, first response or public health for use in responding
to or preventing any critical incident which is or appears to be
terrorist in nature and which has the potential to endanger
individual or public safety or health. Nothing in this exception shall
Section
145.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
145.020
AO:100
be deemed to close information regarding expenditures, purchases
or contracts made by an agency in implementing these guidelines
or policies. When seeking to close information pursuant to this
exception, the agency shall affirmatively state, in writing, that
disclosure would impair its ability to protect the safety or health of
persons and shall in the same writing state that the public interest
in non-disclosure outweighs the public interest in disclosure of the
records.
17. Existing or proposed security systems and structural plans of real
property owned or leased by a public governmental body, and
information that is voluntarily submitted by a non-public entity
owning or operating an infrastructure to any public governmental
body for use by that body to devise plans for protection of that
infrastructure, the public disclosure of which would threaten public
safety.
a. Records related to the procurement of or expenditures relating
to security systems purchased with public funds shall be open;
b. When seeking to close information pursuant to this exception,
the public governmental body shall affirmatively state, in
writing, that disclosure would impair the public governmental
body's ability to protect the security or safety of persons or real
property and shall in the same writing state that the public
interest in non-disclosure outweighs the public interest in
disclosure of the records;
c. Records that are voluntarily submitted by a non-public entity
shall be reviewed by the receiving agency within ninety (90)
days of submission to determine if retention of the document is
necessary in furtherance of a State security interest. If
retention is not necessary, the documents shall be returned to
the non-public governmental body or destroyed.
18. Records that identify the configuration of components or the
operation of a computer, computer system, computer network or
telecommunications network and would allow unauthorized access
to or unlawful disruption of a computer, computer system,
computer network or telecommunications network of a public
governmental body. This exception shall not be used to limit or
deny access to otherwise public records in a file, document, data
file or database containing public records. Records related to the
procurement of or expenditures relating to such computer,
computer system, computer network or telecommunications
network, including the amount of monies paid by, or on behalf of, a
public governmental body for such computer, computer system,
computer network or telecommunications network, shall be open.
19. Credit card numbers, personal identification numbers, digital
certificates, physical and virtual keys, access codes or
Section
145.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
145.020
AO:101
Section 145.030. Records Pertaining To Internal Investigations And
Investigations Of Allegedly Illegal Conduct. [Ord. No. 4872,
3-18-2019]
In order to allow the fullest cooperation by employees and members of
the public in investigation of matters wherein an employee of the City is
alleged to have engaged in any form of misconduct, all files, records and
documents relating to investigations of allegations of misconduct by City
employees will be considered to be personnel records and shall be closed
records under the custody of the respective department head or personnel
office.
Section 145.040. Records Pertaining To Medical Condition Or
History. [Ord. No. 4872, 3-18-2019]
Section 145.050. Records Containing Confidential, Proprietary Or
Private Information. [Ord. No. 4872, 3-18-2019]
authorization codes that are used to protect the security of
electronic transactions between a public governmental body and a
person or entity doing business with a public governmental body.
Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to close the record of
a person or entity using a credit card held in the name of a
public governmental body or any record of a transaction made by
a person using a credit card or other method of payment for which
reimbursement is made by a public governmental body.
20. Pursuant to Section 590.1040, RSMo., notes, records or reports
arising out of a peer support counseling session as defined in such
statute are not public records.
A. All information obtained by the City regarding medical examinations,
medical condition or medical history of City employees or job
applicants, if retained by the City, shall be collected and maintained on
separate forms and in separate medical files and shall be treated as
closed and confidential records, except that:
1. Supervisors and managers may be informed regarding necessary
restrictions on the work duties of employees and necessary
accommodations;
2. First aid and safety personnel may be informed, when appropriate,
if the information reflects the existence of a disability which might
require emergency treatment; or
3. Government officials investigating compliance with State or
Federal law pertaining to treatment of persons with disabilities
may be allowed access to such records.
A. In order to protect reasonable expectations of privacy on the part of
persons having dealings with the City, City records containing
Section
145.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
145.050
AO:102
information or entries of a personal, confidential, private or proprietary
nature, including, but not limited to, income, sales data, financial
circumstances, household and family relationships, Social Security
numbers, dates of birth, insurance information and other information
which reasonable persons generally regard as private and not a
customary subject for public discourse, which information or entries
have been provided to the City by one complying with regulations
requiring the disclosure of such information, shall be excised from
copies of City records disclosed or provided to members of the public
other than those persons to whom the information of entries pertain.
Persons desiring access to information or entries excised from such
records may file a supplementary written request with the City Clerk
for disclosure of material to be specified in the request, which request
should state:
1. Whether or not the requesting party has informed persons to whom
the requested information pertains of the request; and
2. All reasons why the requesting party believes disclosure by the City
of the specified information is in the public interest.
B. The City Clerk may afford all interested parties, including the persons
to whom the information pertains, a reasonable time within which to
comment on the requested disclosure prior to acting further on the
request. If an interested person objects to the disclosure of the
requested information, the City Clerk may conduct a hearing at which
all interested parties may be heard. At such hearing the Clerk shall
consider, among such other factors as may be reasonable and relevant:
1. The requirements and intent of State law, City ordinances and this
policy;
2. The legitimate expectations of privacy on the part of interested
parties;
3. The personal, confidential, private or proprietary nature of the
information at issue;
4. Whether the information was obtained by the City under
compulsion of law or was freely and voluntarily provided by the
persons objecting to the disclosure; and
5. The public purposes to be served by disclosure of the requested
information.
If the City Clerk determines that disclosure is legally required or would
otherwise serve the best interests of the public and that such requirements
or purpose outweigh the legitimate concerns or interest of the persons
to whom the information pertains, the Clerk shall provide the requested
information to the requesting party.
Section
145.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
145.050
AO:103
Section 145.060. Notices Of Meetings. [Ord. No. 4872, 3-18-2019]
C. In addition to or in lieu of the hearing described above, the City Clerk
may afford all interested parties a reasonable opportunity to seek
judicial review of or relief from the proposed disclosure. The City Clerk
may also utilize the procedures for judicial determination and/or
opinion solicitation provided in Section 145.120.
D. Records and information that have been closed pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter, Chapter 610, RSMo., and other relevant
State and Federal laws and regulations are to be treated as confidential
by all employees and elected and appointed officials of the City.
1. It shall be grounds for disciplinary action for any employee to:
a. Violate the confidentiality relating to such records or
information;
b. Copy or remove closed and/or confidential information without
the specific consent of the custodian thereof or in the normal
course of performing such employee's duties for the City;
c. Provide or discuss closed records or confidential information
with any person other than as a necessary part of performing
such employee's duties for the City; or
d. Divulge, discuss or disclose information or records addressed
in any closed meeting of a public governmental body, other
than as a necessary part of performing such employee's duties
for the City.
2. Elected and appointed officials are also expected to maintain the
same strict standards of confidentiality required of employees.
Breach of the confidentiality standards established by this Chapter
and required of employees in this Section may be grounds for
removal from office or other sanctions as may be deemed
appropriate by the body of which such official is a member or by the
Board of Aldermen.
A. Each public governmental body shall give notice of the time, date, place
and tentative agenda of each meeting in a manner reasonably
calculated to advise the public of the matters to be considered, and if
the meeting will be conducted by telephone or other electronic means,
the notice of the meeting shall identify the mode by which the meeting
will be conducted and the designated location where the public may
observe and attend the meeting. If a public body plans to meet by
Internet chat, Internet message board or other computer link, it shall
post a notice of the meeting on its website in addition to its principal
office and shall notify the public how to access that meeting.
Reasonable notice shall include making available copies of the notice to
any representative of the news media who requests notice of meetings
of a particular public governmental body concurrent with the notice
Section
145.050
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
145.060
AO:104
Section 145.070. Closed Meetings — How Held. [Ord. No. 4872,
3-18-2019]
being made available to the members of the particular governmental
body and posting the notice on a bulletin board at City Hall or other
prominent place which is easily accessible to the public and clearly
designated for that purpose at the City Hall.
B. The notice shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours, exclusive of
weekends and holidays when the City Hall is closed, prior to the
commencement of any meeting of a governmental body unless for good
cause such notice is impossible or impractical, in which case as much
notice as is reasonably possible shall be given; provided, however, that
for any public meeting where a vote of the Board of Aldermen is
required to implement a tax increase, or with respect to a retail
development project when the Board of Aldermen votes to utilize the
power of eminent domain, create a transportation development district
or a community improvement district, or approve a redevelopment plan
that pledges public funds as financing for the project or plan, the Board
of Aldermen shall give notice conforming with all the requirements of
law at least four (4) days before the Board of Aldermen may vote on
such issues, exclusive of weekends and holidays when the facility is
closed, and provided, further, that the exception above and in
Subsection (C) below concerning shorter reasonable notice periods if
required notice is impossible or impractical shall not apply to meetings
requiring four (4) days' notice.
C. When it is necessary to hold a meeting on less than twenty-four (24)
hours' notice or at a place that is not reasonably accessible to the public
or at a time that is not reasonably convenient to the public, the nature
of the good cause justifying that departure from the normal
requirements shall be stated in the minutes.
D. A formally constituted subunit of a parent governmental body may
conduct a meeting without notice as required by this Section during a
lawful meeting of the parent governmental body, a recess in that
meeting or immediately following that meeting, if the meeting of the
subunit is publicly announced at the parent meeting and the subject of
the meeting reasonably coincides with the subjects discussed or acted
upon by the parent governmental body.
E. A public body shall allow for the recording by audiotape, videotape or
other electronic means of any open meeting. A public body may
establish guidelines regarding the manner in which such recording is
conducted so as to minimize disruption to the meeting. No audio
recording of any meeting, record or vote closed pursuant to the
provisions of Section 610.021, RSMo., shall be allowed without
permission of the public body; any person who violates this provision
shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and punished by imprisonment
for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, a fine not to exceed three
hundred dollars ($300.00), or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Section
145.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
145.070
AO:105
Section 145.080. Journals Of Meetings And Records Of Voting.
[Ord. No. 4872, 3-18-2019]
A. A public governmental body proposing to hold a closed meeting or vote
may do so by either:
1. Giving notice of same pursuant to the provisions of this Article
along with reference to the specific exception allowing such a
closed meeting under State law; or
2. Upon an affirmative public vote of the majority of a quorum of the
public governmental body. The vote of each member of the public
governmental body on the question of closing a public meeting or
vote and the specific reason for closing that public meeting or vote
by reference to the specific exception allowing such a closed
meeting under State law shall be announced publicly at an open
meeting of the governmental body and entered into the minutes.
B. Any meeting or vote closed pursuant to Section 610.021, RSMo., shall
be closed only to the extent necessary for the specific reason
announced to justify the closed meeting or vote. Public governmental
bodies shall not discuss any business in a closed meeting, record or vote
which does not directly relate to the specific reason announced to
justify the closed meeting or vote. Public governmental bodies holding a
closed meeting shall close only an existing portion of the meeting
facility necessary to house the members of the public governmental
body in the closed session, allowing members of the public to remain to
attend any subsequent open session held by the public governmental
body following the closed session.
C. In the event any member of a public governmental body makes a motion
to close a meeting, or a record, or a vote from the public and any other
member believes that such motion, if passed, would cause a meeting,
record or vote to be closed from the public in violation of any provision
in Chapter 610, RSMo., or this Article, such latter member shall state
his or her objection to the motion at or before the time the vote is taken
on the motion. The public governmental body shall enter in the minutes
of the public governmental body any objection made pursuant to this
Subsection. Any member making such an objection shall be allowed to
fully participate in any meeting, record or vote that is closed from the
public over the member's objection. In the event the objecting member
also voted in opposition to the motion to close the meeting, record or
vote at issue, the objection and vote of the member as entered in the
minutes shall be an absolute defense to any claim filed against the
objecting member pursuant to Chapter 610, RSMo.
A. A journal or minutes of open and closed meetings shall be taken and
retained by the public governmental body, including, but not limited to,
a record of any votes taken at such meeting. The minutes shall include
the date, time, place, members present, members absent and a record
of any votes taken.
Section
145.070
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
145.080
AO:106
Section 145.090. Accessibility Of Meetings. [Ord. No. 4872,
3-18-2019]
Each meeting shall be held at a place reasonably accessible to the public
and of sufficient size to accommodate the anticipated attendance by
members of the public and at a time reasonably convenient to the public,
unless for good cause such a place or time is impossible or impractical.
Every reasonable effort shall be made to grant special access to the meeting
to handicapped or disabled individuals.
Section 145.100. Segregation Of Exempt Material. [Ord. No. 4872,
3-18-2019]
If a public record contains material which is not exempt from disclosure,
as well as material which is exempt from disclosure, the custodian shall
separate the exempt and non-exempt material and make the non-exempt
material available for examination and copying in accord with the policies
provided herein. When designing a public record the custodian shall, to
the extent practicable, facilitate a separation of exempt from non-exempt
information. If the separation is readily apparent to a person requesting to
inspect or receive copies of the form, the custodian shall generally describe
the material exempted unless that description would reveal the contents of
the exempt information and thus defeat the purpose of the exemption.
Section 145.110. Custodian Designated — Response To Request For
Access To Records. [Ord. No. 4872, 3-18-2019]
B. All votes by members of a public governmental body at any meeting
shall be recorded. When a roll call vote is taken, the minutes shall
attribute each "yea" and "nay" vote, or abstinence if not voting, to the
name of the individual member of the body. Any votes taken during a
closed meeting shall be taken by roll call and the minutes of the closed
meeting, sufficient to reflect the vote pursuant to this Subsection, shall
be recorded. All votes taken by roll call in meetings of a public
governmental body consisting of members who are all elected, except
for any committee established by a public governmental body, shall be
cast by members of the public governmental body who are physically
present and in attendance at the meeting or who are participating via
videoconferencing. When it is necessary to take votes by roll call in a
meeting of the public governmental body, due to an emergency of the
public body, with a quorum of the members of the public body physically
present and in attendance and less than a quorum of the members of
the public governmental body participating via telephone, facsimile,
Internet or any other voice or electronic means, the nature of the
emergency of the public body justifying that departure from the normal
requirements shall be stated in the minutes. Where such emergency
exists, the votes taken shall be regarded as if all members were
physically present and in attendance at the meeting.
Section
145.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
145.110
AO:107
A. The City Clerk shall be the custodian of records and will be responsible
for maintenance and control of all records. The City Administrator may
designate deputy custodians in operating departments of the City and
such other departments or offices as the City Administrator may
determine. Deputy custodians shall conduct matters relating to public
records and meetings in accord with the policies enumerated herein.
B. Except as otherwise provided by law, the City shall provide access to
and, upon request, furnish copies of the City's public records subject to
the provisions of the Code of Ordinances relating to copying fees. No
person shall remove original public records from the City Hall or from
the office of the custodian of records without written permission of the
custodian. No public governmental body shall grant to any person or
entity, whether by contract, license or otherwise, the exclusive right to
access and disseminate any public record unless the granting of such
right is necessary to facilitate coordination with, or uniformity among,
industry regulators having similar authority.
C. The custodian of records may require persons seeking access to public
records to submit such request in writing and/or on a form designated
by the custodian for such purpose. Such written request shall be
sufficiently particular to reasonably apprize the custodian of the
records sought.
D. Each request for access to a public record shall be acted upon as soon
as possible, but in no event later than the end of the third business day
following the date the request is received by the custodian of records. If
records are requested in a certain format, the public body shall provide
the records in the requested format, if such format is available. If
access to the public record is not granted immediately, the custodian
shall give a detailed explanation of the cause for further delay and the
place and earliest time and date that the record will be available for
inspection. This period for document production may exceed three (3)
days for reasonable cause.
E. If a request for access is denied, the custodian of records shall provide,
upon request, a written statement of the grounds for such denial. Such
statement shall cite the specific provision of law under which access is
denied and shall be furnished to the requester no later than the end of
the third business day following the date that the request for the
statement is received.
F. Any member of a public governmental body who transmits any message
relating to public business by electronic means shall also concurrently
transmit that message to either the member's public office computer or
the custodian of records in the same format. The provisions of this
Subsection shall only apply to messages sent to other members of that
body so that, when counting the sender, a majority of the body's
members are copied. Any such message received by the custodian or at
the member's office computer shall be a public record, subject,
however, to the exceptions for closed records as provided by law.
Section
145.110
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
145.120
AO:108
Section 145.120. Procedures For Resolving Questions Of Public
Accessibility. [Ord. No. 4872, 3-18-2019]
A public governmental body or record custodian in doubt about the legality
of closing a particular meeting, record or vote may, subject to approval
by the Board of Aldermen, bring suit in the Circuit Court for the County
of St. Louis to ascertain the propriety of such action. In addition, subject
to approval by the Board of Aldermen, the public governmental body or
custodian may seek a formal opinion of the Attorney General or an attorney
for the City regarding the propriety of such action. In such events, the
proposed closed meeting or public access to the record or vote shall be
deferred for a reasonable time pending the outcome of the actions so taken.
Section 145.130. Fees. [Ord. No. 4872, 3-18-2019]
A. The custodian shall charge ten cents ($0.10) per page for a paper copy
not larger than nine (9) by fourteen (14) inches, plus an hourly fee for
duplicating time not to exceed the average hourly rate of pay for
clerical staff of the City. Research time required for fulfilling records
requests may be charged at the actual cost of research time. Based on
the scope of the request, the City shall produce the copies using
employees of the City that result in the lowest amount of charges for
search, research and duplication time. Prior to producing copies of the
requested records, the person requesting the records may request the
City to provide an estimate of the cost to the person requesting the
records. The custodian shall receive (or may require) payment prior to
duplicating and/or searching for documents.
B. Fees for providing access to public records maintained on computer
facilities, recording tapes or disks, video tapes or films, pictures, maps,
slides, graphics, illustrations or similar audio or visual items or devices
and for paper copies larger than nine (9) by fourteen (14) inches shall
include only the cost of copies, staff time, which shall not exceed the
average hourly rate of pay for staff of the City required for making
copies and programming, if necessary, and the cost of the disk or tape
or other medium used for the duplication. Fees for maps, blueprints or
plats that require special expertise to duplicate may include the actual
rate of compensation for the trained personnel required to duplicate
such maps, blueprints or plats. If programming is required beyond the
customary and usual level to comply with a request for records or
information, the fees for compliance may include the actual costs of
such programming.
Section
145.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
145.130
AO:109

ARTICLE II
Law Enforcement Arrest Reports and Records, Incident Reports,
Etc.
Section 145.140. Definitions. [Ord. No. 4872, 3-18-2019]
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following
definitions:
ARREST — An actual restraint of the person of the defendant, or by his/
her submission to the custody of the officer, under authority of a warrant
or otherwise for a criminal violation which results in the issuance of a
summons or the person being booked.
ARREST REPORT — A record of a law enforcement agency of an arrest and
of any detention or confinement incident thereto together with the charge
therefor.
INACTIVE — An investigation in which no further action will be taken by a
law enforcement agency or officer for any of the following reasons:
INCIDENT REPORT — A record of a law enforcement agency consisting of
the date, time, specific location, name of the victim and immediate facts
and circumstances surrounding the initial report of a crime or incident,
including any logs of reported crimes, accidents and complaints maintained
by that agency.
INVESTIGATIVE REPORT — A record, other than an arrest or incident
report, prepared by personnel of a law enforcement agency inquiring into
a crime or suspected crime, either in response to an incident report or in
response to evidence developed by Law Enforcement Officers in the course
of their duties.
Section 145.150. Police Department Records. [Ord. No. 4872,
3-18-2019]
1. A decision by the law enforcement agency not to pursue the case.
Expiration of the time to file criminal charges pursuant to the
applicable statute of limitations or ten (10) years after the commission
of the offense, whichever date earliest occurs.
2.
Finality of the convictions of all persons convicted on the basis of the
information contained in the investigative report, by exhaustion of or
expiration of all rights of appeal of such persons.
3.
A. The Police Department of the City shall maintain records of all incidents
reported to the Police Department, and investigations and arrests made
by the Police Department. All incident reports and arrest reports shall
be open records. Notwithstanding any other provision of law other than
the provisions of Subsection (C) of this Section or Section 320.083,
RSMo., investigative reports of the Police Department are closed
records until the investigation becomes inactive. If any person is
Section
145.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
145.150
AO:111
Section 145.160. Effect Of Nolle Pros, Dismissal And Suspended
Imposition Of Sentence On Records. [Ord. No. 4872, 3-18-2019]
If the person arrested is charged but the case is subsequently nolle prossed,
dismissed, or the accused is found not guilty, or imposition of sentence is
suspended in the court in which the action is prosecuted, official records
arrested and not charged with an offense against the law within thirty
(30) days of the person's arrest, the arrest report shall thereafter be a
closed record, except that the disposition portion of the record may be
accessed except as provided in Section 145.170.
B. Except as provided in Subsections (C) and (D) of this Section, if any
portion of a record or document of a Police Department Officer or the
Police Department, other than an arrest report which would otherwise
be open, contains information that is reasonably likely to pose a clear
and present danger to the safety of any victim, witness, undercover
officer or other person; or jeopardize a criminal investigation, including
records which would disclose the identity of a source wishing to remain
confidential or a suspect not in custody; or which would disclose
techniques, procedures or guidelines for Police Department
investigations or prosecutions, that portion of the record shall be closed
and shall be redacted from any record made available pursuant to this
Article.
C. Any person, including a family member of such person within the first
degree of consanguinity if such person is deceased or incompetent,
attorney for a person or insurer of a person involved in any incident or
whose property is involved in an incident may obtain any records closed
pursuant to this Section or Section 145.170 for purposes of
investigation of any civil claim or defense as provided by this
Subsection. Any individual, his or her family member within the first
degree of consanguinity if such individual is deceased or incompetent,
his/her attorney or insurer, involved in an incident or whose property is
involved in an incident, upon written request, may obtain a complete
unaltered and unedited incident report concerning the incident and
may obtain access to other records closed by the Police Department
pursuant to this Section. Within thirty (30) days of such request, the
Police Department shall provide the requested material or file a motion
pursuant to this Subsection with the Circuit Court having jurisdiction
over the Police Department stating that the safety of the victim, witness
or other individual cannot be reasonably ensured, or that a criminal
investigation is likely to be jeopardized. Pursuant to Section 610.100(4),
RSMo., if, based on such motion, the court finds for the Police
Department, the court shall either order the record closed or order
such portion of the record that should be closed to be redacted from any
record made available pursuant to this Subsection.
D. The victim of an offense as provided in Chapter 566, RSMo., may
request that his/her identity be kept confidential until a charge relating
to such incident is filed.
Section
145.150
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
145.160
AO:112
pertaining to the case shall thereafter be closed records when such case
is finally terminated, except that the disposition portion of the record may
be accessed as provided in Section 145.170. If the accused is found not
guilty due to mental disease or defect pursuant to Section 552.030, RSMo.,
official records pertaining to the case shall thereafter be closed records
upon such findings, except that the disposition may be accessed only by law
enforcement agencies, child care agencies, facilities as defined in Section
198.006, RSMo., and in-home services provider agencies as defined in
Section 660.250, RSMo., in the manner established by Section 145.170.
Section 145.170. Public Access To Closed Arrest Records. [Ord. No.
4872, 3-18-2019]
A. Records required to be closed shall not be destroyed; they shall be
inaccessible to the general public and to all persons other than the
defendant except as provided in this Section, Section 610.120, RSMo.,
and Chapter 43, RSMo. The closed records shall be available to:
criminal justice agencies for the administration of criminal justice
pursuant to Section 43.500, RSMo., criminal justice employment,
screening persons with access to criminal justice facilities, procedures
and sensitive information; to law enforcement agencies for issuance or
renewal of a license, permit, certification, or registration of authority
from such agency, including, but not limited to, watchmen, security
personnel, private investigators, and persons seeking permits to
purchase or possess a firearm; those agencies authorized by Chapter
43, RSMo., and applicable State law to submit and when submitting
fingerprints to the central repository; the Sentencing Advisory
Commission created in Section 558.019, RSMo., for the purpose of
studying sentencing practices in accordance with Chapter 43, RSMo.;
to qualified entities for the purpose of screening providers defined in
Chapter 43, RSMo.; the Department of Revenue for driver license
administration; the Division of Workers' Compensation for the purposes
of determining eligibility for crime victims' compensation pursuant to
Sections 595.010 to 595.075, RSMo.; Department of Health and Senior
Services for the purpose of licensing and regulating facilities and
regulating in-home services provider agencies and Federal agencies for
purposes of criminal justice administration, criminal justice
employment, child, elderly, or disabled care, and for such investigative
purposes as authorized by law or presidential executive order.
B. These records shall be made available only for the purposes and to the
entities listed in this Section. A criminal justice agency receiving a
request for criminal history information under its control may require
positive identification, to include fingerprints of the subject of the
record search, prior to releasing closed record information.
Dissemination of closed and open records from the Missouri criminal
records repository shall be in accordance with Section 43.509, RSMo.
All records which are closed records shall be removed from the records
of the Police Department and Municipal Court which are available to
the public and shall be kept in separate records which are to be held
Section
145.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
145.170
AO:113
Section 145.180. "911" Telephone Reports. [Ord. No. 4872,
3-18-2019]
Excepted as provided by this Section, any information acquired by the
Police Department by way of a complaint or report of a crime made by
telephone contact using the emergency number "911" shall be inaccessible
to the general public. However, information consisting of the date, time,
specific location and immediate facts and circumstances surrounding the
initial report of the crime or incident shall be considered to be an incident
report and subject to Section 145.150. Any closed records pursuant to this
Section shall be available upon request by law enforcement agencies or
the Division of Workers' Compensation or pursuant to a valid court order
authorizing disclosure upon motion and good cause shown.
Section 145.190. Daily Log Or Record Maintained By Police
Department Of Crimes, Accidents Or Complaints — Public Access To
Certain Information. [Ord. No. 4872, 3-18-2019]
confidential and, where possible, pages of the public record shall be
retyped or rewritten omitting those portions of the record which deal
with the defendant's case. If retyping or rewriting is not feasible
because of the permanent nature of the record books, such record
entries shall be blacked out and recopied in a confidential book.
C. All records ordered to be expunged pursuant to Section 610.123,
RSMo., shall be destroyed, except that if such destruction of the record
is not feasible because of the permanent nature of the record books,
such record entries shall be blacked out. Entries of a record ordered
expunged pursuant to Section 610.123, RSMo., shall be removed from
all electronic files. All records ordered to be expunged pursuant to
Section 610.140, RSMo., shall be closed in the manner established
therein and in Section 610.120, RSMo.
A. The City of Brentwood Police Department, if it maintains a daily log or
record that lists suspected crimes, accidents or complaints, shall make
available the following information for inspection and copying by the
public:
1. The time, substance and location of all complaints or requests for
assistance received by the Police Department;
2. The time and nature of the Police Department's response to all
complaints or requests for assistance; and
3. If the incident involves an alleged crime or infraction:
a. The time, date and location of occurrence;
b. The name and age of any victim, unless the victim is a victim of
a crime under Chapter 566, RSMo.;
c. The factual circumstances surrounding the incident; and
Section
145.170
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
145.190
AO:114
Section 145.200. Health Care Coordination — Certain Records May
Be Released. [Ord. No. 4872, 3-18-2019]
Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, information in
law enforcement agency records that would enable the provision of health
care to a person in contact with law enforcement may be released for
the purpose of health care coordination to any health care provider, as
defined in the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996,
as amended, that is providing or may provide services to the person.
d. A general description of any injuries, property or weapons
involved.
Section
145.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
145.200
AO:115
Chapter 200
POLICE
Section
145.200
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
145.200
AO:116
Article I
Police Department35
DIVISION 1
Generally
Section 200.010. Miscellaneous Ordinances Not Affected by Code.
[R.O. 2009 §18-16]
Nothing in this Title or the ordinance adopting this Title shall affect
Ordinance No. 1813, establishing a Police Reserves Manual, and such
ordinance is hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the
same extent as if set out at length in this Title.
Section 200.020. Establishment and Composition. [R.O. 2009
§18-17; Code 1969 §28-1]
There is hereby created and established a Police Department for the City,
to consist of a Chief of Police and as many other Police Officers as may
be deemed necessary from time to time by the Board of Aldermen. Such
department shall include all other personnel which may be authorized from
time to time by the Board of Aldermen.
Section 200.030. through Section 200.070. (Reserved)
35.Cross Reference — As To Officers And Employees Generally, Ch. 115.
Section
200.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
200.030
AO:117

DIVISION 2
Chief of Police36
Section 200.080. Appointment. [R.O. 2009 §18-31; Code 1969
§28-21]
The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent and
approval of a majority of the members of the Board of Aldermen.
Section 200.090. Control of Police Department. [R.O. 2009 §18-32;
Code 1969 §28-22]
The Chief of Police shall be in charge of and in control of the Police
Department.
Section 200.100. Conduct — Supervision. [R.O. 2009 §18-33; Code
1969 §28-30]
The Chief of Police in the discharge of his/her duties shall conduct himself/
herself in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be prescribed
by the Public Safety Committee and shall be under the supervision of the
Mayor and Board of Aldermen.
Section 200.110. Assignment of Police Officers. [R.O. 2009 §18-34;
Code 1969 §28-29]
Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the Chief of Police shall have the
right to determine the assignments to be given to the various Police Officers
of his/her department.
Section 200.120. Custody and Disposal of Property. [R.O. 2009
§18-36; Code 1969 §28-35; Ord. No. 2929 §1, 5-2-1988; Ord. No.
4296 §1, 8-15-2011]
A. The Chief of Police shall be custodian of all property seized or held for
evidence, and after the disposition of the cause (including the time for
appeals from any conviction) in which any property shall be used as
evidence, such property, if of such nature that its possession or sale is
unlawful, shall be destroyed. If such property is proved to be stolen
property and its possession or sale is not unlawful, and the owner of the
same is not known, the Chief of Police may, after ninety (90) days from
the disposition of the cause (including the time for appeals from any
conviction) in which the property was used as evidence, sell the same to
the highest bidder, for cash, at a public sale, which such sale may
include sale at auction by electronic means. All proceeds shall be
deposited in the General Fund of the City.
B. The Chief of Police shall begin investigating lost or stolen property
immediately after it is found or recovered. In the event the owner is
36.State Law References — Chief of police generally, §§85.610, 85.620, RSMo.
Section
200.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
200.120
AO:119
Section 200.130. through Section 200.180. (Reserved)
identified, the owner shall be notified by the Chief of Police and
arrangements shall be made for the return of the property.
C. The Chief of Police may order the disposal of any unclaimed lost or
stolen property. The property must have been in the possession of the
Chief of Police for a period of ninety (90) days and must have remained
unclaimed during that period.
D. All unclaimed property described in Subsection (C) may, but is not
required to be, transferred to other agencies or departments of the City.
All other unclaimed property described in Subsection (C) which is not
so transferred to another agency or department shall be sold to the
highest bidder, for cash, at a public sale, which such sale may include
sale at auction by electronic means. All proceeds shall be deposited in
the General Fund of the City.
E. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no sale of property having an estimated
value in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be made
pursuant to this Section 200.120 without the prior approval of Ways and
Means.
F. The use of an auction company is expressly authorized by this Section
200.120.
Section
200.120
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
200.130
AO:120
DIVISION 3
Police Officers37
Section 200.190. Oath — Bond. [R.O. 2009 §18-43; Code 1969
§28-10]
Section 200.200. through Section 200.240. (Reserved)
A. Before entering upon the duties of his/her employment every Police
Officer shall take and subscribe to an oath or affirmation before some
court of record, magistrate or the City Clerk/Administrator, which oath
or affirmation shall be in the following form:
"I, (name) solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution
of the United States and of the State of Missouri, the provisions of
all laws of the State of Missouri affecting the City of Brentwood and
the ordinances of the City of Brentwood and that I will faithfully and
diligently demean myself at all times while serving as a Police Officer of
the City of Brentwood."
B. This oath or affirmation shall be filed with the City Clerk/Administrator.
No Police Officer, however, other than the Chief of Police, shall be
required to give bond to the City.
37.State Law Reference — General powers of police officers, §85.620, RSMo.
Section
200.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
200.200
AO:121

Article II
False Alarms
Section 200.250. False Fire and Police Alarms. [R.O. 2009 §18-1;
Ord. No. 3010 §1, 5-15-1989; Ord. No. 3015 §1, 6-19-1989]
A. False Alarm Defined. "False alarm" shall be any emergency alarm
intentionally, negligently, inadvertently or unintentionally activated to
which a City emergency vehicle or member of the Police or Fire
Department responds, including alarms activated by the malfunction of
the alarm equipment, wherein an emergency situation does not exist,
with the exception of alarms resulting from one (1) of the following
causes:
1. Malfunction of the indicator or equipment in the Police or Fire
Department;
2. Testing or repair of telephone equipment or lines;
3. An act of God, such as earthquakes, floods, windstorms, thunder or
lightning;
4. Attempted illegal entry, of which there is visible evidence;
5. Fire causing structural damage to the protected premises, verified
by the Fire Chief.
In determining the existence and cause of false alarms, a
decision shall be made in favor of the owners or operators
of and parties responsible for the alarm system if reasonable
doubt exists as to the cause of the alarm. Such decision shall
be made by the City Clerk/Administrator after consultation with
the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief.
B. Response Costs. The owners and operators of and parties responsible
for an emergency alarm system shall be jointly and severally
responsible to the City for the costs of the City's response for each false
alarm transmitted by such system in excess of one (1) during any one
(1) year period. Such response costs shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for the
second (2nd) false alarm during such one (1) year period and twentyfive
dollars ($25.00) for the third (3rd) and each successive false alarm
during such one (1) year period. If the City Clerk/Administrator is
satisfied that the alarm in question is at least the second (2nd) such
occurrence in a one (1) year period, then the City Clerk/Administrator
shall bill the alarm owners, operators and responsible parties for the
response costs, which shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days
of the date of the bill from the City Clerk/Administrator. The Police or
Fire Chief may waive payment for the response costs for good cause.
C. Violation — Penalty. Any owner, operator or responsible party who shall
fail to pay any false alarm response cost when due is deemed guilty of
an ordinance violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable
Section
200.250
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
200.250
AO:123
by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by
imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both such
fine and imprisonment. Any person who shall intentionally cause a false
fire or Police alarm is deemed guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a period not to
exceed ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
D. Defense. It shall be a defense to any charge under this Section that a
person intentionally triggered an emergency alarm while acting under
a sincere belief that a need existed to summon the Police or Fire
Department. Such defense shall be affirmative in nature and must be
proven by a preponderance of the evidence.
E. Definitions. The terms "owner", "operator" and "responsible party" with
regard to an emergency alarm system shall include, without limitation,
owners, lessees or residents of a residential property; with regard to
other than residential property, shall include owners, lessees,
supervisory employees and managers. If an owner or lessee of any
residential or non-residential property is a partnership, corporation or
unincorporated association, then all partners of any such partnership,
all officers or statutory trustees of any such corporations and all
members of any such unincorporated associations shall be deemed to
be owners, operators or responsible parties of such emergency alarm.
Ownership of a property, for purposes of this Section, shall be as shown
on any of the City's records or as shown by any current telephone
directory.
F. Direct Dialing Alarm Systems Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to install or operate any emergency alarm system which
terminates within the Police or Fire Department by way of any direct
dialing device. Any person violating this Section shall be deemed guilty
of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
by imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both
such fine and imprisonment.
G. Audible Alarms. No person shall install or use an audible burglar or fire
alarm which is equipped with an exterior sound-producing device, such
as a gong, buzzer, siren, bell or horn, unless the same shall be equipped
with a fifteen (15) minute timer to limit the duration of the audible
alarm.
Section
200.250
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
200.250
AO:124
Chapter 205
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Cross References — As to buildings and building regulations, ch. 500;
as to reports of incidents involving hazardous substances or hazardous
waste, §215.410; as to offenses involving smoking, §§215.1820 et seq.; as to
adoption of international fire code, §500.840.
Section
200.250
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
200.250
AO:125

ARTICLE I
Fire Department38
Section 205.010. Appointment, Term and Removal of Officers and
Members. [R.O. 2009 §9-27; Code 1969 §14-6; Ord. No. 3743 §1,
12-18-2000]
Section 205.020. Control of the Department.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall be in active charge of the Fire
Department.
A. The Mayor, with the consent and approval of a majority of the members
of the Board of Aldermen, is hereby authorized to appoint a Chief of the
Fire Department.
B. The Chief of the Fire Department shall serve during good behavior and
may be removed at any time by and in conformity with the provisions of
Section 79.240, RSMo.
38.Cross Reference — As to officers and employees generally, ch. 115.
Section
205.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.020
AO:127
Chapter 210
ANIMALS AND FOWL
State Law Reference — Municipal authority to regulate animals, §79.400,
RSMo.
Section
205.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
205.020
AO:128
Article I
In General
Section 210.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §5-1; Code 1969 §§6-1,
6-29]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ANIMAL — Every living creature, domesticated or wild, but not including
Homo sapiens.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any person designated by the State, a
municipal government or a humane society as a Law Enforcement Officer
who is qualified to perform such duties under the laws of this State.
ANIMAL SHELTER — A facility which is used to house or contain animals
and which is owned, operated, or maintained by a duly incorporated
Humane Society, Animal Welfare Society, Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals, or other not-for-profit organization devoted to the
welfare, protection, and humane treatment of animals.
CIRCUS — An incorporated, class C licensee that is licensed under Chapter
I of Title 9 of the Code of Federal Regulations that is temporarily in this
State, and that offers skilled performances by live animals, clowns, and
acrobats for public entertainment.
FOWL — Chickens, ducks and geese and other domesticated birds.
GROOMING SHOP — A commercial establishment where animals are
bathed, clipped, plucked or otherwise groomed.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The City Collector.
OWNER — Any person, partnership or corporation owning, keeping or
harboring one (1) or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be
harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three (3) consecutive days or more.
PERFORMING ANIMAL EXHIBITION — Any spectacle, display, act or event,
other than circuses, in which performing animals are used.
PET — Any domesticated animal normally maintained in or near the
household of the owner thereof.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any animal which:
1. Molests passersby or passing vehicles;
2. Attacks other animals;
3. Trespasses on school grounds;
4. Is repeatedly at large;
5. Damages private or public property;
Section
210.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.010
AO:129
RESTRAINT — Any animal secured by a leash or lead not in excess of six (6)
feet or within the real property limits of its owner.
VICIOUS ANIMAL — Any animal that constitutes a physical threat to human
beings or other animals.
WILD ANIMAL — Any live monkey or non-human primate, raccoon, skunk,
fox, poisonous snake, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other warmblooded
animal which can normally be found in the wild state.
Section 210.020. Enforcement. [R.O. 2009 §5-2; Code 1969 §6-40]
The civil and criminal provisions of this Chapter shall be enforced by
those persons or agencies designated by municipal authority. It shall be a
violation of this Chapter to interfere with an Animal Control Officer in the
performance of his/her duties.
Section 210.030. Animal Neglect.
Section 210.035. Animal Trespass.
6. Barks, whines or howls in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion.
A. A person commits the offense of animal neglect if he or she:
1. Has custody or ownership of an animal and fails to provide
adequate care; or
2. Knowingly abandons an animal in any place without making
provisions for its adequate care.
B. All fines and penalties for a first finding of guilt under this Section may
be waived by the court if the person found guilty of animal neglect
shows that adequate, permanent remedies for the neglect have been
made. Reasonable costs incurred for the care and maintenance of
neglected animals may not be waived. This Section shall not apply to
the provisions of Section 578.007, RSMo., or Chapter 272, RSMo.
C. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Section 578.009,
RSMo., the court may order a person found guilty of animal neglect to
pay all reasonable costs and expenses necessary for:
1. The care and maintenance of neglected animals within the person's
custody or ownership;
2. The disposal of any dead or diseased animals within the person's
custody or ownership;
3. The reduction of resulting organic debris affecting the immediate
area of the neglect; and
4. The avoidance or minimization of any public health risks created by
the neglect of the animals.
Section
210.010
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
210.035
AO:130
Section 210.040. Animal Abuse.39
Section 210.050. Noises or Nauseous Odors Prohibited. [R.O. 2009
§5-4; Code 1969 §6-5]
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having charge of any animal of
any kind, even though the same may be kept penned and confined within the
City, to allow or permit the same to give forth or cause any loud or unusual
noise or to cause any ill-smelling, nauseous or obnoxious odors.
Section 210.060. Animal Fecal Matter. [R.O. 2009 §5-5; Code 1969
§6-38; Ord. No. 3988 §1, 8-15-2005]
A. A person is guilty of animal trespass if a person having ownership or
custody of an animal knowingly fails to provide adequate control for a
period equal to or exceeding twelve (12) hours.
B. For a first conviction of animal trespass, each offense shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). The
second and all subsequent convictions shall be punishable by
imprisonment or a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or
both such fine and imprisonment. All fines for a first conviction of
animal trespass may be waived by the court provided that the person
found guilty of animal trespass shows that adequate, permanent
remedies for trespass have been made. Reasonable costs incurred for
the care and maintenance of trespassing animals may not be waived.
This Section shall not apply to the provisions of Section 578.007 or
Sections 272.010 to 272.370, RSMo.
A. A person commits the offense of animal abuse if he or she:
1. Intentionally or purposely kills an animal in any manner not
allowed by or expressly exempted from the provisions of Sections
578.005 to 578.023 and 273.030, RSMo.;
2. Purposely or intentionally causes injury or suffering to an animal;
or
3. Having ownership or custody of an animal knowingly fails to
provide adequate care which results in substantial harm to the
animal.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or handler of any animal to fail to
remove fecal matter deposited by their animal on public property or
public easement or private property of another, before the owner leaves
the immediate area where the fecal matter was deposited.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner or handler of any animal to fail to have
in their possession the equipment necessary to remove their animal's
39.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.035
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.060
AO:131
Section 210.070. Control of Animals. [R.O. 2009 §5-5.1; Ord. No.
3988 §2, 8-15-2005]
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to cause, permit or allow
such animal to roam, run, stray or to be away from the premises of such
owner unless the animal is under tethered control.
Section 210.080. Disposal of Dead Animals. [R.O. 2009 §5-6; Code
1969 §6-4]
It shall be unlawful for the owner or possessor of an animal which shall have
died within the City, either upon or about the premises of such owner or
possessor or upon or about the premises of any other person, to allow the
carcass of such animal to remain within the City longer than twelve (12)
hours after its death.
Section 210.090. Keeping Livestock in Dwellings. [R.O. 2009 §5-7;
Code 1969 §6-6]
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any horse, mule, jennet, donkey,
bull, cow, calf, sheep, hog, pig, goat or domestic fowl within or under any
building used for human habitation within this City.
Section 210.100. Chickens.40 [Ord. No. 4428 §1, 5-6-2013]
fecal matter when accompanied by said animal on public property or
public easement or private property of another.
C. The above prohibitions shall not extend to areas set aside and
designated by the City as areas where animals can be off leash for
exercise or training.
D. Any person violating this Section is guilty of an ordinance violation and
upon conviction shall be punished:
1. By a fine of not less than twenty dollars ($20.00) or more than fifty
dollars ($50.00) for the first (1st) offense; or
2. For the second (2nd) and subsequent offenses occurring within one
(1) year, a fine of not less than thirty dollars ($30.00) or more than
one hundred dollars ($100.00).
3. The minimum fines provided for by this Section are mandatory
minimums and shall not be either suspended or deferred except in
cases in which the court determines that the defendant is indigent
and unable to pay any fine.
A. The keeping of up to six (6) chickens in total shall be permitted as
provided in this Section only in single-family residences and only if a
40.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 4428 §1, adopted May 6, 2013, repealed section 5-8 "domestic
fowl" and enacted new provisions set out herein. Former section 5-8 derived from code
1969 §6-6A.
Section
210.060
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
210.100
AO:132
permit has been issued by the Director of Planning and Development,
or his or her designee. A permit may be issued if all of the following
conditions are satisfied:
1. The chickens shall be adequately confined within a coop and pen
surrounded by wire netting or other fence to prevent their escape
therefrom and kept in good repair and free of peeling paint,
untreated or rotted wood and rust.
2. The pen shall be maintained in a ventilated, safe and sanitary
condition, which has adequate space for humane treatment and
free from predators.
3. Chicken coops and pens shall only be kept in the rear yard.
4. Chicken coops shall be constructed to include four (4) square feet
of space inside the coop per chicken, up to a maximum of thirty-two
(32) square feet in size. Chicken pens shall be constructed to
include ten (10) square feet of outdoor space per chicken, up to a
maximum of eighty (80) square feet in size. Chicken coops and pens
shall maintain the required rear and side yard setbacks for all
accessory structures in accordance with Section 400.2120,
Development Standards.
5. Any manure or other waste from the chickens shall be collected and
properly removed from the premises or tilled into the soil on the
premises promptly and regularly to prevent the spreading of
offensive smells or diseases.
6. No roosters shall be permitted.
7. No slaughtering of any chickens shall be permitted.
8. No person shall keep chickens in any manner so as to create a
nuisance as defined in Chapter 220, Nuisances of the City
Municipal Code.
9. Eggs shall not be sold on the premises.
10. Fighting or aggressive birds shall not be kept.
11. The keeping of chickens pursuant to a permit issued under this
Section shall comply with all ordinances of the City.
12. Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to preclude the
enforcement of any violation of any City ordinances committed in
connection with the keeping of chickens, notwithstanding the
issuance of such permit.
13. By applying for a permit under this Section, the property owner
authorizes city officials at all reasonable times and in a reasonable
manner to enter upon and inspect the property with respect to
which such permit is applied for to determine whether the keeping
Section
210.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.100
AO:133
of chickens violates this Section or any other applicable
ordinances.
B. Revocation Of Permits To Keep Chickens.
1. The Director of Planning and Development, or his or her designee,
shall revoke any permit issued for the keeping of chickens for
violation of any of the conditions stated in this Section or if any of
the following conditions are found to exist:
a. Excessive noise created by the chickens is audible from
adjacent property.
b. The chickens are not kept in safe and sanitary conditions.
c. The chickens are not properly confined to prevent their escape
onto public ROW and other private property.
d. The keeping of chickens creates a nuisance.
2. Action taken to revoke permit.
a. If a complaint is filed regarding a violation of any condition
stated in this Section, or in the absence of a complaint, in the
discretion of the Planning and Development Director, or his or
her designee, an investigation of any potential violations shall
be made by the Planning and Development Director or his or
her designee.
b. If the investigation substantiates the existence of a violation of
such conditions, a letter shall be sent by certified mail to the
property owner notifying the property owner of such violation
and that same shall be corrected within not less than five (5)
days and that such property owners shall be responsible for
notifying the Director of Planning and Development, or his or
her designee, by certified mail that such violations have been
corrected and seeking a re-inspection to verify that such
violations have been corrected.
c. In the event the property owner shall fail to notify the Director
of Planning and Development, or his or her designee, of such
correction within five (5) days, or in the event that a reinspection
does not verify such correction, the permit shall be
revoked.
3. Permit revocations under this Section may be appealed as follows:
a. Appeals shall be filed within five (5) days after revocation
notice is mailed by certified mail.
b. Appeals shall be determined following a hearing before the
City Administrator or his or her designee.
Section
210.100
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
210.100
AO:134
Section 210.110. Keeping of Wild Animals. [R.O. 2009 §5-11; Code
1969 §§6-36, 6-41]
Section 210.120. Limitations on Number Kept.
Section 210.130. through Section 210.170. (Reserved)
c. At least five (5) days' notice of the hearing shall be given to the
property owner by certified mail.
d. The property owner and any other interested party may appear
at the hearing and testify and present evidence concerning the
conditions giving rise to the revocation.
A. No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his/her premises any wild
or vicious animal for display or for exhibition purposes, whether
gratuitously or for a fee. This Section shall not be construed to apply to
performing animal exhibitions or circuses.
B. No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild animal as a pet.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person at any time to own, harbor, shelter,
keep, control, manage or possess in or on his/her premises more than
three (3) dogs or a combination of six (6) dogs and cats as long as there
are not more than three (3) dogs.
B. No residential structure or lot shall house or contain more than six (6)
pet units as hereinafter defined as long as there are no more than three
(3) dogs total. A dog, cat or rabbit shall constitute one (1) pet unit. Five
(5) chinchillas, guinea pigs or other rodents, over the age of three (3)
months, or any combination thereof, shall constitute one (1) pet unit.
Ten (10) hamsters, mice or other small rodent-related mammals over
the age of three (3) months shall constitute one (1) pet unit.
C. Upon the birth of a litter of puppies, kittens or other animals, it shall be
permissible to allow such litter to stay together with their mother until
they reach the age of four (4) months without violating the limitations of
this Section.
D. This Section shall not apply to a veterinarian's office.
E. Transition Provision. Any owner who on passage of this Section is in
possession of more than three (3) dogs or a combination of six (6) dogs
and cats or who is in the possession of any other animal(s), the
possession of which is restricted or prohibited by this Chapter, shall be
permitted to retain the animal(s) owned until the animal's death or
other disposition. However, no such animal may be replaced or added to
the premises if the addition of the animal exceeds the limitations
established in Subsection (A) or if the replacement of such animal
violates the provisions of this Chapter.
Section
210.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.130
AO:135

Article II
Dogs And Cats
DIVISION 1
Generally
Section 210.180. Restraint of Dogs. [R.O. 2009 §5-26; Code 1969
§6-33; Ord. No. 3988 §3, 8-15-2005]
Section 210.190. Cats at Large. [R.O. 2009 §5-27; Code 1969 §6-8]
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, controlling, possessing or having
the management or care, in whole or in part, of any cat, to permit the same
to run at large within the City.
Section 210.200. Warning Sign for Vicious Dog. [R.O. 2009 §5-29;
Code 1969 §6-10]
It shall be the duty of the owner and custodian of a vicious dog or a dog
that has bitten a person to post on the premises where such dog is kept a
sign clearly visible to the public with letters not less than two (2) inches
high reading "Beware Bad Dog" or words of similar meaning. If the owner
or custodian of such dog is a person under eighteen (18) years of age, the
adult in the family where such minor resides or the person in possession of
the premises where such dog is kept shall also be subject to the provisions
of this Section.
Section 210.210. through Section 210.250. (Reserved)
A. All dogs shall be kept under restraint.
B. No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his/her dogs
to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance.
C. Every vicious animal, as determined by the Chief of Police, shall be
confined by the owner within a building or secure enclosure and shall
be securely muzzled or caged whenever off the premises of its owner.
Section
210.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.210
AO:137

Article III
Rabies Control
Section 210.260. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §5-61; Code 1969 §6-20]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AFFECTED WITH RABIES — Infected with the rabies virus as determined
by standard laboratory testing.
CAT — All animals of the feline species, both male and female.
DOG — All animals of the canine species, both male and female.
EXPOSED TO RABIES — When bitten by, or fought with, or has come in
close contact with a dog or other animal shown to be infected with the
rabies virus as determined by standard laboratory testing.
IMMUNIZED — Immunized against rabies at the expense of the owner or
custodian by the administration of antirabic virus by a licensed veterinarian.
KEEPER — The owner or person in charge of any cat or dog.
RABIES — Hydrophobia.
Section 210.270. Confinement After Biting, Scratching Person or
Animal. [R.O. 2009 §5-63; Code 1969 §6-9]
Section 210.280. Establishment of Quarantine.41 [R.O. 2009 §5-64;
Code 1969 §6-24]
Whenever rabies becomes prevalent in the City, the Board of Aldermen
shall, according to the necessity of the case, upon motion, direct the Mayor
to issue a quarantine order requiring every keeper of any dog or cat within
A. Any person owning, controlling, possessing or having the management
or care, in whole or in part, of any animal susceptible to rabies which
has bitten or scratched any person or animal shall cause any such
animal to be placed, for a period of ten (10) days after such biting or
scratching occurs, under the continual custody and supervision of a
duly licensed veterinarian.
B. Within twenty-four (24) hours after receiving notice of such biting or
scratching, such owner or keeper shall deliver to the Police
Department, evidence in writing that such animal has been placed
under the supervision of a duly licensed veterinarian.
C. Upon the expiration of such ten (10) day period, such owner or keeper
shall furnish to the Police Department, evidence in writing from such
veterinarian stating whether or not such animal had or has rabies.
41.State Law Reference — Authority of mayor to issue quarantine against rabies in dogs,
§322.040, RSMo.
Section
210.260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.280
AO:139
the City to either kill or impound his/her dog or cat or to have such dog or
cat immunized. Such order shall be published once in a newspaper in the
County in which the business of the City may officially be published.
Section 210.290. Duty of Police Officers During Quarantine. [R.O.
2009 §5-65; Code 1969 §6-25]
Whenever any quarantine order is issued, it shall be the duty of all Police
Officers within the City to kill all dogs or cats found running at large except
those which have been immunized.
Section 210.300. Penalty for Failure to Kill, Impound or Immunize
Exposed Animals. [R.O. 2009 §5-66; Code 1969 §6-26]
Any keeper of any dog or cat which has had any substantial exposure to
rabies shall upon failure to kill such dog or cat or to keep such dog or
cat impounded or to have such dog or cat immunized, in addition to the
penalties prescribed by Section 100.080, shall be liable for all damages that
may result from the actions of any such exposed dog or cat.
Section 210.310. Order Confining Unleashed Dogs and Cats to
Keeper's Property. [R.O. 2009 §5-67; Code 1969 §6-27]
Whenever in the judgment and opinion of the Board of Aldermen the public
health or safety shall require it, the Board of Aldermen shall, upon motion,
direct the Mayor to issue an order declaring it unlawful for the keeper of
any dog or cat to permit such dog or cat, whether immunized or not, to go
off the premises of such keeper unless securely tied or led by a line or leash.
Such order shall be published in the manner provided in Section 210.280.
Section
210.280
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
210.310
AO:140
Chapter 215
OFFENSES
Section
210.310
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.310
AO:141

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 215.003. Definitions.
In this Chapter, unless the context requires a different definition, the
following shall apply:
ACCESS — To instruct, communicate with, store data in, retrieve or extract
data from, or otherwise make any use of any resources of, a computer,
computer system, or computer network.
AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE —
BURDEN OF INJECTING THE ISSUE —
COMMERCIAL FILM AND PHOTOGRAPHIC PRINT PROCESSOR — Any
person who develops exposed photographic film into negatives, slides or
prints, or who makes prints from negatives or slides, for compensation. The
term commercial film and photographic print processor shall include all
employees of such persons but shall not include a person who develops film
or makes prints for a public agency.
COMPUTER — The box that houses the central processing unit (CPU), along
with any internal storage devices, such as internal hard drives, and internal
communication devices, such as internal modems capable of sending or
receiving electronic mail or fax cards, along with any other hardware stored
or housed internally. Thus, "computer" refers to hardware, software and
data contained in the main unit. Printers, external modems attached by
cable to the main unit, monitors, and other external attachments will be
referred to collectively as "peripherals" and discussed individually when
appropriate. When the computer and all peripherals are referred to as a
package, the term "computer system" is used. "Information" refers to all the
information on a computer system, including both software applications and
data.
COMPUTER EQUIPMENT — Computers, terminals, data storage devices,
and all other computer hardware associated with a computer system or
network.
COMPUTER HARDWARE — All equipment which can collect, analyze,
create, display, convert, store, conceal or transmit electronic, magnetic,
The defense referred to is not submitted to the trier of fact unless
supported by evidence; and
1.
If the defense is submitted to the trier of fact the defendant has the
burden of persuasion that the defense is more probably true than not.
2.
The issue referred to is not submitted to the trier of fact unless
supported by evidence; and
1.
If the issue is submitted to the trier of fact any reasonable doubt on the
issue requires a finding for the defendant on that issue.
2.
Section
215.003
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.003
AO:143
optical or similar computer impulses or data. "Hardware" includes, but is
not limited to, any data processing devices, such as central processing
units, memory typewriters and self-contained laptop or notebook
computers; internal and peripheral storage devices, transistor-like binary
devices and other memory storage devices, such as floppy disks, removable
disks, compact disks, digital video disks, magnetic tape, hard drive, optical
disks and digital memory; local area networks, such as two (2) or more
computers connected together to a central computer server via cable or
modem; peripheral input or output devices, such as keyboards, printers,
scanners, plotters, video display monitors and optical readers; and related
communication devices, such as modems, cables and connections,
recording equipment, RAM or ROM units, acoustic couplers, automatic
dialers, speed dialers, programmable telephone dialing or signaling devices
and electronic tone-generating devices; as well as any devices, mechanisms
or parts that can be used to restrict access to computer hardware, such as
physical keys and locks.
COMPUTER NETWORK — Two (2) or more interconnected computers or
computer systems.
COMPUTER PROGRAM — A set of instructions, statements, or related data
that directs or is intended to direct a computer to perform certain functions.
COMPUTER SOFTWARE — Digital information which can be interpreted
by a computer and any of its related components to direct the way they
work. Software is stored in electronic, magnetic, optical or other digital
form. The term commonly includes programs to run operating systems and
applications, such as word processing, graphic, or spreadsheet programs,
utilities, compilers, interpreters and communications programs.
COMPUTER SYSTEM — A set of related, connected or unconnected,
computer equipment, data, or software.
COMPUTER-RELATED DOCUMENTATION — Written, recorded, printed or
electronically stored material which explains or illustrates how to configure
or use computer hardware, software or other related items.
CONFINEMENT —
A person is in confinement when such person is held in a place of
confinement pursuant to arrest or order of a court and remains in
confinement until:
a. A court orders the person's release; or
The person is released on bail, bond or recognizance, personal or
otherwise; or
b.
A public servant having the legal power and duty to confine the
person authorizes his/her release without guard and without
condition that he/she return to confinement.
c.
1.
2. A person is not in confinement if:
Section
215.003
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.003
AO:144
CONSENT — Consent or lack of consent may be expressed or implied.
Assent does not constitute consent if:
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — A drug, substance, or immediate precursor
in Schedules I through V as defined in Chapter 195, RSMo.
CRIMINAL NEGLIGENCE — Failure to be aware of a substantial and
unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or a result will follow, and such
failure constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a
reasonable person would exercise in the situation.
CUSTODY — A person is in custody when he/she has been arrested but has
not been delivered to a place of confinement.
DAMAGE — When used in relation to a computer system or network, means
any alteration, deletion, or destruction of any part of the computer system
or network.
DANGEROUS FELONY — The felonies of arson in the first degree, assault in
the first degree, attempted rape in the first degree if physical injury results,
attempted forcible rape if physical injury results, attempted sodomy in the
first degree if physical injury results, attempted forcible sodomy if physical
injury results, rape in the first degree, forcible rape, sodomy in the first
degree, forcible sodomy, assault in the second degree if the victim of such
assault is a special victim as defined in Subdivision (14) of Section 565.002,
RSMo., kidnapping in the first degree, kidnapping, murder in the second
degree, assault of a Law Enforcement Officer in the first degree, domestic
assault in the first degree, elder abuse in the first degree, robbery in the
first degree, statutory rape in the first degree when the victim is a child
less than twelve (12) years of age at the time of the commission of the
act giving rise to the offense, statutory sodomy in the first degree when
the victim is a child less than twelve (12) years of age at the time of the
commission of the act giving rise to the offense, child molestation in the first
a. The person is on probation or parole, temporary or otherwise; or
The person is under sentence to serve a term of confinement which
is not continuous, or is serving a sentence under a work-release
program, and in either such case is not being held in a place of
confinement or is not being held under guard by a person having
the legal power and duty to transport the person to or from a place
of confinement.
b.
It is given by a person who lacks the mental capacity to authorize the
conduct charged to constitute the offense and such mental incapacity is
manifest or known to the actor; or
1.
It is given by a person who by reason of youth, mental disease or defect,
intoxication, a drug-induced state, or any other reason is manifestly
unable or known by the actor to be unable to make a reasonable
judgment as to the nature or harmfulness of the conduct charged to
constitute the offense; or
2.
3. It is induced by force, duress or deception.
Section
215.003
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.003
AO:145
or second degree, abuse of a child if the child dies as a result of injuries
sustained from conduct chargeable under Section 568.060, RSMo., child
kidnapping, parental kidnapping committed by detaining or concealing the
whereabouts of the child for not less than one hundred twenty (120) days
under Section 565.153, RSMo., and an "intoxication-related traffic offense"
or "intoxication-related boating offense" if the person is found to be an
"habitual offender" or "habitual boating offender" as such terms are defined
in Section 577.001, RSMo.
DANGEROUS INSTRUMENT — Any instrument, article or substance which,
under the circumstances in which it is used, is readily capable of causing
death or other serious physical injury.
DATA — A representation of information, facts, knowledge, concepts, or
instructions prepared in a formalized or other manner and intended for use
in a computer or computer network. Data may be in any form including,
but not limited to, printouts, microfiche, magnetic storage media, punched
cards and as may be stored in the memory of a computer.
DEADLY WEAPON — Any firearm, loaded or unloaded, or any weapon from
which a shot, readily capable of producing death or serious physical injury,
may be discharged; or a switchblade knife, dagger, billy club, blackjack or
metal knuckles.
DIGITAL CAMERA — A camera that records images in a format which
enables the images to be downloaded into a computer.
DISABILITY — A mental, physical, or developmental impairment that
substantially limits one (1) or more major life activities or the ability to
provide adequately for one's care or protection, whether the impairment
is congenital or acquired by accident, injury or disease, where such
impairment is verified by medical findings.
ELDERLY PERSON — A person sixty (60) years of age or older.
FELONY — An offense so designated or an offense for which persons found
guilty thereof may be sentenced to death or imprisonment for a term of
more than one (1) year.
FORCIBLE COMPULSION — Either:
INCAPACITATED — A temporary or permanent physical or mental condition
in which a person is unconscious, unable to appraise the nature of his/her
conduct, or unable to communicate unwillingness to an act.
INFRACTION — A violation defined by this Code or by any other Statute of
this state if it is so designated or if no sentence other than a fine, or fine and
forfeiture or other civil penalty, is authorized upon conviction.
1. Physical force that overcomes reasonable resistance; or
A threat, express or implied, that places a person in reasonable fear of
death, serious physical injury, or kidnapping of such person or another
person.
2.
Section
215.003
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.003
AO:146
INHABITABLE STRUCTURE —
KNOWINGLY —
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any public servant having both the
power and duty to make arrests for violations of the laws of this State, and
Federal Law Enforcement Officers authorized to carry firearms and to make
arrests for violations of the laws of the United States.
MISDEMEANOR — An offense so designated or an offense for which
persons found guilty thereof may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term
of which the maximum is one (1) year or less.
OF ANOTHER — Property that any entity, including but not limited to
any natural person, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, governmental subdivision or instrumentality, other than the
actor, has a possessory or proprietary interest therein, except that property
shall not be deemed property of another who has only a security interest
therein, even if legal title is in the creditor pursuant to a conditional sales
contract or other security arrangement.
OFFENSE — Any felony, ordinance violation, misdemeanor or infraction.
PHYSICAL INJURY — Slight impairment of any function of the body or
temporary loss of use of any part of the body.
PLACE OF CONFINEMENT — Any building or facility and the grounds
thereof wherein a court is legally authorized to order that a person charged
with or convicted of a crime be held.
POSSESS or POSSESSED — Having actual or constructive possession of
an object with knowledge of its presence. A person has actual possession
if such person has the object on his/her person or within easy reach and
convenient control. A person has constructive possession if such person
A vehicle, vessel or structure:
a. Where any person lives or carries on business or other calling; or
Where people assemble for purposes of business, government,
education, religion, entertainment, or public transportation; or
b.
c. Which is used for overnight accommodation of persons.
1.
Any such vehicle, vessel, or structure is inhabitable regardless of
whether a person is actually present.
2.
If a building or structure is divided into separately occupied units, any
unit not occupied by the actor is an inhabitable structure of another.
3.
When used with respect to conduct or attendant circumstances, means
a person is aware of the nature of his or her conduct or that those
circumstances exist; or
1.
When used with respect to a result of conduct, means a person is aware
that his or her conduct is practically certain to cause that result.
2.
Section
215.003
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.003
AO:147
has the power and the intention at a given time to exercise dominion or
control over the object either directly or through another person or persons.
Possession may also be sole or joint. If one (1) person alone has possession
of an object, possession is sole. If two (2) or more persons share possession
of an object, possession is joint.
PROPERTY — Anything of value, whether real or personal, tangible or
intangible, in possession or in action.
PUBLIC SERVANT — Any person employed in any way by a government
of this State who is compensated by the government by reason of such
person's employment, any person appointed to a position with any
government of this State, or any person elected to a position with any
government of this State. It includes, but is not limited to, legislators,
jurors, members of the judiciary and Law Enforcement Officers. It does not
include witnesses.
PURPOSELY — When used with respect to a person's conduct or to a result
thereof, means when it is his/her conscious object to engage in that conduct
or to cause that result.
RECKLESSLY — Consciously disregarding a substantial and unjustifiable
risk that circumstances exist or that a result will follow, and such disregard
constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable
person would exercise in the situation.
SERIOUS EMOTIONAL INJURY — An injury that creates a substantial risk
of temporary or permanent medical or psychological damage, manifested
by impairment of a behavioral, cognitive or physical condition. Serious
emotional injury shall be established by testimony of qualified experts upon
the reasonable expectation of probable harm to a reasonable degree of
medical or psychological certainty.
SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY — Physical injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes serious disfigurement or protracted loss or
impairment of the function of any part of the body.
SERVICES — When used in relation to a computer system or network,
means use of a computer, computer system, or computer network and
includes, but is not limited to, computer time, data processing, and storage
or retrieval functions.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION — Male or female heterosexuality, homosexuality
or bisexuality by inclination, practice, identity or expression, or having a
self-image or identity not traditionally associated with one's gender.
SPECIAL VICTIM — Any of the following:
A Law Enforcement Officer assaulted in the performance of his or her
official duties or as a direct result of such official duties;
1.
Emergency personnel, any paid or volunteer firefighter, emergency
room, hospital, or trauma center personnel, or emergency medical
technician, assaulted in the performance of his or her official duties or
as a direct result of such official duties;
2.
Section
215.003
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.003
AO:148
VEHICLE — A self-propelled mechanical device designed to carry a person
or persons, excluding vessels or aircraft.
VESSEL — Any boat or craft propelled by a motor or by machinery, whether
or not such motor or machinery is a principal source of propulsion used or
capable of being used as a means of transportation on water, or any boat or
craft more than twelve (12) feet in length which is powered by sail alone or
by a combination of sail and machinery, and used or capable of being used
as a means of transportation on water, but not any boat or craft having, as
the only means of propulsion, a paddle or oars.
VOLUNTARY ACT —
A probation and parole officer assaulted in the performance of his/her
official duties or as a direct result of such official duties;
3.
4. An elderly person;
5. A person with a disability;
6. A vulnerable person;
Any jailer or corrections officer of the State or one (1) of its political
subdivisions assaulted in the performance of his/her official duties or as
a direct result of such official duties;
7.
A highway worker in a construction or work zone as the terms "highway
worker," "construction zone" and "work zone" are defined under Section
304.580, RSMo.;
8.
Any utility worker, meaning any employee of a utility that provides gas,
heat, electricity, water, steam, telecommunications services, or sewer
services, whether privately, municipally, or cooperatively owned, while
in the performance of his/her job duties, including any person employed
under a contract;
9.
Any cable worker, meaning any employee of a cable operator, as such
term is defined in Section 67.2677, RSMo., including any person
employed under contract, while in the performance of his/her job
duties; and
10.
Any employee of a mass transit system, including any employee of
public bus or light rail companies, while in the performance of his/her
job duties.
11.
A bodily movement performed while conscious as a result of effort or
determination. Possession is a voluntary act if the possessor knowingly
procures or receives the thing possessed, or having acquired control of
it was aware of his/her control for a sufficient time to have enabled him
or her to dispose of it or terminate his/her control; or
1.
An omission to perform an act of which the actor is physically capable.
A person is not guilty of an offense based solely upon an omission
to perform an act unless the law defining the offense expressly so
2.
Section
215.003
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.003
AO:149
VULNERABLE PERSON — Any person in the custody, care, or control of the
Department of Mental Health who is receiving services from an operated,
funded, licensed, or certified program.
Section 215.005. Attempt.
Section 215.007. Conspiracy.42
provides, or a duty to perform the omitted act is otherwise imposed by
law.
A. Guilt for an offense may be based upon an attempt to commit an offense
if, with the purpose of committing the offense, a person performs any
act which is a substantial step towards the commission of the offense. A
"substantial step" is conduct which is strongly corroborative of the
firmness of the actor's purpose to complete the commission of the
offense.
B. It is no defense to a prosecution under this Section that the offense
attempted was, under the actual attendant circumstances, factually or
legally impossible of commission, if such offense could have been
committed had the attendant circumstances been as the actor believed
them to be.
A. Guilt for an offense may be based upon a conspiracy to commit an
offense when a person, with the purpose of promoting or facilitating the
commission of an offense, agrees with another person or persons that
they or one or more of them will engage in conduct which constitutes
such offense.
B. It is no defense to a prosecution for conspiring to commit an offense
that a person, who knows that a person with whom he or she conspires
to commit an offense has conspired with another person or persons to
commit the same offense, does not know the identity of such other
person or persons.
C. If a person conspires to commit a number of offenses, he or she can be
found guilty of only one offense so long as such multiple offenses are
the object of the same agreement.
D. No person may be convicted of an offense based upon a conspiracy to
commit an offense unless an overt act in pursuance of such conspiracy
is alleged and proved to have been done by him or her or by a person
with whom he or she conspired.
E. Exceptions.
1. No person shall be convicted of an offense based upon a conspiracy
to commit an offense if, after conspiring to commit the offense, he/
she prevented the accomplishment of the objectives of the
42.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.003
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.007
AO:150
Section 215.010. (Reserved)
conspiracy under circumstances manifesting a renunciation of his/
her criminal purpose.
2. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of
renunciation of criminal purpose under Subsection (E)(1).
F. For the purpose of time limitations on prosecutions:
1. A conspiracy to commit an offense is a continuing course of conduct
which terminates when the offense or offenses which are its object
are committed or the agreement that they be committed is
abandoned by the defendant and by those with whom he or she
conspired;
2. If an individual abandons the agreement, the conspiracy is
terminated as to him/her only if he/she advises those with whom he/
she has conspired of his/her abandonment or he/she informs the
law enforcement authorities of the existence of the conspiracy and
of his/her participation in it.
G. A person shall not be charged, convicted or sentenced on the basis of
the same course of conduct of both the actual commission of an offense
and a conspiracy to commit that offense.
Section
215.007
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.010
AO:151

ARTICLE II
Offenses Against The Person
Section 215.020. Assault.43
Section 215.030. Domestic Assault.44
A. A person commits the offense of assault if:
1. The person attempts to cause or recklessly causes physical injury,
physical pain or illness to another person;
2. With criminal negligence the person causes physical injury to
another person by means of a firearm;
3. The person purposely places another person in apprehension of
immediate physical injury;
4. The person recklessly engages in conduct which creates a
substantial risk of death or serious physical injury to another
person;
5. The person knowingly causes or attempts to cause physical contact
with a person with a disability, which a reasonable person, who
does not have a disability, would consider offensive or provocative;
or
6. The person knowingly causes physical contact with another person
knowing the other person will regard the contact as offensive or
provocative.
A. A person commits the offense of domestic assault if the act involves a
domestic victim, as the term "domestic victim" is defined under Section
565.002, RSMo., and:
1. The person attempts to cause or recklessly causes physical injury,
physical pain, or illness to such domestic victim;
2. With criminal negligence the person causes physical injury to such
domestic victim by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
instrument;
3. The person purposely places such domestic victim in apprehension
of immediate physical injury by any means;
4. The person recklessly engages in conduct which creates a
substantial risk of death or serious physical injury to such domestic
victim;
43.Editor's Note: As to assault of certain other persons, see the definition of "special victim"
as set out in Section 215.003 of this Chapter.
44.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.030
AO:153
Section 215.040. (Reserved)45
Section 215.050. Harassment.46
A person commits the offense of harassment if he/she, without good cause,
engages in any act with the purpose to cause emotional distress to another
person.
Section 215.060. Stalking — Definitions.47
Section 215.070. Kidnapping.48
A person commits the offense of kidnapping if he or she knowingly restrains
another unlawfully and without consent so as to interfere substantially with
his or her liberty.
5. The person knowingly causes physical contact with such domestic
victim knowing he or she will regard the contact as offensive; or
6. The person knowingly attempts to cause or causes the isolation of
such domestic victim by unreasonably and substantially restricting
or limiting his or her access to other persons, telecommunication
devices or transportation for the purpose of isolation.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section:
DISTURBS — Shall mean to engage in a course of conduct directed
at a specific person that serves no legitimate purpose and that would
cause a reasonable person under the circumstances to be frightened,
intimidated, or emotionally distressed.
B. A person commits the offense of stalking if he or she purposely, through
his or her course of conduct, disturbs, or follows with the intent to
disturb another person.
C. This Section shall not apply to activities of Federal, State, County, or
Municipal Law Enforcement Officers conducting investigations of any
violation of Federal, State, County, or Municipal Law.
D. Any Law Enforcement Officer may arrest, without a warrant, any
person he or she has probable cause to believe has violated the
provisions of this Section.
45.Editor's Note: This Section previously pertained to assault of a law enforcement officer,
corrections officer, emergency personnel, highway worker in a construction zone or work
zone, utility worker, cable worker, or probation and parole officer. However, the
authorizing statute, former RSMo. §565.083, was repealed without replacement by SB 491
in the 2014 Legislative Session, effective 1-1-2017. See Section 215.020, Assault, as it
relates to a "special victim."
46.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
47.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
48.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.030
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.080
AO:154
Section 215.080. Endangering the Welfare of a Child.49
Section 215.090. Leaving a Child Unattended in a Motor Vehicle —
Definitions.50
A. A person commits the offense of endangering the welfare of a child if
he/she:
1. With criminal negligence acts in a manner that creates a
substantial risk to the life, body or health of a child less than
seventeen (17) years old; or
2. Knowingly encourages, aids or causes a child less than seventeen
(17) years of age to engage in any conduct which causes or tends to
cause the child to come within the provisions of Paragraph (d) of
Subdivision (2) of Subsection (1) or Subdivision (3) of Subsection
(1) of Section 211.031, RSMo.; or
3. Being a parent, guardian or other person legally charged with the
care or custody of a child less than seventeen (17) years of age,
recklessly fails or refuses to exercise reasonable diligence in the
care or control of such child to prevent him/her from coming within
the provisions of Paragraph (c) of Subdivision (1) of Subsection (1)
or Paragraph (d) of Subdivision (2) of Subsection (1) or Subdivision
(3) of Subsection (1) of Section 211.031, RSMo.; or
4. Knowingly encourages, aids or causes a child less than seventeen
(17) years of age to enter into any room, building or other structure
which is a public nuisance as defined in Section 579.105, RSMo.
B. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to mean the welfare of a child
is endangered for the sole reason that he/she is being provided nonmedical
remedial treatment recognized and permitted under the laws
of this State.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms mean:
COLLISION — The act of a motor vehicle coming into contact with an
object or a person.
INJURES — To cause physical harm to the body of a person.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any automobile, truck, truck-tractor, or any motor
bus or motor-propelled vehicle not exclusively operated or driven on
fixed rails or tracks.
UNATTENDED — Not accompanied by an individual fourteen (14) years
of age or older.
B. A person commits the offense of leaving a child unattended in a motor
vehicle if such person knowingly leaves a child less than eleven (11)
49.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
50.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.090
AO:155
Section 215.100. through Section 215.140. (Reserved)
years of age unattended in a motor vehicle and such child injures
another person by causing a motor vehicle collision or by causing the
motor vehicle to injure a pedestrian.
C. The offense of leaving a child unattended in a motor vehicle is an
ordinance violation.
Section
215.090
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.100
AO:156
ARTICLE III
Offenses Concerning Administration Of Justice
Section 215.150. Concealing an Offense.51
Section 215.160. Hindering Prosecution.52
Section 215.170. Refusal To Identify as a Witness.
A person commits the offense of refusal to identify as a witness if, knowing
he or she has witnessed any portion of an offense, or of any other incident
resulting in physical injury or substantial property damage, he or she
refuses to report or gives a false report of his or her name and present
address to a Law Enforcement Officer engaged in the performance of his or
her duties.
A. A person commits the offense of concealing an offense if he or she:
1. Confers or agrees to confer any pecuniary benefit or other
consideration to any person in consideration of that person's
concealing of any offense, refraining from initiating or aiding in the
prosecution of an offense, or withholding any evidence thereof; or
2. Accepts or agrees to accept any pecuniary benefit or other
consideration in consideration of his/her concealing any offense,
refraining from initiating or aiding in the prosecution of an offense,
or withholding any evidence thereof.
A. A person commits the offense of hindering prosecution if, for the
purpose of preventing the apprehension, prosecution, conviction or
punishment of another person for conduct constituting an offense, he or
she:
1. Harbors or conceals such person; or
2. Warns such person of impending discovery or apprehension, except
this does not apply to a warning given in connection with an effort
to bring another into compliance with the law; or
3. Provides such person with money, transportation, weapon, disguise
or other means to aid him/her in avoiding discovery or
apprehension; or
4. Prevents or obstructs, by means of force, deception or intimidation,
anyone from performing an act that might aid in the discovery or
apprehension of such person.
51.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
52.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.180
AO:157
Section 215.180. Disturbing a Judicial Proceeding.
A person commits the offense of disturbing a judicial proceeding if, with the
purpose to intimidate a judge, attorney, juror, party or witness and thereby
influence a judicial proceeding, he or she disrupts or disturbs a judicial
proceeding by participating in an assembly and calling aloud, shouting,
or holding or displaying a placard or sign containing written or printed
matter, concerning the conduct of the judicial proceeding, or the character
of a judge, attorney, juror, party or witness engaged in such proceeding,
or calling for or demanding any specified action or determination by such
judge, attorney, juror, party, or witness in connection with such proceeding.
Section 215.190. Tampering With a Witness or Victim.53
Section 215.200. Tampering With Physical Evidence.54
A. A person commits the offense of tampering with a witness or victim if:
1. With the purpose to induce a witness or a prospective witness to
disobey a subpoena or other legal process, absent himself or
herself, avoid subpoena or other legal process, withhold evidence,
information, or documents, or testify falsely, he or she:
a. Threatens or causes harm to any person or property; or
b. Uses force, threats or deception; or
c. Offers, confers or agrees to confer any benefit, direct or
indirect, upon such witness; or
d. Conveys any of the foregoing to another in furtherance of a
conspiracy; or
2. He or she purposely prevents or dissuades or attempts to prevent
or dissuade any person who has been a victim of any crime or a
person who is acting on behalf of any such victim from:
a. Making any report of such victimization to any peace officer,
State, Local or Federal Law Enforcement Officer, prosecuting
agency, or judge;
b. Causing a complaint, indictment or information to be sought
and prosecuted or assisting in the prosecution thereof;
c. Arresting or causing or seeking the arrest of any person in
connection with such victimization.
A. A person commits the offense of tampering with physical evidence if he/
she:
53.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
54.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.180
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.200
AO:158
Section 215.210. Improper Communication.
A person commits the offense of improper communication if he/she
communicates, directly or indirectly, with any juror, special master, referee
or arbitrator in a judicial proceeding, other than as part of the proceedings
in a case, for the purpose of influencing the official action of such person.
Section 215.220. False Impersonation.
1. Alters, destroys, suppresses or conceals any record, document or
thing with the purpose to impair its verity, legibility or availability
in any official proceeding or investigation; or
2. Makes, presents or uses any record, document or thing knowing it
to be false with the purpose to mislead a public servant who is or
may be engaged in any official proceeding or investigation.
A. A person commits the offense of false impersonation if such person:
1. Falsely represents himself/herself to be a public servant with the
purpose to induce another to submit to his/her pretended official
authority or to rely upon his/her pretended official acts, and
a. Performs an act in that pretended capacity; or
b. Causes another to act in reliance upon his/her pretended
official authority.
2. Falsely represents himself/herself to be a person licensed to
practice or engage in any profession for which a license is required
by the laws of this State with purpose to induce another to rely
upon such representation, and
a. Performs an act in that pretended capacity; or
b. Causes another to act in reliance upon such representation; or
3. Upon being arrested, falsely represents himself/herself, to a Law
Enforcement Officer, with the first and last name, date of birth or
social security number, or a substantial number of identifying
factors or characteristics as that of another person that results in
the filing of a report or record of arrest or conviction for an
infraction or offense that contains the first and last name, date of
birth and social security number, or a substantial number of
identifying factors or characteristics to that of such other person as
to cause such other person to be identified as the actual person
arrested or convicted.
B. If a violation of Subsection (A)(3) hereof is discovered prior to any
conviction of the person actually arrested for an underlying charge,
then the prosecuting attorney bringing any action on the underlying
charge shall notify the court thereof, and the court shall order the falseidentifying
factors ascribed to the person actually arrested as are
Section
215.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.220
AO:159
Section 215.230. False Reports.
Section 215.240. Resisting or Interfering With Arrest, Detention or
Stop.55
contained in the arrest and court records amended to correctly and
accurately identify the defendant and shall expunge the incorrect and
inaccurate identifying factors from the arrest and court records.
C. Any person who is the victim of a false impersonation and whose
identity has been falsely reported in arrest or conviction records may
move for expungement and correction of said records under the
procedures set forth in Section 610.123, RSMo. Upon a showing that a
substantial number of identifying factors of the victim was falsely
ascribed to the person actually arrested or convicted, the court shall
order the false-identifying factors ascribed to the person actually
arrested as are contained in the arrest and court records amended to
correctly and accurately identify the defendant and shall expunge the
incorrect and inaccurate factors from the arrest and court records.
A. A person commits the offense of making a false report if he/she
knowingly:
1. Gives false information to any person for the purpose of implicating
another person in an offense; or
2. Makes a false report to a Law Enforcement Officer that an offense
has occurred or is about to occur; or
3. Makes a false report or causes a false report to be made to a Law
Enforcement Officer, security officer, Fire Department or other
organization, official or volunteer which deals with emergencies
involving danger to life or property that a fire or other incident
calling for an emergency response has occurred or is about to
occur.
B. It is a defense to a prosecution under Subsection (A) of this Section that
the person retracted the false statement or report before the Law
Enforcement Officer or any other person took substantial action in
reliance thereon.
C. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of retraction
under Subsection (B) of this Section.
A. A person commits the offense of resisting or interfering with arrest,
detention, or stop if he or she knows or reasonably should know that a
Law Enforcement Officer is making an arrest or attempting to lawfully
detain or stop an individual or vehicle, and for the purpose of
preventing the Officer from effecting the arrest, stop or detention, he or
she:
55.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.220
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.240
AO:160
Section 215.250. Escape or Attempted Escape From Custody.56
A person commits the offense of escape from custody or attempted escape
from custody if, while being held in custody after arrest for any offense, he/
she escapes or attempts to escape from custody.
Section 215.260. Interference With Legal Process.
Section 215.270. Obstructing Officers. [R.O. 2009 §13-156; Code
1969 §25-27]
No person shall hinder, obstruct, run away from or otherwise interfere with
an officer of this City in the discharge of his/her official duties.
1. Resists the arrest, stop or detention of such person by using or
threatening the use of violence or physical force or by fleeing from
such officer; or
2. Interferes with the arrest, stop or detention of another person by
using or threatening the use of violence, physical force or physical
interference.
B. This Section applies to:
1. Arrests, stops or detentions with or without warrants;
2. Arrests, stops or detentions for any offense, infraction or ordinance
violation; and
3. Arrests for warrants issued by a court or a probation and parole
officer.
C. A person is presumed to be fleeing a vehicle stop if he or she continues
to operate a motor vehicle after he or she has seen or should have seen
clearly visible emergency lights or has heard or should have heard an
audible signal emanating from the law enforcement vehicle pursuing
him or her.
D. It is no defense to a prosecution under Subsection (A) of this Section
that the Law Enforcement Officer was acting unlawfully in making the
arrest. However, nothing in this Section shall be construed to bar civil
suits for unlawful arrest.
A. A person commits the offense of interference with legal process if,
knowing another person is authorized by law to serve process, he or she
interferes with or obstructs such person for the purpose of preventing
such person from effecting the service of any process.
B. "Process" includes any writ, summons, subpoena, warrant other than an
arrest warrant, or other process or order of a court.
56.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.275
AO:161
Section 215.275. Signal or Direction of Law Enforcement Officer or
Firefighter, Duty To Stop, Motor Vehicle Operators and Riders of
Animals — Violation, Penalty.
Section 215.280. Assault on a Police Animal.57
A person commits the offense of assault on a police animal if he or she
knowingly attempts to kill or disable or knowingly causes or attempts to
cause serious physical injury to a police animal when that animal is involved
in law enforcement investigation, apprehension, tracking, or search, or the
animal is in the custody of or under the control of a Law Enforcement
Officer, Department of Corrections Officer, Municipal Police Department or
Fire Department or a rescue unit or agency.
Section 215.290. through Section 215.330. (Reserved)
A. It shall be the duty of the operator or driver of any vehicle or any other
conveyance regardless of means of propulsion, or the rider of any
animal traveling on the highways of this {MuniType} to stop on signal
of any Law Enforcement Officer or Firefighter and to obey any other
reasonable signal or direction of such Law Enforcement Officer or
Firefighter given in directing the movement of traffic on the highways
or enforcing any offense or infraction.
B. The offense of willfully failing or refusing to obey such signals or
directions or willfully resisting or opposing a Law Enforcement Officer
or a Firefighter in the proper discharge of his or her duties is an
ordinance violation.
57.Note: Under certain circumstances, this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.275
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.290
AO:162
ARTICLE IV
Offenses Concerning Public Safety
Section 215.340. Abandonment of Airtight or Semi-Airtight
Containers.
Section 215.350. Littering.
A person commits the offense of littering if he or she places, deposits,
or causes to be placed or deposited, any glass, glass bottles, wire, nails,
tacks, hedge, cans, garbage, trash, refuse, or rubbish of any kind, nature
or description on the right-of-way of any public road or State highway or
on or in any of the waters in this City or on the banks of any stream, or
on any land or water owned, operated or leased by the State, any board,
department, agency or commission thereof or on any land or water owned,
operated or leased by the Federal Government or the City, or on any private
real property owned by another without the owner's consent.
Section 215.360. Littering Via Carcasses.
A. A person commits the offense of abandonment of an airtight or semiairtight
container if he or she knowingly abandons, discards, or permits
to remain on premises under his or her control, in a place accessible to
children, any abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or other
airtight or semi-airtight container which has a capacity of one and onehalf
(1 1/2) cubic feet or more and an opening of fifty (50) square inches
or more and which has a door or lid equipped with hinge, latch or other
fastening device capable of securing such door or lid, without rendering
such equipment harmless to human life by removing such hinges,
latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined
therein.
B. Subsection (A) of this Section does not apply to an icebox, refrigerator
or other airtight or semi-airtight container located in that part of a
building occupied by a dealer, warehouse operator or repair person.
C. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue under
Subsection (B) of this Section.
D. The offense of abandonment of an airtight or semi-airtight container is
an ordinance violation.
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful disposition of a dead animal if
he or she knowingly places or causes to be placed the carcass or offal of
any dead animal:
1. Into any well, spring, brook, branch, creek, pond, or lake; or
2. On any public road or highway, river, stream, or watercourse or
upon premises not his or her own for the purpose of annoying
another or others.
Section
215.340
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.365
AO:163
Section 215.365. Tampering With a Water Supply.
Section 215.370. Open and Abandoned Excavations.58 [R.O. 2009
§13-179; Code 1969 §25-28]
Open and abandoned excavations upon property lying within the City are
deemed to be attractive and dangerous nuisances to children and to be,
in other respects, a menace to the public health and safety. Therefore, it
shall be unlawful for any owner or lessee of such property to cause an
excavation to be made thereon in connection with any lawful construction
project and thereafter to abandon such project without completely filling
or completely covering the excavations thus made. For the purpose of
this Section a project and excavation shall be deemed "abandoned" if no
work is performed upon or about such project for seven (7) consecutive
days. Whenever it shall appear that the project, in connection with which
an excavation was either wholly or partially made, has been abandoned
and that such excavation has not been completely filled or completely
covered, the Building Official shall cause a written notice to be served upon
the owner or lessee of such property, either personally or by registered
mail, calling attention to the existence of such excavation, the apparent
abandonment of the project in connection with which the same was made
and directing that the excavation be completely filled or completely covered
within a period of ninety (90) days from the date of such notice. During
such time as an excavation is not abandoned and while work about such
excavation is not being performed, the perimeter of such excavation shall
be adequately marked, barricaded or roped off so as to identify the location
thereof.
Section 215.380. Hunting Within City. [R.O. 2009 §13-180; Code
1969 §25-21]
It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt birds or small animals with dogs,
guns, stones or other kinds of missiles or weapons within this City.
A. A person commits the offense of tampering with a water supply if he or
she purposely:
1. Poisons, defiles or in any way corrupts the water of a well, spring,
brook or reservoir used for domestic or municipal purposes; or
2. Diverts, dams up and holds back from its natural course and flow
any spring, brook or other water supply for domestic or municipal
purposes, after said water supply shall have once been taken for
use by any person or persons, corporation, town or city for his/her,
their or its use.
B. The offense of tampering with a water supply is an ordinance violation.
58.Cross References — As to excavations generally, §§505.490 et seq.
Section
215.365
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.390
AO:164
Section 215.390. Storing Junk on Public Property. [R.O. 2009
§13-203; Code 1969 §30-5]
It shall be unlawful to store or leave standing or placed upon any public
right-of-way or other public property within this City any discarded
machine, apparatus or vehicle or any junk, refuse, waste or equipment of
any kind for the purpose of storing, selling or maintaining the same during
periods of non-use.
Section 215.400. Obstructing Flow of Water. [R.O. 2009 §13-204;
Code 1969 §25-15]
No person shall obstruct the passage of any water or suffer the same to be
done by any other person under his/her control, so as to cause water or any
other fluid matter to flow upon the premises of another or upon any street,
alley, square or other public property of any description and shall fail to
remove such obstruction within five (5) hours after being instructed so to
do by the Chief of Police, other Police Officer or any member of the Board
of Aldermen.
Section 215.410. Reports of Exposure, Etc., to Hazardous
Substances. [R.O. 2009 §13-207]
Section 215.420. Sale, Discharge and Use of Fireworks and
Pyrotechnic Displays. [R.O. 2009 §13-208; Ord. No. 3039 §1,
11-6-1989; Ord. No. 3592 §1, 3-16-1998]
A. In this Section "hazardous waste" or "hazardous substance" means any
substance or waste defined as such by Federal or State Statute or by
rule or regulation of the Federal or State Governments.
B. The owner or operator of any premises upon which any incident
involving the exposure of human beings to hazardous wastes or
hazardous substances or the introduction into the environment of
hazardous wastes or hazardous substances shall report same to the
Chief of the Fire Department. Such reports shall be made within
twenty-four (24) hours of the incident.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person within this City to sell, offer for sale,
expose for sale, use or discharge any firecrackers, bottle rockets,
Roman candles or other fireworks of like construction or any other
fireworks containing any explosives of like construction or any
fireworks containing any explosives or flammable compounds, except
displays authorized by special use permit. However, "fireworks" does
not include auto flares, sparklers, fountains, paper caps containing less
than an average of one-quarter (¼) of a grain of explosive content per
cap or devices for use of such caps, the sale and use of which shall be
permitted at all times.
B. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult person
having care and custody of a minor under the age of seventeen (17)
Section
215.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.420
AO:165
Section 215.430. through Section 215.470. (Reserved)
years to knowingly permit such minor to violate the provisions of this
Section or, after becoming aware that such minor is violating the
provisions of this Section or intending to violate the provisions of this
Section, to fail to terminate or prevent such violation.
Section
215.420
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.430
AO:166
ARTICLE V
Offenses Concerning Public Peace
Section 215.480. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms mean:
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any place which at the time of the offense is not
open to the public. It includes property which is owned publicly or privately.
PROPERTY OF ANOTHER — Any property in which the person does not
have a possessory interest.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place which at the time of the offense is open to the
public. It includes property which is owned publicly or privately.
Section 215.490. Peace Disturbance.
Section 215.500. Private Peace Disturbance.
A. A person commits the offense of peace disturbance if he or she:
1. Unreasonably and knowingly disturbs or alarms another person or
persons by:
a. Loud noise; or
b. Offensive language addressed in a face-to-face manner to a
specific individual and uttered under circumstances which are
likely to produce an immediate violent response from a
reasonable recipient; or
c. Threatening to commit a felonious act against any person
under circumstances which are likely to cause a reasonable
person to fear that such threat may be carried out; or
d. Fighting; or
e. Creating a noxious and offensive odor.
2. Is in a public place or on private property of another without
consent and purposely causes inconvenience to another person or
persons by unreasonably and physically obstructing:
a. Vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or
b. The free ingress or egress to or from a public or private place.
A. A person commits the offense of private peace disturbance if he/she is
on private property and unreasonably and purposely causes alarm to
another person or persons on the same premises by:
1. Threatening to commit an offense against any person; or
2. Fighting.
Section
215.480
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.500
AO:167
Section 215.505. Disrupting a House of Worship.59
Section 215.510. Unlawful Assembly.
A person commits the offense of unlawful assembly if he/she knowingly
assembles with six (6) or more other persons and agrees with such persons
to violate any of the criminal laws of this State or of the United States with
force or violence.
Section 215.520. Rioting.
A person commits the offense of rioting if he/she knowingly assembles with
six (6) or more other persons and agrees with such persons to violate any of
the criminal laws of this State or of the United States with force or violence
and thereafter, while still so assembled, does violate any of said laws with
force or violence.
Section 215.530. Refusal To Disperse.
A person commits the offense of refusal to disperse if, being present at the
scene of an unlawful assembly or at the scene of a riot, he/she knowingly
fails or refuses to obey the lawful command of a Law Enforcement Officer
to depart from the scene of such unlawful assembly or riot.
Section 215.540. Obstructing Public Places.
B. For purposes of this Section, if a building or structure is divided into
separately occupied units, such units are separate premises.
A. For purposes of this Section, "house of worship" means any church,
synagogue, mosque, other building or structure, or public or private
place used for religious worship, religious instruction, or other religious
purpose.
B. A person commits the offense of disrupting a house of worship if such
person:
1. Intentionally and unreasonably disturbs, interrupts, or disquiets
any house of worship by using profane discourse, rude or indecent
behavior, or making noise either within the house of worship or so
near it as to disturb the order and solemnity of the worship
services; or
2. Intentionally injures, intimidates, or interferes with or attempts to
injure, intimidate, or interfere with any person lawfully exercising
the right of religious freedom in or outside of a house of worship or
seeking access to a house of worship, whether by force, threat, or
physical obstruction.
A. Definition. The following term shall be defined as follows:
59.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.500
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.540
AO:168
Section 215.550. Unlawful Funeral Protests Prohibited —
Definitions.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the general public has access and
a right of resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose,
but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the
public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store,
shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public
grounds, areas or parks.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or remain idle either alone
or in consort with others in a public place in such manner so as to:
1. Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending
to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles,
traffic or pedestrians;
2. Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing
which is an obstruction or interference to the free and
uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully
conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such
public street, public highway, public sidewalk, or any other public
place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted
ingress, egress and regress, therein, thereon and thereto;
3. Obstruct the entrance to any business establishment, without so
doing for some lawful purpose, if contrary to the expressed wish of
the owner, lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of
the building or premises.
C. When any person causes or commits any of the conditions in this
Section, a Police Officer or any Law Enforcement Officer shall order
that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move
on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall
be guilty of a violation of this Section.
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful funeral protest if he or she
pickets or engages in other protest activities within three hundred
(300) feet of any residence, cemetery, funeral home, church, synagogue
or other establishment during or within one (1) hour before or one (1)
hour after the conducting of any actual funeral or burial service at that
place.
B. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms mean:
OTHER PROTEST ACTIVITIES — Any action that is disruptive or
undertaken to disrupt or disturb a funeral or burial service.
FUNERAL and BURIAL SERVICE — The ceremonies and memorial
services held in conjunction with the burial or cremation of the dead,
but this Section does not apply to processions while they are in transit
Section
215.540
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.550
AO:169
Section 215.560. through Section 215.590. (Reserved)
beyond any three-hundred-foot zone that is established under
Subsection (A) above.
C. The offense of unlawful funeral protest shall be an ordinance violation.
Section
215.550
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.560
AO:170
ARTICLE VI
Offenses Concerning Weapons And Firearms
Section 215.600. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings set
out herein:
ANTIQUE, CURIO OR RELIC FIREARM — Any firearm so defined by the
National Gun Control Act, 18 U.S.C. Title 26, §5845, and the United States
Treasury/Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, 27 CFR 178.11:
BLACKJACK — Any instrument that is designed or adapted for the purpose
of stunning or inflicting physical injury by striking a person, and which is
readily capable of lethal use.
BLASTING AGENT — Any material or mixture, consisting of fuel and
oxidizer that is intended for blasting, but not otherwise defined as an
explosive under this Section, provided that the finished product, as mixed
for use of shipment, cannot be detonated by means of a numbered 8 test
blasting cap when unconfined.
CONCEALABLE FIREARM — Any firearm with a barrel less than sixteen
(16) inches in length, measured from the face of the bolt or standing breech.
DEFACE — To alter or destroy the manufacturer's or importer's serial
number or any other distinguishing number or identification mark.
DETONATOR — Any device containing a detonating charge that is used for
initiating detonation in an explosive, including but not limited to, electric
blasting caps of instantaneous and delay types, non-electric blasting caps
for use with safety fuse or shock tube and detonating cord delay connectors.
EXPLOSIVE WEAPON — Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas bomb
or similar device designed or adapted for the purpose of inflicting death,
serious physical injury or substantial property damage; or any device
designed or adapted for delivering or shooting such a weapon. For the
purposes of this Article, the term "explosive" shall mean any chemical
compound mixture or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to
function by explosion, including but not limited to, dynamite and other high
explosives, pellet powder, initiating explosives, detonators, safety fuses,
squibs, detonating cords, igniter cords, and igniters or blasting agents.
"Antique firearm" is any firearm not designed or redesigned for using
rim fire or conventional center fire ignition with fixed ammunition
and manufactured in or before 1898, said ammunition not being
manufactured any longer; this includes any matchlock, wheel lock,
flintlock, percussion cap or similar type ignition system, or replica
thereof;
1.
Curio or relic firearm is any firearm deriving value as a collectible
weapon due to its unique design, ignition system, operation or at least
fifty (50) years old, associated with a historical event, renown
personage or major war.
2.
Section
215.600
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.600
AO:171
FIREARM — Any weapon that is designed or adapted to expel a projectile
by the action of an explosive.
FIREARM SILENCER — Any instrument, attachment or appliance that is
designed or adapted to muffle the noise made by the firing of any firearm.
GAS GUN — Any gas ejection device, weapon, cartridge, container or
contrivance, other than a gas bomb, that is designed or adapted for the
purpose of ejecting any poison gas that will cause death or serious physical
injury, but not any device that ejects a repellent or temporary incapacitating
substance.
INTOXICATED — Substantially impaired mental or physical capacity
resulting from introduction of any substance into the body.
KNIFE — Any dagger, dirk, stiletto, or bladed hand instrument that is
readily capable of inflicting serious physical injury or death by cutting or
stabbing a person. For purposes of this Article, "knife" does not include any
ordinary pocketknife with no blade more than four (4) inches in length.
KNUCKLES — Any instrument that consists of finger rings or guards made
of a hard substance that is designed or adapted for the purpose of inflicting
serious physical injury or death by striking a person with a fist enclosed in
the knuckles.
MACHINE GUN — Any firearm that is capable of firing more than one (1)
shot automatically, without manual reloading, by a single function of the
trigger.
PROJECTILE WEAPON — Any bow, crossbow, pellet gun, slingshot or other
weapon that is not a firearm, which is capable of expelling a projectile that
could inflict serious physical injury or death by striking or piercing a person.
RIFLE — Any firearm designed or adapted to be fired from the shoulder
and to use the energy of the explosive in a fixed metallic cartridge to fire a
projectile through a rifled bore by a single function of the trigger.
SHORT BARREL — A barrel length of less than sixteen (16) inches for a rifle
and eighteen (18) inches for a shotgun, both measured from the face of the
bolt or standing breech, or an overall rifle or shotgun length of less than
twenty-six (26) inches.
SHOTGUN — Any firearm designed or adapted to be fired from the shoulder
and to use the energy of the explosive in a fixed shotgun shell to fire a
number of shot or a single projectile through a smooth bore barrel by a
single function of the trigger.
SPRING GUN — Any fused, timed or non-manually controlled trap or device
designed or adapted to set off an explosion for the purpose of inflicting
serious physical injury or death.
SWITCHBLADE KNIFE — Any knife which has a blade that folds or closes
into the handle or sheath, and
That opens automatically by pressure applied to a button or other
device located on the handle; or
1.
Section
215.600
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.600
AO:172
Section 215.610. Unlawful Use Of Weapons — Exceptions.60
That opens or releases from the handle or sheath by the force of gravity
or by the application of centrifugal force.
2.
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons, except as
otherwise provided by Sections 571.101 to 571.121, RSMo., if he or she
knowingly:
1. Carries concealed upon or about his or her person a knife, a
firearm, a blackjack or any other weapon readily capable of lethal
use into any area where firearms are restricted under Section
571.107, RSMo; or
2. Sets a spring gun; or
3. Discharges or shoots a firearm into a dwelling house, a railroad
train, boat, aircraft, or motor vehicle as defined in Section 302.010,
RSMo., or any building or structure used for the assembling of
people; or
4. Exhibits, in the presence of one (1) or more persons, any weapon
readily capable of lethal use in an angry or threatening manner; or
5. Has a firearm or projectile weapon readily capable of lethal use on
his or her person, while he or she is intoxicated, and handles or
otherwise uses such firearm or projectile weapon in either a
negligent or unlawful manner or discharges such firearm or
projectile weapon unless acting in self-defense; or
6. Discharges a firearm within one hundred (100) yards of any
occupied schoolhouse, courthouse, or church building; or
7. Discharges or shoots a firearm at a mark, at any object, or at
random, on, along or across a public highway or discharges or
shoots a firearm into any outbuilding; or
8. Carries a firearm or any other weapon readily capable of lethal use
into any church or place where people have assembled for worship,
or into any election precinct on any election day, or into any
building owned or occupied by any agency of the Federal
Government, State Government, or political subdivision thereof; or
9. Discharges or shoots a firearm at or from a motor vehicle, as
defined in Section 301.010, RSMo., discharges or shoots a firearm
at any person, or at any other motor vehicle, or at any building or
habitable structure, unless the person was lawfully acting in selfdefense;
or
10. Carries a firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, or any other
weapon readily capable of lethal use into any school, onto any
60.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.600
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.610
AO:173
school bus, or onto the premises of any function or activity
sponsored or sanctioned by school officials or the district school
board; or
11. Possesses a firearm while also knowingly in possession of a
controlled substance that is sufficient for a felony violation of
Section 579.015, RSMo.
B. Subdivisions (1), (8), and (10) of Subsection (A) of this Section shall not
apply to the persons described in this Subsection, regardless of
whether such uses are reasonably associated with or are necessary to
the fulfillment of such person's official duties except as otherwise
provided in this Subsection. Subdivisions (3), (4), (6), (7), and (9) of
Subsection (A) of this Section shall not apply to or affect any of the
following persons, when such uses are reasonably associated with or
are necessary to the fulfillment of such person's official duties, except
as otherwise provided in this Subsection:
1. All State, County and Municipal Peace Officers who have completed
the training required by the Police Officer Standards and Training
Commission pursuant to Sections 590.030 to 590.050, RSMo., and
who possess the duty and power of arrest for violation of the
general criminal laws of the State or for violation of ordinances of
Counties or Municipalities of the State, whether such officers are
on or off duty, and whether such Officers are within or outside of
the law enforcement agency's jurisdiction, or all qualified retired
Peace Officers, as defined in Subsection (H) of this Section, and
who carry the identification defined in Subsection (I) of this
Section, or any person summoned by such Officers to assist in
making arrests or preserving the peace while actually engaged in
assisting such officer;
2. Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries,
jails and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or
convicted of crime;
3. Members of the Armed Forces or National Guard while performing
their official duty;
4. Those persons vested by Article V, Section 1, of the Constitution of
Missouri with the judicial power of the State and those persons
vested by Article III of the Constitution of the United States with
the judicial power of the United States, the members of the Federal
judiciary;
5. Any person whose bona fide duty is to execute process, civil or
criminal;
6. Any Federal Probation Officer or Federal Flight Deck Officer as
defined under the Federal Flight Deck Officer Program, 49 U.S.C.
§ 44921, regardless of whether such officers are on duty, or within
the law enforcement agency's jurisdiction;
Section
215.610
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.610
AO:174
7. Any State Probation or Parole Officer, including supervisors and
members of the Board of Probation and Parole;
8. Any corporate security advisor meeting the definition and fulfilling
the requirements of the regulations established by the Department
of Public Safety under Section 590.750, RSMo.;
9. Any coroner, deputy coroner, medical examiner, or assistant
medical examiner;
10. Any municipal or county prosecuting attorney or assistant
prosecuting attorney, circuit attorney or assistant circuit attorney,
municipal, associate or circuit judge, or any person appointed by a
court to be a special prosecutor who has completed the firearms
safety training course required under Subsection 2 of Section
571.111, RSMo.;
11. Any member of a Fire Department or Fire Protection District who is
employed on a full-time basis as a fire investigator and who has a
valid concealed carry endorsement issued prior to August 28, 2013,
or a valid concealed carry permit under Section 571.111, RSMo.,
when such uses are reasonably associated with or are necessary to
the fulfillment of such person's official duties; and
12. Upon the written approval of the Governing Body of a Fire
Department or Fire Protection District, any paid Fire Department
or Fire Protection District member who is employed on a full-time
basis and who has a valid concealed carry endorsement issued
prior to August 28, 2013, or a valid concealed carry permit, when
such uses are reasonably associated with or are necessary to the
fulfillment of such person's official duties.
C. Subdivisions (1), (5), (8), and (10) of Subsection (A) of this Section do
not apply when the actor is transporting such weapons in a non
functioning state or in an unloaded state when ammunition is not
readily accessible or when such weapons are not readily accessible.
Subdivision (1) of Subsection (A) of this Section does not apply to any
person nineteen (19) years of age or older or eighteen (18) years of age
or older and a member of the United States Armed Forces, or honorably
discharged from the United States Armed Forces, transporting a
concealable firearm in the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle,
so long as such concealable firearm is otherwise lawfully possessed, nor
when the actor is also in possession of an exposed firearm or projectile
weapon for the lawful pursuit of game, or is in his or her dwelling unit
or upon premises over which the actor has possession, authority or
control, or is traveling in a continuous journey peaceably through this
State. Subdivision (10) of Subsection (A) of this Section does not apply
if the firearm is otherwise lawfully possessed by a person while
traversing school premises for the purposes of transporting a student to
or from school, or possessed by an adult for the purposes of facilitation
of a school-sanctioned firearm-related event or club event.
Section
215.610
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.610
AO:175
D. Subdivisions (1), (8), and (10) of Subsection (A) of this Section shall not
apply to any person who has a valid concealed carry permit issued
pursuant to Sections 571.101 to 571.121, RSMo., a valid concealed
carry endorsement issued before August 28, 2013, or a valid permit or
endorsement to carry concealed firearms issued by another state or
political subdivision of another state.
E. Subdivisions (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9), and (10) of Subsection (A) of
this Section shall not apply to persons who are engaged in a lawful act
of defense pursuant to Section 563.031, RSMo.
F. Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, the State
shall not prohibit any State employee from having a firearm in the
employee's vehicle on the State's property provided that the vehicle is
locked and the firearm is not visible. This Subsection shall only apply to
the State as an employer when the State employee's vehicle is on
property owned or leased by the State and the State employee is
conducting activities within the scope of his or her employment. For the
purposes of this Subsection, "State employee" means an employee of
the executive, legislative, or judicial branch of the government of the
State of Missouri.
G. Nothing in this Section shall make it unlawful for a student to actually
participate in school-sanctioned gun safety courses, student military or
ROTC courses, or other school-sponsored or club-sponsored firearmrelated
events, provided the student does not carry a firearm or other
weapon readily capable of lethal use into any school, onto any school
bus, or onto the premises of any other function or activity sponsored or
sanctioned by school officials or the district school board.
H. As used in this Section, "qualified retired Peace Officer" means an
individual who:
1. Retired in good standing from service with a public agency as a
Peace Officer, other than for reasons of mental instability;
2. Before such retirement, was authorized by law to engage in or
supervise the prevention, detection, investigation, or prosecution
of, or the incarceration of any person for, any violation of law, and
had Statutory powers of arrest;
3. Before such retirement, was regularly employed as a Peace Officer
for an aggregate of fifteen (15) years or more, or retired from
service with such agency, after completing any applicable
probationary period of such service, due to a service-connected
disability, as determined by such agency;
4. Has a non-forfeitable right to benefits under the retirement plan of
the agency if such a plan is available;
Section
215.610
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.610
AO:176
Section 215.620. Possession, Manufacture, Transport, Repair, Sale
of Certain Weapons.61
5. During the most recent twelve-month period, has met, at the
expense of the individual, the standards for training and
qualification for active Peace Officers to carry firearms;
6. Is not under the influence of alcohol or another intoxicating or
hallucinatory drug or substance; and
7. Is not prohibited by Federal law from receiving a firearm.
I. The identification required by Subdivision (1) of Subsection (B) of this
Section is:
1. A photographic identification issued by the agency from which the
individual retired from service as a Peace Officer that indicates that
the individual has, not less recently than one (1) year before the
date the individual is carrying the concealed firearm, been tested
or otherwise found by the agency to meet the standards established
by the agency for training and qualification for active peace officers
to carry a firearm of the same type as the concealed firearm; or
2. A photographic identification issued by the agency from which the
individual retired from service as a Peace Officer; and
3. A certification issued by the State in which the individual resides
that indicates that the individual has, not less recently than one (1)
year before the date the individual is carrying the concealed
firearm, been tested or otherwise found by the State to meet the
standards established by the State for training and qualification for
active Peace Officers to carry a firearm of the same type as the
concealed firearm.
A. A person commits an offense if such person knowingly possesses,
manufactures, transports, repairs, or sells:
1. An explosive weapon;
2. An explosive, incendiary or poison substance or material with the
purpose to possess, manufacture or sell an explosive weapon;
3. A gas gun;
4. A bullet or projectile which explodes or detonates upon impact
because of an independent explosive charge after having been shot
from a firearm;
5. Knuckles; or
6. Any of the following in violation of Federal law:
61.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.610
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.620
AO:177
Section 215.630. Defacing Firearm.
A person commits the offense of defacing a firearm if he/she knowingly
defaces any firearm.
Section 215.640. Purchase in Another State by Missouri Residents,
Permitted When.
Residents of the State of Missouri may purchase firearms in any State,
provided that such residents conform to the applicable provisions of the
Federal Gun Control Act of 1968, 18 U.S.C. §921 et seq., and regulations
thereunder, and provided further that such residents conform to the
provisions of law applicable to such purchase in the State of Missouri and
in the State in which the purchase is made.
Section 215.650. Purchase in Missouri by Non-Resident, Permitted
When.
Residents of any State may purchase firearms in the State of Missouri,
provided that such residents conform to the applicable provisions of the
Federal Gun Control Act of 1968, 18 U.S.C. §921 et seq., and regulations
thereunder, and provided further that such residents conform to the
a. A machine gun;
b. A short-barreled rifle or shotgun;
c. A firearm silencer; or
d. A switchblade knife.
B. A person does not commit an offense pursuant to this Section if his/her
conduct involved any of the items in Subsections (A)(1) through (5), the
item was possessed in conformity with any applicable Federal law, and
the conduct:
1. Was incident to the performance of official duty by the Armed
Forces, National Guard, a governmental law enforcement agency
or a penal institution; or
2. Was incident to engaging in a lawful commercial or business
transaction with an organization enumerated in Subparagraph (1)
of this Subsection; or
3. Was incident to using an explosive weapon in a manner reasonably
related to a lawful industrial or commercial enterprise; or
4. Was incident to displaying the weapon in a public museum or
exhibition; or
5. Was incident to using the weapon in a manner reasonably related to
a lawful dramatic performance.
Section
215.620
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.650
AO:178
provisions of law applicable to such purchase in the State of Missouri and
in the State in which such persons reside.
Section 215.660. Unlawful Transfer of Weapons.62
Section 215.670. Carrying Concealed Firearms Prohibited —
Penalty for Violation.
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful transfer of weapons if he/she:
1. Knowingly sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers a blackjack to
a person less than eighteen (18) years old without the consent of
the child's custodial parent or guardian or recklessly, as defined in
Section 562.016, RSMo., sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers
any firearm to a person less than eighteen (18) years old without
the consent of the child's custodial parent or guardian; provided
that this does not prohibit the delivery of such weapons to any
Peace Officer or member of the Armed Forces or National Guard
while performing his/her official duty; or
2. Recklessly, as defined in Section 562.016, RSMo., sells, leases,
loans, gives away or delivers a firearm or ammunition for a firearm
to a person who is intoxicated.
A. It shall be a violation of this Section, punishable as hereinafter
provided, for any person to carry any concealed firearm into:
1. Any Police, Sheriff or Highway Patrol office or station without the
consent of the Chief Law Enforcement Officer in charge of that
office or station. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the
premises of the office or station shall not be a criminal offense so
long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished
while the vehicle is on the premises;
2. Within twenty-five (25) feet of any polling place on any election day.
Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of the polling
place shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not
removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the
premises;
3. The facility of any adult or juvenile detention or correctional
institution, prison or jail. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the
premises of any adult, juvenile detention or correctional institution,
prison or jail shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is
not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on
the premises;
4. Any courthouse solely occupied by the Circuit, Appellate or
Supreme Court, or any courtrooms, administrative offices, libraries
or other rooms of any such court whether or not such court solely
62.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.650
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.670
AO:179
occupies the building in question. This Subsection shall also
include, but not be limited to, any juvenile, family, drug or other
court offices, any room or office wherein any of the courts or
offices listed in this Subsection are temporarily conducting any
business within the jurisdiction of such courts or offices, and such
other locations in such manner as may be specified by Supreme
Court Rule pursuant to Subdivision (6) of Subsection (1) of Section
571.107, RSMo. Nothing in this Subsection shall preclude those
persons listed in Subsection (B)(1) of Section 215.610 while within
their jurisdiction and on duty, those persons listed in Subsections
(B)(2), (4) and (10) of Section 215.610, or such other persons who
serve in a law enforcement capacity for a court as may be specified
by Supreme Court Rule pursuant to Subdivision (6) of Subsection
(1) of Section 571.107, RSMo., from carrying a concealed firearm
within any of the areas described in this Subsection. Possession of a
firearm in a vehicle on the premises of any of the areas listed in this
Subsection shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is
not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on
the premises;
5. Any meeting of the Brentwood {GovBody}, except that nothing in
this Subsection shall preclude a member of the {GovBody} holding
a valid concealed carry permit or endorsement from carrying a
concealed firearm at a meeting of the {GovBody} of which he or
she is a member. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the
premises shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not
removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the
premises;
6. Any building owned, leased or controlled by the City of Brentwood
identified by signs posted at the entrance to the building. This
Subsection shall not apply to any building used for public housing
by private persons, highways or rest areas, firing ranges, and
private dwellings owned, leased, or controlled by the City of
Brentwood. Persons violating this Subsection may be denied
entrance to the building, ordered to leave the building and, if
employees of the City, be subjected to disciplinary measures for
violation;
7. Any establishment licensed to dispense intoxicating liquor for
consumption on the premises, which portion is primarily devoted to
that purpose, without the consent of the owner or manager. The
provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to the licensee of said
establishment. The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to
any bona fide restaurant open to the general public having dining
facilities for not less than fifty (50) persons and that receives at
least fifty-one percent (51%) of its gross annual income from the
dining facilities by the sale of food. This Subsection does not
prohibit the possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of
the establishment and shall not be a criminal offense so long as the
Section
215.670
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.670
AO:180
firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the
vehicle is on the premises. Nothing in this Subsection authorizes
any individual who has been issued a concealed carry permit or
endorsement to possess any firearm while intoxicated;
8. Any area of an airport to which access is controlled by the
inspection of persons and property. Possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of the airport shall not be a violation so
long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished
while the vehicle is on the premises;
9. Any place where the carrying of a firearm is prohibited by Federal
law;
10. Any higher education institution or elementary or secondary school
facility without the consent of the Governing Body of the higher
education institution or a school official or the district school board,
unless the person with the concealed carry endorsement or permit
is a teacher or administrator of an elementary or secondary school
who has been designated by his or her school district as a school
protection officer and is carrying a firearm in a school within that
district, in which case no consent is required. Possession of a
firearm in a vehicle on the premises of any higher education
institution or elementary or secondary school facility shall not be a
criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the
vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises;
11. Any portion of a building used as a child care facility without the
consent of the manager. Nothing in this Subsection shall prevent
the operator of a child care facility in a family home from owning or
possessing a firearm or a concealed carry permit or endorsement;
12. Any riverboat gambling operation accessible by the public without
the consent of the owner or manager pursuant to rules
promulgated by the Gaming Commission. Possession of a firearm in
a vehicle on the premises of a riverboat gambling operation shall
not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from
the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises;
13. Any gated area of an amusement park. Possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of the amusement park shall not be a
criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the
vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises;
14. Any church or other place of religious worship without the consent
of the minister or person or persons representing the religious
organization that exercises control over the place of religious
worship. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises shall
not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from
the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises;
Section
215.670
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.670
AO:181
15. Any private property whose owner has posted the premises as
being off-limits to concealed firearms by means of one (1) or more
signs displayed in a conspicuous place of a minimum size of eleven
(11) inches by fourteen (14) inches with the writing thereon in
letters of not less than one (1) inch. The owner, business or
commercial lessee, manager of a private business enterprise, or
any other organization, entity or person may prohibit persons
holding a concealed carry permit or endorsement from carrying
concealed firearms on the premises and may prohibit employees,
not authorized by the employer, holding a concealed carry permit
or endorsement from carrying concealed firearms on the property
of the employer. If the building or the premises are open to the
public, the employer of the business enterprise shall post signs on
or about the premises if carrying a concealed firearm is prohibited.
Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises shall not be a
criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the
vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. An
employer may prohibit employees or other persons holding a
concealed carry permit or endorsement from carrying a concealed
firearm in vehicles owned by the employer;
16. Any sports arena or stadium with a seating capacity of five
thousand (5,000) or more. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on
the premises shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is
not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on
the premises;
17. Any hospital accessible by the public. Possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of a hospital shall not be a criminal offense
so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or
brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of Subsection (A) of this
Section shall be punished as follows:
1. If the violator holds a concealed carry permit or endorsement
issued pursuant to State law, the violator may be subject to denial
to the premises or removal from the premises. If such person
refuses to leave the premises and a Peace Officer is summoned,
such person may be issued a citation for an amount not to exceed
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense. If a second
citation for a similar violation occurs within a six-month period,
such person shall be fined an amount not to exceed two hundred
dollars ($200.00). If a third citation for a similar violation is issued
within one (1) year of the first citation, such person shall be fined
an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Upon
conviction of charges arising from a citation issued pursuant to this
Section, the court shall notify the Sheriff of the County which
issued the concealed carry permit, or, if the person is a holder of a
concealed carry endorsement issued prior to August 28, 2013, the
court shall notify the Sheriff of the County which issued the
Section
215.670
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.670
AO:182
Section 215.675. Open Display of Firearm Permitted, When.
Any person who has a valid concealed carry endorsement issued prior to
August 28, 2013, or a valid concealed carry permit, and who is lawfully
carrying a firearm in a concealed manner, may briefly and openly display
the firearm to the ordinary sight of another person, unless the firearm is
intentionally displayed in an angry or threatening manner, not in necessary
self-defense.
Section 215.680. Discharging Air Rifle, Bow and Arrow, Etc. [R.O.
2009 §13-177; Code 1969 §25-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge in the City any air rifle, air
gun or pistol, spring gun, gun or rifle containing a gas-propelled cartridge,
any bow or arrow or any other similar weapon, whether such be classed as a
toy or not, which impels with force a metal pellet of any kind or propels any
metal or sharp pointed arrow; provided that the provisions of this Section
shall not apply to persons authorized by this Article to discharge firearms in
the City or to persons discharging firearms or bows or arrows in a target or
archery range authorized by the City.
Section 215.690. Possession by or Sale of Air Gun to Persons Under
Eighteen — Responsibility of Parent or Guardian. [R.O. 2009
§13-178; Code 1969 §25-2]
certificate of qualification for a concealed carry permit or
endorsement and the Department of Revenue.
2. If the violator does not hold a current valid concealed carry permit
or endorsement issued pursuant to State law, upon conviction of a
charge of violating this Section the defendant shall be punished as
provided in Section 100.080 of this Code of Ordinances.
3. Employees of the City of Brentwood may, in addition to any other
punishment hereby, be subject to disciplinary action.
C. It shall be a violation of this Section, punishable by a citation for an
amount not to exceed thirty-five dollars ($35.00), for any person issued
a concealed carry permit or endorsement pursuant to State law to fail
to carry the concealed carry permit or endorsement at all times the
person is carrying a concealed firearm, or to fail to display the
concealed carry permit or endorsement upon the request of any Peace
Officer.
A. The term "air gun", as used in this Section, shall mean any small gun or
rifle capable of discharging a leaden or metallic bullet or any pellet by
means of a spring or air pressure.
B. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years
to use or have in his/her possession an air gun. Any Police Officer shall
have authority and it shall be his/her duty to confiscate any air gun
Section
215.670
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.690
AO:183
Section 215.700. "Turkey Shoots" and Other Charitable Events.
The discharge of firearms in connection with any turkey shoots or other
charitable event may be authorized by the Board of Aldermen.
Section 215.710. through Section 215.740. (Reserved)
found in the possession of any minor under the age of eighteen (18)
years.
C. It shall be unlawful for the parent or guardian of any such minor in his/
her charge or custody to knowingly permit any such minor to use or
have in his/her possession any air gun.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away or
distribute any air gun to any minor under the age of eighteen (18)
years.
Section
215.690
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.710
AO:184
ARTICLE VII
Offenses Concerning Property
Section
215.750
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.710
AO:185

DIVISION 1
Generally
Section 215.750. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms mean:
ENTER UNLAWFULLY or REMAIN UNLAWFULLY — A person enters or
remains in or upon premises when he or she is not licensed or privileged
to do so. A person who, regardless of his or her purpose, enters or remains
in or upon premises which are at the time open to the public does so with
license and privilege unless he or she defies a lawful order not to enter
or remain, personally communicated to him or her by the owner of such
premises or by other authorized person. A license or privilege to enter or
remain in a building which is only partly open to the public is not a license
or privilege to enter or remain in that part of the building which is not open
to the public.
TO TAMPER — To interfere with something improperly, to meddle with it,
displace it, make unwarranted alterations in its existing condition, or to
deprive, temporarily, the owner or possessor of that thing.
UTILITY — An enterprise which provides gas, electric, steam, water, sewage
disposal, or communication, video, internet, or voice over internet protocol
services, and any common carrier. It may be either publicly or privately
owned or operated.
Section 215.760. Tampering.63
A. A person commits the offense of tampering if he/she:
1. Tampers with property of another for the purpose of causing
substantial inconvenience to that person or to another; or
2. Unlawfully rides in or upon another's automobile, airplane,
motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle; or
3. Tampers or makes connection with property of a utility; or
4. Tampers with, or causes to be tampered with, any meter or other
property of an electric, gas, steam or water utility, the effect of
which tampering is either:
a. To prevent the proper measuring of electric, gas, steam or
water service; or
b. To permit the diversion of any electric, gas, steam or water
service.
B. In any prosecution under Subsection (A)(4), proof that a meter or any
other property of a utility has been tampered with, and the person or
persons accused received the use or direct benefit of the electric, gas,
63.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.750
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.760
AO:187
Section 215.770. Property Damage.64
Section 215.780. Claim of Right.
Section 215.790. Trespass in the First Degree.
Section 215.800. Trespass in the Second Degree.
steam or water service with one (1) or more of the effects described in
Subsection (A)(4), shall be sufficient to support an inference which the
trial court may submit to the trier of fact from which the trier of fact
may conclude that there has been a violation of such Subsection by the
person or persons who use or receive the direct benefit of the electric,
gas, steam or water service.
A. A person commits the offense of property damage if he/she:
1. Knowingly damages property of another; or
2. Damages property for the purpose of defrauding an insurer.
A. A person does not commit an offense by damaging, tampering with,
operating, riding in or upon or making connection with property of
another if he/she does so under a claim of right and has reasonable
grounds to believe he/she has such a right.
B. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of claim of
right.
C. No person who, as a tenant, willfully or wantonly destroys, defaces,
damages, impairs or removes any part of a leased structure or dwelling
unit, or the facilities, equipment or appurtenances thereof, may inject
the issue of claim of right.
A. A person commits the offense of trespass in the first degree if he/she
knowingly enters unlawfully or knowingly remains unlawfully in a
building or inhabitable structure or upon real property.
B. A person does not commit the offense of trespass by entering or
remaining upon real property unless the real property is fenced or
otherwise enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders or as to
which notice against trespass is given by:
1. Actual communication to the actor; or
2. Posting in a manner reasonably likely to come to the attention of
intruders.
A. A person commits trespass in the second degree if he/she enters
unlawfully upon real property of another. This is an offense of absolute
liability.
64.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.760
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.800
AO:188
Section 215.810. Trespass of a School Bus.
Section 215.820. Reckless Burning or Exploding.
A person commits the offense of reckless burning or exploding if he/she
recklessly starts a fire or causes an explosion and thereby damages or
destroys the property of another.
Section 215.830. Negligent Burning or Exploding.
Section 215.840. Stealing.65
B. Trespass in the second degree is an infraction.
A. A person commits the offense of trespass of a school bus if he or she
knowingly and unlawfully enters any part of or unlawfully operates any
school bus.
B. For the purposes of this Section, the terms "unlawfully enters" and
"unlawfully operates" refer to any entry or operation of a school bus
which is not:
1. Approved of and established in a school district's written policy on
access to school buses; or
2. Authorized by specific written approval of the school board.
C. In order to preserve the public order, any district which adopts the
policies described in Subsection (B) of this Section shall establish and
enforce a student behavior policy for students on school buses.
A. A person commits the offense of negligent burning or exploding if he/
she with criminal negligence causes damage to property or to the
woodlands, cropland, grassland, prairie, or marsh of another by:
1. Starting a fire or causing an explosion; or
2. Allowing a fire burning on lands in his or her possession or control
onto the property of another.
A. A person commits the offense of stealing if he or she:
1. Appropriates property or services of another with the purpose to
deprive him or her thereof, either without his or her consent or by
means of deceit or coercion;
2. Attempts to appropriate anhydrous ammonia or liquid nitrogen of
another with the purpose to deprive him or her thereof, either
without his or her consent or by means of deceit or coercion; or
65.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.800
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.840
AO:189
Section 215.850. Theft of Motor Fuel.
Section 215.860. (Reserved)66
Section 215.870. Financial Exploitation of an Elderly Person or
Person With a Disability — Certain Defense Prohibited.67
3. For the purpose of depriving the owner of a lawful interest therein,
receives, retains or disposes of property of another knowing that it
has been stolen, or believing that it has been stolen.
A. No person shall drive a motor vehicle so as to cause it to leave the
premises of an establishment at which motor fuel offered for retail sale
was dispensed into the fuel tank of such motor vehicle unless payment
or authorized charge for motor fuel dispensed has been made.
B. A person found guilty or pleading guilty to stealing pursuant to Section
215.840 for the theft of motor fuel as described in Subsection (A) shall
have his/her driver's license suspended by the court beginning on the
date of the court's order of conviction. The person shall submit all of
his/her operator's and chauffeur's licenses to the court upon conviction
and the court shall forward all such driver's licenses and the order of
suspension of driving privileges to the Department of Revenue for
administration of such order.
A. A person commits the offense of financial exploitation of an elderly
person or a person with a disability if such person knowingly obtains
control over the property of the elderly person or person with a
disability with the intent to permanently deprive the person of the use,
benefit or possession of his or her property thereby benefitting the
offender or detrimentally affecting the elderly person or person with a
disability by:
1. Deceit;
2. Coercion;
3. Creating or confirming another person's impression which is false
and which the offender does not believe to be true;
4. Failing to correct a false impression which the offender previously
has created or confirmed;
5. Preventing another person from acquiring information pertinent to
the disposition of the property involved;
6. Selling or otherwise transferring or encumbering property, failing
to disclose a lien, adverse claim or other legal impediment to the
66.Editor's Note: This Section previously pertained to receiving stolen property. However, the
authorizing statute, former RSMo. §570.080, was repealed without replacement by SB 491
in the 2014 Legislative Session, effective 1-1-2017.
67.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.840
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.870
AO:190
enjoyment of the property, whether such impediment is or is not
valid, or is or is not a matter of official record;
7. Promising performance which the offender does not intend to
perform or knows will not be performed. Failure to perform
standing alone is not sufficient evidence to prove that the offender
did not intend to perform; or
8. Undue influence, which means the use of influence by someone
who exercises authority over an elderly person or person with a
disability in order to take unfair advantage of that person's
vulnerable state of mind, neediness, pain, or agony. "Undue
influence" includes, but is not limited to, the improper or
fraudulent use of a power of attorney, guardianship,
conservatorship, or other fiduciary authority.
B. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit the remedies
available to the victim pursuant to any State law relating to domestic
violence.
C. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to impose criminal liability on
a person who has made a good-faith effort to assist the elderly person or
person with a disability in the management of his or her property, but
through no fault of his or her own has been unable to provide such
assistance.
D. Nothing in this Section shall limit the ability to engage in bona fide
estate planning, to transfer property and to otherwise seek to reduce
estate and inheritance taxes; provided that such actions do not
adversely impact the standard of living to which the elderly person or
person with a disability has become accustomed at the time of such
actions.
E. It shall not be a defense to financial exploitation of an elderly person or
person with a disability that the accused reasonably believed that the
victim was not an elderly person or person with a disability.
F. Medicaid Funds. It shall be unlawful in violation of this Section for any
person receiving or in the possession of funds of a Medicaid-eligible
elderly person or person with a disability residing in a facility licensed
under Chapter 198, RSMo., to fail to remit to the facility in which the
Medicaid-eligible person resides all money owing the facility resident
from any source, including, but not limited to, social security, railroad
retirement, or payments from any other source disclosed as resident
income contained in the records of the Department of Social Services,
Family Support Division, or its successor. The Department of Social
Services, Family Support Division, or its successor is authorized to
release information from its records containing the resident's income or
assets to any prosecuting or circuit attorney in the State of Missouri for
purposes of investigating or prosecuting any suspected violation of this
Section.
Section
215.870
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.870
AO:191
Section 215.880. Fraudulent Use of a Credit or Debit Device.68
Section 215.890. Deceptive Business Practice.
G. The offense of financial exploitation of an elderly person or person with
a disability is an ordinance violation.
A. A person commits the offense of fraudulent use of a credit device or
debit device if he or she uses a credit device or debit device for the
purpose of obtaining services or property, knowing that:
1. The device is stolen, fictitious or forged; or
2. The device has been revoked or canceled; or
3. For any other reason his or her use of the device is unauthorized;
or
B. A person commits the offense of fraudulent use of a credit device or
debit device if he or she uses a credit device or debit device for the
purpose of paying property taxes and knowingly cancels such charges
or payment without just cause. It shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this Section if a person cancels such charges or payment
after obtaining a property tax receipt to obtain license tags from the
Missouri Department of Revenue.
A. A person commits the offense of deceptive business practice if in the
course of engaging in a business, occupation or profession, he or she
recklessly:
1. Uses or possesses for use a false weight or measure, or any other
device for falsely determining or recording any quality or quantity;
2. Sells, offers, displays for sale, or delivers less than the represented
quantity of any commodity or service;
3. Takes or attempts to take more than the represented quantity of
any commodity or service when as buyer he or she furnishes the
weight or measure;
4. Sells, offers, or exposes for sale adulterated or mislabeled
commodities;
5. Makes a false or misleading written statement for the purpose of
obtaining property or credit;
6. Promotes the sale of property or services by a false or misleading
statement in any advertisement; or
7. Advertises in any manner the sale of property or services with the
purpose not to sell or provide the property or services:
68.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.870
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.890
AO:192
Section 215.900. Alteration or Removal of Item Numbers With
Intent To Deprive Lawful Owner.69
Section 215.910. Destroying or Defacing Public Notices. [R.O. 2009
§13-46; Code 1969 §25-34]
No person shall in any manner destroy or deface any public notice which
has been posted by the City or any governmental agency.
Section 215.920. Posting Notices and Signs.70 [R.O. 2009 §13-202;
Code 1969 §25-25]
No person shall paint, post, place, hang, suspend or affix any advertisement
card, poster, sign, banner or streamer of any nature or for any purpose
or shall cause the same to be done on or to any curbstone, flagstone or
any other portion of any street or sidewalk or upon any tree or lamppost
standing or erected on any public street, alley or other public place or upon
any pole erected upon any public street, alley or other public place, which
pole is used to carry telephone wires or cables, electric light wires or other
a. At the price which he or she offered them;
b. In a quantity sufficient to meet the reasonably expected public
demand, unless the quantity is specifically stated in the
advertisement; or
c. At all.
A. A person commits the offense of alteration or removal of item numbers
if he/she with the purpose of depriving the owner of a lawful interest
therein:
1. Destroys, removes, covers, conceals, alters, defaces or causes to be
destroyed, removed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced the
manufacturer's original serial number or other distinguishing
owner-applied number or mark on any item which bears a serial
number attached by the manufacturer or distinguishing number or
mark applied by the owner of the item for any reason whatsoever;
2. Sells, offers for sale, pawns or uses as security for a loan any item
on which the manufacturer's original serial number or other
distinguishing owner-applied number or mark has been destroyed,
removed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced; or
3. Buys, receives as security for a loan or in pawn, or in any manner
receives or has in his/her possession any item on which the
manufacturer's original serial number or other distinguishing
owner-applied number or mark has been destroyed, removed,
covered, concealed, altered or defaced.
69.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
70.Cross Reference — As to signs, ch. 410.
Section
215.890
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.920
AO:193
electric conductors, or to any hydrant, bridge or other public structure
within this City; provided that nothing in this Section shall apply to any
official notice required by law or ordinance to be posted by public officers.
Section 215.930. Stealing Leased or Rented Personal Property —
Enforcement Procedure — Penalty — Venue.71
A. A person commits the offense of stealing leased or rented property if,
with the intent to deprive the owner thereof, such person:
1. Purposefully fails to return leased or rented personal property to
the place and within the time specified in an agreement in writing
providing for the leasing or renting of such personal property;
2. Conceals or aids or abets the concealment of the property from the
owner;
3. Sells, encumbers, conveys, pawns, loans, abandons or gives away
the leased or rented property or any part thereof, without the
written consent of the lessor, or without informing the person to
whom the property is transferred to, that the property is subject to
a lease;
4. Returns the property to the lessor at the end of the lease term, plus
any agreed upon extensions, but does not pay the lease charges
agreed upon in the written instrument, with the intent to
wrongfully deprive the lessor of the agreed upon charges.
B. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all forms of leasing and
rental agreements including, but not limited to, contracts which
provide the consumer options to buy the leased or rented personal
property, lease-purchase agreements and rent-to-own contracts. For the
purpose of determining if a violation of this Section has occurred,
leasing contracts which provide options to buy the merchandise are
owned by the owner of the property until such time as the owner
endorses the sale and transfer of ownership of the leased property to
the lessee.
C. Evidence that a lessee used a false, fictitious, or not current name,
address, or place of employment in obtaining the property or that a
lessee fails or refuses to return the property or pay the lease charges to
the lessor within seven (7) days after written demand for the return has
been sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address the
person set forth in the lease agreement, or in the absence of the
address, to the person's last known place of residence, shall be
evidence of intent to violate the provisions of this Section, except that if
a motor vehicle has not been returned within seventy-two (72) hours
after the expiration of the lease or rental agreement, such failure to
return the motor vehicle shall be prima facie evidence of the intent of
71.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.920
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.930
AO:194
Section 215.940. Passing Bad Checks.72
the offense of stealing leased or rented property. Where the leased or
rented property is a motor vehicle, if the motor vehicle has not been
returned within seventy-two (72) hours after the expiration of the lease
or rental agreement, the lessor may notify the local law enforcement
agency of the failure of the lessee to return such motor vehicle, and
the local law enforcement agency shall cause such motor vehicle to
be put into any appropriate State and local computer system listing
stolen motor vehicles. Any Law Enforcement Officer which stops such
a motor vehicle may seize the motor vehicle and notify the lessor that
he/she may recover such motor vehicle after it is photographed and
its vehicle identification number is recorded for evidentiary purposes.
Where the leased or rented property is not a motor vehicle, if such
property has not been returned within the seven-day period prescribed
in this Subsection, the owner of the property shall report the failure
to return the property to the local law enforcement agency, and such
law enforcement agency may within five (5) days notify the person
who leased or rented the property that such person is in violation of
this Section, and that failure to immediately return the property may
subject such person to arrest for the violation.
D. This Section shall not apply if such personal property is a vehicle and
such return is made more difficult or expensive by a defect in such
vehicle which renders such vehicle inoperable if the lessee shall notify
the lessor of the location of such vehicle and such defect before the
expiration of the lease or rental agreement or within ten (10) days after
proper notice.
E. Any person who has leased or rented personal property of another who
destroys such property so as to avoid returning it to the owner commits
the offense of property damage pursuant to Section 569.100, RSMo., or
Section 215.770 of this Code in addition to being in violation of this
Section.
F. Venue shall lie in the County where the personal property was originally
rented or leased.
A. A person commits the offense of passing a bad check when he/she:
1. With the purpose to defraud, makes, issues or passes a check or
other similar sight order or any other form of presentment
involving the transmission of account information for the payment
of money knowing that it will not be paid by the drawee or that
there is no such drawee; or
2. Makes, issues or passes a check or other similar sight order or any
other form of presentment involving the transmission of account
information for the payment of money, knowing that there are
72.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.930
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.940
AO:195
Section 215.950. Removal of Shopping Carts. [R.O. 2009 §13-18;
Code 1969 §25-24]
It shall be unlawful to remove carts, baskets or other devices furnished
by merchants or storekeepers for the convenience of customers for use on
the mercantile premises, from such premises without the express written
consent of the merchant or storekeeper.
Section 215.960. Shoplifting — Detention of Suspect by Merchant
— Liability Presumption.
insufficient funds in or on deposit with that account for the
payment of such check, sight order or other form of presentment
involving the transmission of account information in full and all
other checks, sight orders or other forms of presentment involving
the transmission of account information upon such funds then
outstanding, or that there is no such account or no drawee and
fails to pay the check or sight order or other form of presentment
involving the transmission of account information within ten (10)
days after receiving actual notice in writing that it has not been
paid because of insufficient funds or credit with the drawee or
because there is no such drawee.
B. As used in Subsection (A)(2) of this Section, "actual notice in writing"
means notice of the non-payment which is actually received by the
defendant. Such notice may include the service of summons or warrant
upon the defendant for the initiation of the prosecution of the check or
checks which are the subject matter of the prosecution if the summons
or warrant contains information of the ten-day period during which the
instrument may be paid and that payment of the instrument within such
ten-day period will result in dismissal of the charges. The requirement
of notice shall also be satisfied for written communications which are
tendered to the defendant and which the defendant refuses to accept.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following definitions shall apply:
MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT — Any mercantile place of business
in, at or from which goods, wares and merchandise are sold, offered for
sale or delivered from and sold at retail or wholesale.
MERCHANDISE — All goods, wares and merchandise offered for sale
or displayed by a merchant.
MERCHANT — Any corporation, partnership, association or person
who is engaged in the business of selling goods, wares and merchandise
in a mercantile establishment.
WRONGFUL TAKING — Includes stealing of merchandise or money and
any other wrongful appropriation of merchandise or money.
B. Any merchant, his/her agent or employee, who has reasonable grounds
or probable cause to believe that a person has committed or is
committing a wrongful taking of merchandise or money from a
Section
215.940
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.960
AO:196
Section 215.970. Library Theft.
mercantile establishment, may detain such person in a reasonable
manner and for a reasonable length of time for the purpose of
investigating whether there has been a wrongful taking of such
merchandise or money. Any such reasonable detention shall not
constitute an unlawful arrest or detention, nor shall it render the
merchant, his/her agent or employee criminally or civilly liable to the
person so detained.
C. Any person willfully concealing unpurchased merchandise of any
mercantile establishment, either on the premises or outside the
premises of such establishment, shall be presumed to have so
concealed such merchandise with the intention of committing a
wrongful taking of such merchandise within the meaning of Subsection
(A), and the finding of such unpurchased merchandise concealed upon
the person or among the belongings of such person shall be evidence of
reasonable grounds and probable cause for the detention in a
reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time of such person
by a merchant, his/her agent or employee in order that recovery of such
merchandise may be effected, and any such reasonable detention shall
not be deemed to be unlawful nor render such merchant, his/her agent
or employee criminally or civilly liable.
A. Any person who does any of the following shall be deemed to have
appropriated said item with the intent to deprive the library of said item
without its consent and shall be guilty of the offense of stealing under
Section 570.030, RSMo.:
1. Knowingly removes any library material from the premises of a
library without authorization;
2. Borrows or attempts to borrow any library material from a library
by the unauthorized use of a library card;
3. Borrows library materials from any library pursuant to an
agreement or procedure established by the library which requires
the return of such library material and fails to return the library
material to the library; or
4. Knowingly writes on, injures, defaces, tears, cuts, mutilates, or
destroys a book, document, or other library material belonging to,
on loan to, or otherwise in the custody of a library.
B. It shall be prima facie evidence of the person's purpose to deprive the
library of the library materials if, within ten (10) days after notice in
writing deposited as certified mail from the library demanding the
return of such library material, such person without good cause shown
fails to return the library material. A person is presumed to have
received the notice required by this Subsection if the library mails such
notice to the last address provided to the library by such person.
Section
215.960
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.970
AO:197
Section 215.980. through Section 215.1010. (Reserved)
Payment to the library, in an amount equal to the cost of replacement of
an item of no historical significance, shall be considered returning the
item for purposes of this Subsection.
Section
215.970
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.980
AO:198
DIVISION 2
Offenses Concerning Copper and Scrap Metal
Section 215.1020. Copper Wire Or Cable, Catalytic Converters,
Collectors And Dealers To Keep Register, Information Required —
Penalty — Exempt Transactions.
A. Every purchaser or collector of, or dealer in, junk, scrap metal or any
secondhand property shall keep a register containing a written or
electronic record for each purchase or trade in which each type of
material subject to the provisions of this Section is obtained for value.
There shall be a separate record for each transaction involving any:
1. Copper, brass or bronze;
2. Aluminum wire, cable, pipe, tubing, bar, ingot, rod, fitting or
fastener;
3. Material containing copper or aluminum that is knowingly used for
farming purposes as farming is defined in Section 350.010, RSMo.;
whatever may be the condition or length of such metal;
4. Catalytic converter; or
5. Motor vehicle, heavy equipment or tractor battery.
B. The record required by this Section shall contain the following data:
1. A copy of the driver's license or photo identification issued by the
State or by the United States Government or agency thereof to the
person from whom the material is obtained;
2. The current address, gender, birth date, and a photograph of the
person from whom the material is obtained if not included or are
different from the identification required in Subsection (B)(1) of
this Section;
3. The date, time and place of the transaction;
4. The license plate number of the vehicle used by the seller during
the transaction;
5. A full description of the material, including the weight and
purchase price.
C. The records required under this Section shall be maintained for a
minimum of twenty-four (24) months from when such material is
obtained and shall be available for inspection by any Law Enforcement
Officer.
D. Anyone convicted of violating this Section shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation.
E. This Section shall not apply to any of the following transactions:
Section
215.1020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1020
AO:199
Section 215.1030. Metal Beer Keg, Prohibition on Purchase or
Possession by Scrap Metal Dealer — Violation, Penalty.
Section 215.1040. Metal Belonging to Various Entities — Scrap
Yard Not To Purchase — Violation, Penalty.
1. Any transaction for which the total amount paid for all regulated
material purchased or sold does not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00),
unless the material is a catalytic converter;
2. Any transaction for which the seller, including a farm or farmer, has
an existing business relationship with the scrap metal dealer and is
known to the scrap metal dealer making the purchase to be an
established business or political subdivision that operates a
business with a fixed location that can be reasonably expected to
generate regulated scrap metal and can be reasonably identified as
such a business; or
3. Any transaction for which the type of metal subject to Subsection
(A) of this Section is a minor part of a larger item, except for
equipment used in the generation and transmission of electrical
power or telecommunications.
A. No scrap metal dealer shall knowingly purchase or possess a metal beer
keg, whether damaged or undamaged, or any reasonably recognizable
part thereof, on any premises that the dealer uses to buy, sell, store,
shred, melt, cut or otherwise alter scrap metal except when the
purchase is from the brewer or its authorized representative. For
purposes of this Section, "keg" shall have the same meaning as in
Section 311.082, RSMo.
B. Anyone who is found guilty of, or pleads guilty to, violating this Section
shall be guilty of an ordinance violation punishable only by fine.
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to preclude a person
violating this Section from also being prosecuted for any applicable
criminal offense.
A. No scrap yard shall purchase any metal that can be identified as
belonging to a public or private cemetery, political subdivision,
telecommunications provider, cable provider, wireless service or other
communications-related provider, electrical cooperative, water utility,
municipal utility or utility regulated under Chapters 386 or 393, RSMo.,
including bleachers, guardrails, signs, street and traffic lights or
signals, and manhole cover or covers, whether broken or unbroken,
from anyone other than the cemetery or monument owner, political
subdivision, telecommunications provider, cable provider, wireless
service or other communications-related provider, electrical
cooperative, water utility, municipal utility, utility regulated under
Chapter 386 or 393, RSMo., or manufacturer of the metal or item
described in this Section unless such person is authorized in writing by
the cemetery or monument owner, political subdivision,
Section
215.1020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.1040
AO:200
Section 215.1050. Scrap Metal Dealers — Payments in Excess of
$500.00 To Be Made by Check — Exceptions.
Section 215.1060. through Section 215.1110. (Reserved)
telecommunications provider, cable provider, wireless service or other
communications-related provider, electrical cooperative, water utility,
municipal utility, utility regulated under Chapter 386 or 393, RSMo., or
manufacturer to sell the metal.
B. Anyone convicted of violating this Section shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation.
A. Any scrap metal dealer paying out an amount that is five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or more shall make such payment by issuing a
prenumbered check drawn on a regular bank account in the name of
the licensed scrap metal dealer and with such check made payable to
the person documented as the seller in accordance with this Section, or
by using a system for automated cash or electronic payment
distribution which photographs or videotapes the payment recipient
and identifies the payment with a distinct transaction in the register
maintained in accordance with Chapter 407, RSMo.
B. Any scrap metal dealer that purchases scrap metal from a seller and
pays in the form of cash is required to obtain a copy of the seller's
driver's license or non-driver's license if the metal is copper or a
catalytic converter. This Section shall not apply to any transaction for
which the seller has an existing business relationship with the scrap
metal dealer and is known to the scrap metal dealer making the
purchase to be an established business or political subdivision that
operates a business with a fixed location that can be reasonably
expected to generate regulated scrap metal and can be reasonably
identified as such a business.
C. Any person in violation of Sections 215.1020 to 215.1050 by selling
stolen scrap metal shall be responsible for consequential damages
related to obtaining the scrap metal.
Section
215.1040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1060
AO:201

DIVISION 3
Offenses Concerning Computers
Section 215.1120. Tampering With Computer Data.73
Section 215.1130. Tampering With Computer Equipment.74
Section 215.1140. Tampering With Computer Users.75
A. A person commits the ordinance violation of tampering with computer
data if he/she knowingly and without authorization or without
reasonable grounds to believe that he/she has such authorization:
1. Modifies or destroys data or programs residing or existing internal
to a computer, computer system, or computer network; or
2. Modifies or destroys data or programs or supporting
documentation residing or existing external to a computer,
computer system, or computer network; or
3. Discloses or takes data, programs, or supporting documentation,
residing or existing internal or external to a computer, computer
system, or computer network; or
4. Discloses or takes a password, identifying code, personal
identification number, or other confidential information about a
computer system or network that is intended to or does control
access to the computer system or network;
5. Accesses a computer, a computer system, or a computer network,
and intentionally examines information about another person;
6. Receives, retains, uses, or discloses any data he/she knows or
believes was obtained in violation of this Subsection.
A. A person commits the ordinance violation of tampering with computer
equipment if he/she knowingly and without authorization or without
reasonable grounds to believe that he/she has such authorization:
1. Modifies, destroys, damages, or takes equipment or data storage
devices used or intended to be used in a computer, computer
system, or computer network; or
2. Modifies, destroys, damages, or takes any computer, computer
system, or computer network.
A. A person commits the ordinance violation of tampering with computer
users if he/she knowingly and without authorization or without
reasonable grounds to believe that he/she has such authorization:
73.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
74.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
75.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1140
AO:203
Section 215.1150. through Section 215.1190. (Reserved)
1. Accesses or causes to be accessed any computer, computer system,
or computer network; or
2. Denies or causes the denial of computer system services to an
authorized user of such computer system services, which, in whole
or in part, is owned by, under contract to, or operated for, or on
behalf of, or in conjunction with another.
Section
215.1140
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.1150
AO:204
ARTICLE VIII
Offenses Concerning Prostitution
Section 215.1200. Article Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms mean:
DEVIATE SEXUAL INTERCOURSE — Any sexual act involving the genitals
of one (1) person and the mouth, hand, tongue, or anus of another person;
or any act involving the penetration, however slight, of the penis, the female
genitalia, or the anus by a finger, instrument, or object done for the purpose
of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of any person or for the purpose
of terrorizing the victim.
PERSISTENT PROSTITUTION OFFENDER — A person who has been found
guilty of two (2) or more prostitution-related offenses.
PROSTITUTION-RELATED OFFENSE — Any violation of State law for
prostitution, patronizing prostitution, or promoting prostitution.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Sexual intercourse, deviate sexual intercourse, or
sexual contact.
SEXUAL CONTACT — Any touching of another person with the genitals or
any touching of the genitals or anus of another person or the breast of a
female person, or such touching through the clothing, for the purpose of
arousing or gratifying sexual desire of any person or for the purpose of
terrorizing the victim.
SEXUAL INTERCOURSE — Any penetration, however slight, of the female
genitalia by the penis.
SOMETHING OF VALUE — Any money or property, or any token, object or
article exchangeable for money or property.
Section 215.1210. Prostitution.76
Section 215.1220. Patronizing Prostitution.77
A. A person commits the offense of prostitution if he or she engages in or
offers or agrees to engage in sexual conduct with another person in
return for something of value to be received by any person.
B. In addition to the affirmative defense provided in Subsection 2 of
Section 566.223, RSMo., it shall be an affirmative defense to
prosecution pursuant to this Section that the defendant was under the
age of eighteen (18) and was acting under the coercion, as defined in
Section 566.200, RSMo., of an agent at the time of the offense charged.
A. A person commits the offense of patronizing prostitution if he or she:
76.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
77.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1220
AO:205
Section 215.1230. (Reserved)78
Section 215.1240. Prostitution Houses Deemed Public Nuisances.
Section 215.1250. through Section 215.1290. (Reserved)
1. Pursuant to a prior understanding, gives something of value to
another person as compensation for having engaged in sexual
conduct with any person; or
2. Gives or agrees to give something of value to another person with
the understanding that such person or another person will engage
in sexual conduct with any person; or
3. Solicits or requests another person to engage in sexual conduct
with any person in return for something of value.
B. It shall not be a defense that the person believed that the individual he
or she patronized for prostitution was eighteen (18) years of age or
older.
A. Any room, building or other structure regularly used for any
prostitution activity prohibited by this Article is a public nuisance.
B. The City Prosecuting Attorney may, in addition to all criminal sanctions,
prosecute a suit in equity to enjoin the nuisance. If the court finds that
the owner of the room, building or structure knew or had reason to
believe that the premises were being used regularly for prostitution
activity, the court may order that the premises shall not be occupied or
used for such period as the court may determine, not to exceed one (1)
year.
C. All persons, including owners, lessees, officers, agents, inmates or
employees, aiding or facilitating such a nuisance may be made
defendants in any suit to enjoin the nuisance, and they may be enjoined
from engaging in any prostitution activity anywhere within the
jurisdiction of the court.
D. Appeals shall be allowed from the judgment of the court as in other civil
actions.
78.Editor's Note: This Section previously noted that in prosecutions of prostitution and
patronizing prostitution, the sex (gender) of the parties was no defense. However, the
authorizing statute, former RSMo. §567.040, was repealed without replacement by SB 491
in the 2014 Legislative Session, effective 1-1-2017.
Section
215.1220
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.1250
AO:206
ARTICLE IX
Sexual Offenses
Section 215.1300. Article Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth
herein:
DEVIATE SEXUAL INTERCOURSE — Any act involving the genitals of one
person and the hand, mouth, tongue or anus of another person or a sexual
act involving the penetration, however slight, of the penis, female genitalia,
or the anus by a finger, instrument or object done for the purpose of
arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of any person or for the purpose of
terrorizing the victim.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Sexual intercourse, deviate sexual intercourse or
sexual contact.
SEXUAL CONTACT — Any touching of another person with the genitals or
any touching of the genitals or anus of another person, or the breast of a
female person, or such touching through the clothing, for the purpose of
arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of any person or for the purpose of
terrorizing the victim.
SEXUAL INTERCOURSE — Any penetration, however slight, of the female
genitalia by the penis.
Section 215.1310. Sexual Misconduct.
Section 215.1320. Sexual Abuse.79
A person commits the offense of sexual abuse in the second degree if he/she
purposely subjects another person to sexual contact without that person's
consent.
Section 215.1330. Residency, Loitering, Activity and Location
Limitations for Sex Offenders and Certain Facilities. [Ord. No. 4714
§1, 5-16-201680]
A. A person commits the offense of sexual misconduct in the first degree if
such person:
1. Exposes his/her genitals under circumstances in which he/she
knows that his/her conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm;
2. Has sexual contact in the presence of a third person or persons
under circumstances in which he/she knows that such conduct is
likely to cause affront or alarm; or
3. Has sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse in a public
place in the presence of a third person.
79.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1300
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1330
AO:207
A. Any person who:
1. Has pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to, or been convicted of, or
been found guilty of violating any of the provisions of:
a. Chapter 566, RSMo.; or
b. The provisions of Subsection (2) of Section 568.020, RSMo.,
incest; or
c. Section 568.045, RSMo., endangering the welfare of a child in
the first degree; or
d. Subsection (2) of Section 568.080, RSMo., use of a child in a
sexual performance; or
e. Section 568.090, RSMo., promoting a sexual performance by a
child; or
f. Section 573.023, RSMo., sexual exploitation of a minor; or
g. Section 573.025, RSMo., promoting child pornography in the
first degree; or
h. Section 573.035, RSMo., promoting child pornography in the
second degree; or
i. Section 573.037, RSMo., possession of child pornography; or
j. Section 573.040, RSMo., furnishing pornographic material to
minors; or
k. Any offense in any other State or foreign country, or under
Federal, tribal, or military jurisdiction which, if committed in
this State, would be a violation listed in this Subsection; and
2. Any person required to register with the Chief Law Enforcement
Official of the County in which such person resides pursuant to the
provisions of Sections 589.400, et seq., RSMo.;
80.Editor's Note: Section 1 of this ordinance repealed former Section 215.1330, Certain
Offenders Not to Physically Be Present or Loiter Within Five Hundred Feet of a Child Care
Facility — Violation — Penalty.
Section
215.1330
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.1330
AO:208
shall not reside within one thousand (1,000) feet of (i) any public
school as defined in Section 160.011, RSMo.; or (ii) any private
school giving instruction in a grade or grades not higher than
the 12th grade; or (iii) any public library; or (iv) any public park;
or (v) any pool open to the general public; or (vi) any child-care
facility that is licensed under Chapter 210, RSMo.; or (vii) any
child-care facility as defined in Section 210.201, RSMo., that is
exempt from State licensure but subject to State regulation under
Section 210.252, RSMo., and holds itself out to be a child-care
facility, which is in existence at the time the individual begins to
reside at the location.
B. If such person has already established a residence and a public school,
a private school, a child-care facility, a public library, a public park or a
pool open to the general public is subsequently built or placed within
the requisite distance of such person's residence, then such person
shall, within one (1) week of the opening of such public school, private
school, public library, public park, pool or child-care facility, notify the
Chief of Police that he or she is now residing within the proscribed
distance of the relevant facility and shall provide verifiable proof to the
Chief that he or she resided there prior to the opening of such facility.
C. For purposes of this Section:
1. "Resides" means sleeps in a residence, which may include more
than one (1) location and may be mobile or transitory; and
2. The requisite distance between the relevant facility and the
residence in question shall be measured by the straight line
distance between the nearest point on the property boundary line
of the property upon which the relevant facility is located and the
nearest point on the boundary line of the property upon which the
residence is located.
D. Any person who has pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to, or been
convicted of, or been found guilty of violating any of the provisions of
Chapter 566, RSMo., or the provisions of Subsection (2) of Section
568.020, RSMo., incest; Section 568.045, RSMo., endangering the
welfare of a child in the first degree; Subsection (2) of Section 568.080,
RSMo., use of a child in a sexual performance; Section 568.090, RSMo.,
promoting a sexual performance by a child; Section 573.023, RSMo.,
sexual exploitation of a minor; Section 573.025, RSMo., promoting child
pornography; Section 573.040, RSMo., furnishing pornographic
material to minors; or any offense in any other state or foreign country,
or under Federal, tribal, or military jurisdiction which, if committed in
this State, would be a violation listed in this Subsection shall not be
present in or loiter within five hundred (500) feet of any school building,
on real property comprising any school, or in any conveyance owned,
leased or contracted by a school to transport students to or from school
or a school-related activity when persons under the age of eighteen (18)
are present in the building, on the grounds or in the conveyance, unless
Section
215.1330
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1330
AO:209
the offender is a parent, legal guardian or custodian of a student
present in the building and has met the conditions set forth in
Subsection (E) of this Section.
E. No parent, legal guardian or custodian who has pleaded guilty or nolo
contendere to, or been convicted of, or been found guilty of violating
any of the offenses listed in Subsection (D) of this Section shall be
present in any school building, on real property comprising any school,
or in any conveyance owned, leased or contracted by a school to
transport students to or from school or a school-related activity when
persons under the age of eighteen (18) are present in the building, on
the grounds or in the conveyance unless the parent, legal guardian or
custodian has permission to be present from the Superintendent or
school board or, in the case of a private school, from the principal. In
the case of a public school, if permission is granted, the Superintendent
or school board President must inform the principal of the school where
the sex offender will be present. Permission may be granted by the
Superintendent, school board or, in the case of a private school, from
the principal for more than one (1) event at a time, such as a series of
events; however, the parent, legal guardian or custodian must obtain
permission for any other event he or she wishes to attend for which he
or she has not yet had permission granted.
F. Any person who has pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to, or been
convicted of, or been found guilty of violating any of the provisions of
Chapter 566, RSMo., or the provisions of Subsection 2 of Section
568.020, RSMo., incest; Section 568.045, RSMo., endangering the
welfare of a child in the first degree; Subsection 2 of Section 568.080,
RSMo., use of a child in a sexual performance; Section 568.090, RSMo.,
promoting a sexual performance by a child; Section 573.023, RSMo.,
sexual exploitation of a minor; Section 573.025, RSMo., promoting child
pornography in the first degree; Section 573.035, RSMo., promoting
child pornography in the second degree; Section 573.037, RSMo.,
possession of child pornography, or Section 573.040, RSMo., furnishing
pornographic material to minors; or any offense in any other state or
foreign country, or under Federal, tribal, or military jurisdiction which,
if committed in this State, would be a violation listed in this Subsection
shall not knowingly be physically present in or loiter within five
hundred (500) feet of or approach, contact, or communicate with any
child under eighteen (18) years of age in any child-care facility as
defined in Section 210.201, RSMo., on the real property comprising any
child-care facility when persons under the age of eighteen are present
in the building, on the grounds, or in the conveyance, unless the
offender is a parent, legal guardian, or custodian of a student present in
the building or on the grounds.
G. Any person who has pleaded guilty to, or been convicted of, or been
found guilty of violating any of the provisions of Chapter 566, RSMo., or
the provisions of Subsection 2 of Section 568.020, RSMo., incest;
Section 568.045, RSMo., endangering the welfare of a child in the first
Section
215.1330
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.1330
AO:210
Section 215.1340. (Reserved)81
degree; Subsection 2 of Section 568.080, RSMo., use of a child in
a sexual performance; Section 568.090, RSMo., promoting a sexual
performance by a child; Section 573.023, RSMo., sexual exploitation
of a minor; Section 573.025, RSMo., promoting child pornography; or
Section 573.040, RSMo., furnishing pornographic material to minors;
or any offense in any other state or foreign country, or under Federal,
tribal, or military jurisdiction which, if committed in this State, would
be a violation listed in this Subsection shall not serve as an athletic
coach, manager, or athletic trainer for any sports team in which a child
less than seventeen (17) years of age is a member.
H. No enterprise, business, agency, service or other activity of any kind
which is intended, designed or operated so as to serve or attract
persons convicted of violent crimes or persons described in Subsection
(A), (D), (F), or (G) of this Section, or otherwise cause such persons to
congregate at or be present in, at or around the same ("proposed
activity"), shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any
public school as defined in Section 160.011, RSMo., or any private
school giving instruction in a grade or grades not higher than the 12th
grade, or public library, or public park, or pool open to the general
public, or any child-care facility as defined in Section 210.201, RSMo.,
that is exempt from State licensure but subject to State regulation
under Section 210.252, RSMo., and holds itself out to be a child-care
facility (collectively, "relevant facility"), which is in existence at the time
the proposed activity begins or is proposed to begin, as measured by
the straight line distance between the nearest point on the property
boundary line of the property upon which the proposed activity is
located and the nearest point on the boundary line of the property upon
which the relevant facility is located.
I. No residency, activity or presence limitation established by Subsection
(A), (D), (F) or (G) shall apply to any person who pleaded guilty to, or
been convicted of, or been found guilty of the offense giving rise to the
limitation prior to the effective date of the enactment of a similar State
limitation or to any person as to whom the application of the limitation
would render the Subsection an ex post facto or impermissibly
retroactive law. The burden of raising the issue and the burden of proof
relating to same shall be on the person subject to the limitation at issue.
Any person asserting an exemption from any provision of this Section
by reason of this Subsection or ex post facto or impermissible
retroactive application shall notify the Chief of Police of his or her claim
to exemption within thirty (30) days of first learning of the applicability
of the limitation to such person.
J. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section is guilty of an
ordinance violation.
Section
215.1330
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1350
AO:211
Section 215.1350. Halloween, Restrictions on Conduct —
Violations.
Section 215.1360. Urinating in Public.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the City to urinate in or upon any
street, park, any public place open to the public or private place open to
public view other than in the restroom facilities provided for such activity.
Section 215.1370. through Section 215.1410. (Reserved)
A. Any person required to register as a sexual offender under Sections
589.400 to 589.425, RSMo., shall be required on October 31st of each
year to:
1. Avoid all Halloween-related contact with children;
2. Remain inside his or her residence between the hours of 5:00 P.M.
and 10:30 P.M. unless required to be elsewhere for just cause
including, but not limited to, employment or medical emergencies;
3. Post a sign at his or her residence stating "No candy or treats at
this residence"; and
4. Leave all outside residential lighting off during the evening hours
after 5:00 P.M.
B. Any person required to register as a sexual offender under Sections
589.400 to 589.425, RSMo., who violates the provisions of Subsection
(A) of this Section shall be guilty of an ordinance violation.
81.Editor’s Note: Former Section 215.1340, Certain Offenders Not to Be Present Within Five
Hundred Feet of School Property, Exception — Permission Required for Parents or
Guardians Who Are Offenders, Procedure, was repealed 5-16-2016 by Ord. No. 4714 §1.
Section
215.1350
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.1370
AO:212
ARTICLE X
Offenses Concerning Pornography
Section 215.1420. Definitions.
When used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings set
out herein:
FURNISH — To issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer,
circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or otherwise provide.
MATERIAL — Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing,
photograph, motion-picture film, videotape or videotape production, or
pictorial representation, or any recording or transcription, or any
mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction, or stored computer data,
or anything which is or may be used as a means of communication.
"Material" includes undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates,
stored computer data, and other latent representational objects.
MINOR — Any person less than eighteen (18) years of age.
NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human genitals, pubic
area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the nipple or areola.
OBSCENE — Any material or performance if, taken as a whole:
PERFORMANCE — Any play, motion-picture film, videotape, dance or
exhibition performed before an audience of one (1) or more.
PORNOGRAPHIC FOR MINORS — Any material or performance if the
following apply:
Applying contemporary community standards, its predominant appeal
is to prurient interest in sex; and
1.
The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find the material depicts or describes sexual conduct in a
patently offensive way; and
2.
A reasonable person would find the material lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value.
3.
The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find that the material or performance, taken as a whole, has a
tendency to cater or appeal to a prurient interest of minors; and
1.
The material or performance depicts or describes nudity, sexual
conduct, the condition of human genitals when in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal or sadomasochistic abuse in a way which is
patently offensive to the average person applying contemporary adult
community standards with respect to what is suitable for minors; and
2.
The material or performance, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value for minors.
3.
Section
215.1420
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1420
AO:213
PROMOTE — To manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail, deliver, transfer,
transmute, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or
advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same, by any means including a
computer.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Flagellation or torture by or upon a person
as an act of sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Actual or simulated, normal or perverted acts of
human masturbation; deviate sexual intercourse; sexual intercourse; or
physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area,
buttocks, or the breast of a female in an act of apparent sexual stimulation
or gratification; or any sadomasochistic abuse or acts including animals or
any latent objects in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Section 215.1430. Promoting Pornography for Minors or
Obscenity.82
Section 215.1440. Furnishing Pornographic Materials to Minors.83
A. A person commits the offense of promoting pornography for minors or
obscenity if, knowing of its content and character, he/she:
1. Promotes or possesses with the purpose to promote any obscene
materials for pecuniary gain; or
2. Produces, presents, directs or participates in any obscene
performance for pecuniary gain; or
3. Promotes or possesses with the purpose to promote any material
pornographic for minors for pecuniary gain; or
4. Produces, presents, directs or participates in any performance
pornographic for minors for pecuniary gain; or
5. Promotes, possesses with the purpose to promote, produces,
presents, directs or participates in any performance that is
pornographic for minors via computer, electronic transfer, Internet
or computer network if the person made the matter available to a
specific individual known by the defendant to be a minor.
A. A person commits the offense of furnishing pornographic material to
minors if, knowing of its content and character, he/she:
1. Furnishes any material pornographic for minors knowing that the
person to whom it is furnished is a minor or acting in reckless
disregard of the likelihood that such person is a minor; or
82.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
83.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1420
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.1440
AO:214
Section 215.1450. through Section 215.1490. (Reserved)
2. Produces, presents, directs or participates in any performance
pornographic for minors that is furnished to a minor knowing that
any person viewing such performance is a minor or acting in
reckless disregard of the likelihood that a minor is viewing the
performance; or
3. Furnishes, produces, presents, directs, participates in any
performance or otherwise makes available material that is
pornographic for minors via computer, electronic transfer, Internet
or computer network if the person made the matter available to a
specific individual known by the defendant to be a minor.
B. It is not a defense to a prosecution for a violation of this Section that the
person being furnished the pornographic material is a Peace Officer
masquerading as a minor.
C. The offense of furnishing pornographic material to minors or
attempting to furnish pornographic material to minors is an ordinance
violation.
Section
215.1440
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1450
AO:215

ARTICLE XI
Offenses Concerning Drugs
Section 215.1500. Possession of Marijuana or Synthetic
Cannabinoid.84
A person commits the offense of possession of marijuana or any synthetic
cannabinoid, as both terms are defined in Section 195.010, RSMo., if he or
she knowingly possesses marijuana or any synthetic cannabinoid, except as
authorized by Chapter 579 or Chapter 195, RSMo.85
Section 215.1510. Possession of a Controlled Substance.86
A person commits the offense of possession of a controlled substance,
as defined in Section 195.010, RSMo., if he or she knowingly possesses
a controlled substance, except as authorized by Chapter 579, RSMo., or
Chapter 195, RSMo.87
Section 215.1520. Limitations on the Retail Sale of
Methamphetamine Precursor Drugs.
Section 215.1530. Unlawful Possession of Drug Paraphernalia.88
A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of drug paraphernalia
if he or she knowingly uses, or possesses with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia, to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the
A. The retail sale of methamphetamine precursor drugs shall be limited to:
1. Sales in packages containing not more than a total of three (3)
grams of one (1) or more methamphetamine precursor drugs
calculated in terms of ephedrine base, pseudoephedrine base and
phenylpropanolamine base; and
2. For non-liquid products, sales in blister packs, each blister
containing not more than two (2) dosage units, or where the use of
blister packs is technically infeasible, sales in unit dose packets or
pouches.
B. The penalty for a knowing violation of Subsection (A) of this Section is
found in Section 569.060, RSMo.
84.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
85.State Law Reference: For similar statutory provisions and the elements setting the levels
of this offense, see §§195.010, 195.017 and 579.015, RSMo.
86.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
87.State Law Reference: For similar statutory provisions and the elements setting the levels
of this offense, see §§195.010, 195.017 and 579.015, RSMo.
88.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1500
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1530
AO:217
human body, a controlled substance or an imitation controlled substance in
violation of Chapter 579, RSMo., or Chapter 195, RSMo.
Section 215.1540. Inhalation or Inducing Others To Inhale Solvent
Fumes to Cause Certain Reactions, Prohibited — Exceptions.
No person shall intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any solvent,
particularly toluol, amyl nitrite, butyl nitrite, cyclohexyl nitrite, ethyl nitrite,
pentyl nitrite and propyl nitrite and their iso-analogues or induce any other
person to do so for the purpose of causing a condition of, or inducing
symptoms of, intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement,
irrational behavior, exhilaration, paralysis, stupefaction, or dulling of senses
or nervous system, or for the purpose of, in any manner, changing,
distorting or disturbing the audio, visual or mental processes; except that
this Section shall not apply to the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical
or dental purposes.
Section 215.1550. Inducing, or Possession With Intent To Induce,
Symptoms by Use of Solvents and Other Substances, Prohibited.
A. As used in this Section, "alcohol beverage vaporizer" means any device
which, by means of heat, a vibrating element, or any method, is capable
of producing a breathable mixture containing one (1) or more alcoholic
beverages to be dispensed for inhalation into the lungs via the nose or
mouth or both.
B. No person shall intentionally or willfully induce the symptoms of
intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational
behavior, exhilaration, paralysis, stupefaction, or dulling of the senses
or nervous system, distortion of audio, visual or mental processes by
the use or abuse of any of the following substances:
1. Solvents, particularly toluol;
2. Ethyl alcohol;
3. Amyl nitrite and its iso-analogues;
4. Butyl nitrite and its iso-analogues;
5. Cyclohexyl nitrite and its iso-analogues;
6. Ethyl nitrite and its iso-analogues;
7. Pentyl nitrite and its iso-analogues; and
8. Propyl nitrite and its iso-analogues.
C. This Section shall not apply to substances that have been approved by
the United States Food and Drug Administration as therapeutic drug
products or are contained in approved over-the-counter drug products
or administered lawfully pursuant to the order of an authorized medical
practitioner.
Section
215.1530
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.1550
AO:218
Section 215.1560. Possession or Purchase of Solvents To Aid Others
in Violations, Prohibited — Violations of Sections 215.1540 to
215.1550 — Penalty.89
Section 215.1570. through Section 215.1610. (Reserved)
D. No person shall intentionally possess any solvent, particularly toluol,
amyl nitrite, butyl nitrite, cyclohexyl nitrite, ethyl nitrite, pentyl nitrite
and propyl nitrite and their iso-analogues for the purpose of using it in
the manner prohibited by Section 215.1540 and this Section.
E. No person shall possess or use an alcoholic beverage vaporizer.
F. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the legal
consumption of intoxicating liquor.
A. No person shall intentionally possess or buy any solvent, particularly
toluol, amyl nitrite, butyl nitrite, cyclohexyl nitrite, ethyl nitrite, pentyl
nitrite and propyl nitrite and their iso-analogues for the purpose of
inducing or aiding any other person to violate the provisions of Sections
215.1540 and 215.1550 hereof.
B. Any person who violates any provision of Sections 215.1540 through
215.1560 is guilty of an ordinance violation for the first violation.
89.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1550
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1570
AO:219

ARTICLE XII
Offenses Concerning Minors90
Section 215.1620. Curfew Hours. [R.O. 2009 §13-221; Ord. No. 2925
§1, 4-18-1988]
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of seventeen (17) years to loiter,
idle, wander, stroll or to drive or ride in an automobile or play in or upon
the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, wharves,
docks or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places
of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places
between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M. of the following day, official
County time, except on Fridays and Saturdays when the hours shall be
12:00 Midnight to 6:00 A.M. of the following day, official County time,
except that this Section does not apply to a minor accompanied by his/
her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of
the minor or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate
business directed by his/her parent, guardian or other adult person having
the care and custody of the minor.
Section 215.1630. Duties of Parents. [R.O. 2009 §13-222; Ord. No.
2925 §1, 4-18-1988]
It is unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the
care and custody of a minor under the age of seventeen (17) years to
knowingly permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon
the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, wharves,
docks or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places
of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places
between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M. of the following day, official
County time, except that this Section does not apply when the minor is
accompanied by his/her parent, guardian or other adult person having the
care and custody of the minor or where the minor is upon an emergency
errand or legitimate business directed by his/her parent, guardian or other
adult person having the care and custody of the minor.
Section 215.1640. Duty of Police Officers — Penalty for Violation.
[R.O. 2009 §13-223; Ord. No. 2925 §1, 4-18-1988]
A. Any Police Officer finding a child violating the provisions of Section
215.1620 shall warn the child to cease and desist immediately from
such violation. The Police Officer may take the child into custody and
release him/her to his/her parent or guardian or release the child at the
scene with a written notice of referral to the Juvenile Court. The
Juvenile Court shall serve upon the parent or guardian or person in
charge of said child the written notice setting forth the manner in which
the child violated Section 215.1620.
90.Cross Reference: As To Alcohol-related Offenses Involving Minors, §600.240.
Section
215.1620
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1640
AO:221
Section 215.1650. through Section 215.1690. (Reserved)
B. After receiving notice of the first (1st) violation by the child, any parent,
guardian or other person in charge of such child who knowingly permits
such child to again violate the provisions of Section 215.1620 shall be
fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
Section
215.1640
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.1650
AO:222
ARTICLE XIII
Offenses Concerning Tobacco, Alternative Nicotine Products Or
Vapor Products
Section 215.1700. Definitions.
For purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply:
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT — Any non-combustible product
containing nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether
chewed, absorbed, dissolved or ingested by any other means. "Alternative
nicotine product" does not include any vapor product, tobacco product or
any product regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and
Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.91
CENTER OF YOUTH ACTIVITIES — Any playground, school or other facility,
when such facility is being used primarily by persons under the age of
eighteen (18) for recreational, educational or other purposes.
DISTRIBUTE — A conveyance to the public by sale, barter, gift or sample.
MINOR — A person under the age of eighteen (18).
PROOF OF AGE — A driver's license or other generally accepted means of
identification that contains a picture of the individual and appears on its
face to be valid.
ROLLING PAPERS — Paper designed, manufactured, marketed or sold for
use primarily as a wrapping or enclosure for tobacco which enables a
person to roll loose tobacco into a smokeable cigarette.
SAMPLE — A tobacco product, alternative nicotine product or vapor
product distributed to members of the general public at no cost or at
nominal cost for product promotional purposes.
SAMPLING — The distribution to members of the general public of tobacco
product, alternative nicotine product or vapor product samples.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS — Any substance containing tobacco leaf including,
but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco
or dipping tobacco, but does not include alternative nicotine products or
vapor products.
VAPOR PRODUCT — Any non-combustible product containing nicotine that
employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit or other
electronic, chemical or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size,
that can be used to produce vapor from nicotine in a solution or other
form. "Vapor product" includes any electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe or similar product or device and any
vapor cartridge or other container of nicotine in a solution or other form
that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic
cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe or similar product or device.
91.Editor's Note: See 21 U.S.C. § 351 et seq.
Section
215.1700
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1700
AO:223
"Vapor product" does not include any alternative nicotine product or
tobacco product.
VENDING MACHINE — Any mechanical, electric or electronic self-service
device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or vapor
products.
Section 215.1705. No Tobacco Sales to Minors — Alternative
Nicotine Products, Vapor Products and Nicotine Liquid Containers
— Sale to Minors Prohibited.
A. Any person or entity who sells tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products shall deny the sale of such tobacco
products to any person who is less than eighteen (18) years of age.
B. Any person or entity who sells or distributes tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or vapor products by mail or through the
Internet in this State in violation of Subsection (A) of this Section shall
be assessed a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first
violation and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent
violation.
C. Alternative nicotine products and vapor products shall only be sold to
persons eighteen (18) years of age or older, shall be subject to local and
State sales tax, but shall not be otherwise taxed or regulated as tobacco
products.
D. Nicotine Liquid Containers — Regulations.
1. Any nicotine liquid container that is sold at retail in this State shall
satisfy the child-resistant effectiveness standards set forth in 16
CFR 1700.15(b) as in effect on the effective date of this Section
when tested in accordance with the method described in 16 CFR
1700.20 as in effect on the effective date of this Section.
2. For the purposes of this Subsection, “nicotine liquid container”
shall mean a bottle or other container of liquid or other substance
containing nicotine if the liquid or substance is sold, marketed, or
intended for use in a vapor product. A “nicotine liquid container”
shall not include a liquid or other substance containing nicotine in a
cartridge that is sold, marketed, or intended for use in a vapor
product, provided that such cartridge is prefilled and sealed by the
manufacturer and not intended to be opened by the consumer.
3. Any person who engages in retail sales of liquid nicotine containers
in this State in violation of this Subsection shall be assessed a fine
of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first violation and five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent violation.
4. The Department of Health and Senior Services may adopt rules
necessary to carry out the provisions of this Subsection. Any rule or
Section
215.1700
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.1705
AO:224
Section 215.1710. Unlawful To Sell or Distribute Tobacco Products,
Alternative Nicotine Products or Vapor Products to Minors —
Vending Machine Requirements.
portion of a rule, as that term is defined in Section 536.010, RSMo.,
that is created under the authority delegated in that Section shall
become effective only if it complies with and is subject to all of
the provisions of Chapter 536, RSMo., and, if applicable, Section
536.028, RSMo. This Section and Chapter 536, RSMo., are nonseverable,
and if any of the powers vested with the General
Assembly under Chapter 536, RSMo., to review, to delay the
effective date, or to disapprove and annul a rule are subsequently
held unconstitutional, then the grant of rulemaking authority and
any rule proposed or adopted after August 28, 2015, shall be
invalid and void.
5. The provisions of this Subsection and any rules adopted hereunder
shall be null, void, and of no force and effect upon the effective date
of the final regulations issued by the Federal Food and Drug
Administration or from any other Federal agency if such
regulations mandate child-resistant effectiveness standards for
nicotine liquid containers.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, provide or distribute tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products or vapor products to persons
under eighteen (18) years of age.
B. All vending machines that dispense tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products or vapor products shall be located within the
unobstructed line of sight and under the direct supervision of an adult
responsible for preventing persons less than eighteen (18) years of age
from purchasing any tobacco product, alternative nicotine product or
vapor product from such machine or shall be equipped with a lock-out
device to prevent the machines from being operated until the person
responsible for monitoring sales from the machines disables the lock.
Such locking device shall be of a design that prevents it from being left
in an unlocked condition and which will allow only a single sale when
activated. A locking device shall not be required on machines that are
located in areas where persons less than eighteen (18) years of age are
not permitted or prohibited by law. An owner of an establishment whose
vending machine is not in compliance with the provisions of this
Subsection shall be subject to the penalties contained in Subsection (D)
of this Section. A determination of non-compliance may be made by a
local law enforcement agency or the Division of Alcohol and Tobacco
Control. Nothing in this Section shall apply to a vending machine if
located in a factory, private club or other location not generally
accessible to the general public.
C. No person or entity shall sell, provide or distribute any tobacco product,
alternative nicotine product or vapor product or rolling papers to any
minor or sell any individual cigarettes to any person in this State. This
Section
215.1705
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1710
AO:225
Subsection shall not apply to the distribution by family members on
property that is not open to the public.
D. Any person, including, but not limited to, a sales clerk, owner or
operator, who violates Subsection (A), (B) or (C) of this Section or
Section 215.1740 of this Article shall be penalized as follows:
1. For the first offense, twenty-five dollars ($25.00);
2. For the second offense, one hundred dollars ($100.00); and
3. For a third and subsequent offense, two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
E. Any owner of the establishment where tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products or vapor products are available for sale who violates
Subsection (C) of this Section shall not be penalized pursuant to this
Section if such person documents the following:
1. An in-house or other tobacco compliance employee training
program was in place to provide the employee with information on
the State and Federal regulations regarding sales of tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products or vapor products to
minors. Such training program must be attended by all employees
who sell tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or vapor
products to the general public;
2. A signed statement by the employee stating that the employee has
been trained and understands the State laws and Federal
regulations regarding the sale of tobacco to minors products,
alternative nicotine products or vapor products; and
3. Such in-house or other tobacco compliance training meets the
minimum training criteria, which shall not exceed a total of ninety
(90) minutes in length, established by the Division of Alcohol and
Tobacco Control.
F. The exemption in Subsection (E) of this Section shall not apply to any
person who is considered the general owner or operator of the outlet
where tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or vapor
products are available for sale if:
1. Four (4) or more violations per location of Subsection (C) of this
Section occur within a one-year period; or
2. Such person knowingly violates or knowingly allows his/her
employees to violate Subsection (C) of this Section.
G. If a sale is made by an employee of the owner of an establishment in
violation of this Article, the employee shall be guilty of an offense
established in Subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this Section. If a vending
machine is in violation of Section 215.1740, the owner of the
establishment shall be guilty of an offense established in Subsections
Section
215.1710
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.1710
AO:226
Section 215.1720. Minors Prohibited From Purchase or Possession
of Tobacco Products, Alternative Nicotine Products or Vapor
Products — Misrepresentation of Age.
(C) and (D) of this Section. If a sample is distributed by an employee of
a company conducting the sampling, such employee shall be guilty of
an offense established in Subsections (C) and (D) of this Section.
H. A person cited for selling, providing or distributing any tobacco
product, alternative nicotine product or vapor product to any individual
less than eighteen (18) years of age in violation of Subsection (A), (B) or
(C) of this Section shall conclusively be presumed to have reasonably
relied on proof of age of the purchaser or recipient, and such person
shall not be found guilty of such violation if such person raises and
proves as an affirmative defense that such individual presented a
driver's license or other government-issued photo identification
purporting to establish that such individual was eighteen (18) years of
age or older.
I. Any person adversely affected by this Section may file an appeal with
the Administrative Hearing Commission which shall be adjudicated
pursuant to the procedures established in Chapter 621, RSMo.
A. No person less than eighteen (18) years of age shall purchase, attempt
to purchase or possess cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products or vapor products unless such person is an employee
of a seller of cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products
or vapor products and is in such possession to effect a sale in the course
of employment or an employee of the Division of Alcohol and Tobacco
Control for enforcement purposes pursuant to Subsection (5) of Section
407.934, RSMo.
B. Any person less than eighteen (18) years of age shall not misrepresent
his/her age to purchase cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products or vapor products.
C. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section shall be
penalized as follows:
1. For the first violation, the person is guilty of an infraction and shall
have any cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products or vapor products confiscated;
2. For a second violation and any subsequent violations, the person is
guilty of an infraction, shall have any cigarettes, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products or vapor products confiscated and
shall complete a tobacco education or smoking cessation program,
if available.
Section
215.1710
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1730
AO:227
Section 215.1730. Retail Sales Tax License Required for Sale of
Tobacco Products, Alternative Nicotine Products or Vapor Products.
No person shall sell cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products or vapor products unless the person has a retail sales tax license.
Section 215.1740. Required Sign Stating Violation of State Law To
Sell Tobacco Products, Alternative Nicotine Products or Vapor
Products to Minors Under Age 18 — Display of Sign Required,
Where.
Section 215.1750. Restrictions on Sales of Individual Packs of
Cigarettes.
Section 215.1760. Proof of Age Required, When Defense to Action
for Violation Is Reasonable Reliance on Proof — Liability.
A. The owner of an establishment at which tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, vapor products or rolling papers are sold at retail or
through vending machines shall cause to be prominently displayed in a
conspicuous place at every display from which tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, vapor products are sold and on every
vending machine where tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, vapor products are purchased a sign that shall:
1. Contain in red lettering at least one-half (1/2) inch high on a white
background the following:
IT IS A VIOLATION OF STATE LAW FOR CIGARETTES, OTHER
TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS OR
VAPOR PRODUCTS TO BE SOLD OR OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO
ANY PERSON UNDER THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN OR FOR SUCH
PERSON TO PURCHASE, ATTEMPT TO PURCHASE OR POSSESS
CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ALTERNATIVE
NICOTINE PRODUCTS OR VAPOR PRODUCTS; and
2. Include a depiction of a pack of cigarettes at least two (2) inches
high defaced by a red diagonal diameter of a surrounding red circle
and the words "Under 18."
A. No person or entity shall sell individual packs of cigarettes or smokeless
tobacco products unless such packs satisfy one (1) of the following
conditions prior to the time of sale:
1. It is sold through a vending machine; or
2. It is displayed behind the checkout counter or it is within the
unobstructed line of sight of the sales clerk or store attendant from
the checkout counter.
A. A person or entity selling tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products or vapor products or rolling papers or distributing tobacco
Section
215.1730
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.1760
AO:228
Section 215.1770. through Section 215.1810. (Reserved)
product, alternative nicotine product or vapor product samples shall
require proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient if an
ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance that such
prospective purchaser or recipient may be under the age of eighteen
(18).
B. The operator's or chauffeur's license issued pursuant to the provisions
of Section 302.177, RSMo., or the operator's or chauffeur's license
issued pursuant to the laws of any State or possession of the United
States to residents of those States or possessions, or an identification
card as provided for in Section 302.181, RSMo., or the identification
card issued by any uniformed service of the United States, or a valid
passport shall be presented by the holder thereof upon request of any
agent of the Division of Alcohol and Tobacco Control or any owner or
employee of an establishment that sells tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products or vapor products for the purpose of aiding the
registrant, agent or employee to determine whether or not the person is
at least eighteen (18) years of age when such person desires to
purchase or possess tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or
vapor products procured from a registrant. Upon such presentation, the
owner or employee of the establishment shall compare the photograph
and physical characteristics noted on the license, identification card or
passport with the physical characteristics of the person presenting the
license, identification card or passport.
C. Any person who shall, without authorization from the Department of
Revenue, reproduce, alter, modify or misrepresent any chauffeur's
license, motor vehicle operator's license or identification card shall be
deemed guilty of an ordinance violation.
D. Reasonable reliance on proof of age or on the appearance of the
purchaser or recipient shall be a defense to any action for a violation of
Subsections (A), (B) and (C) of Section 215.1710 of this Article. No
person shall be liable for more than one (1) violation of Subsections (B)
and (C) of Section 215.1710 on any single day.
Section
215.1760
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1770
AO:229

ARTICLE XIV
Clean Air Act — Smoking Prohibited92
Section 215.1820. Purpose. [Ord. No. 4243 §§1 — 2, 8-16-2010; Ord.
No. 4575 §§1 — 2, 10-20-2014]
Section 215.1830. Definitions. [Ord. No. 4243 §§1 — 2, 8-16-2010;
Ord. No. 4575 §§1 — 2, 10-20-2014]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall be
construed as defined in this Section:
BAR — An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the
serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages,
including, but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges and
cabarets.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Fire Marshal or his or her
designee.
EMPLOYEE — Any person who performs services for an employer, with or
without compensation.
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, trust, or
other organized group of individuals, including the City or any agency
thereof, which utilizes the services of one (1) or more employees.
ENCLOSED — A space bound on all sides by walls or windows continuous
from the floor to the ceiling and enclosed by doors, including, but not
limited to, lobbies, offices, rooms, all space therein screened by partitions,
which do not extend to the ceiling or are not solid, office landscaping or
similar structures, and hallways.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT — Any enclosed area under the control of a
public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the
course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee
lounges and restrooms, conference rooms and classrooms, employee
A. The purposes of this Article are to:
1. Promote public health by creating environments which reduce
citizens' and workers' exposure to secondhand tobacco smoke and
vapor products; and
2. Create tobacco-smoke and vapor-product-free environments for
citizens and workers through regulation in public places and the
workplace.
92.Cross References — As To Mayor And Board Of Aldermen, Ch. 110; As To Alcoholic
Beverages, Ch. 600; As To Buildings And Building Regulations, Ch. 500; As To Fire
Prevention And Protection, Ch. 205; As To Licenses, Taxation And Miscellaneous Business
Regulations, Ch. 605.
Section
215.1820
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1830
AO:231
cafeterias and hallways. A private residence is not a place of employment
unless it is used as a child care, adult day-care or health-care facility.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any enclosed area to which the public is invited or
in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, banks,
educational facilities, health facilities, laundering facilities, public
transportation facilities, reception areas, production and marketing
establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, theaters and
waiting rooms.
RESTAURANT — An eating establishment, including but not limited to,
coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school
cafeterias, which gives or offers at no cost or for sale food to the public,
guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which
food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term
"restaurant" shall include an attached bar.
SMOKING — Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar,
cigarette, pipe or other tobacco product, and inhaling, exhaling, or burning
any vapor product.
VAPOR PRODUCTS — Any noncombustible product containing nicotine
that employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other
electronic chemical or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, that
can be used to produce vapor from nicotine in a solution or other form.
Vapor product includes any electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic
cigarillo, electric pipe, or similar product or device and any other form that
is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device.
Section 215.1840. Prohibition of Smoking in All Enclosed Places of
Employment and All Enclosed Public Places. [Ord. No. 4243 §§1 — 2,
8-16-2010; Ord. No. 4575 §§1 — 2, 10-20-2014]
A. Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed places of employment
within the City of Brentwood.
B. Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the City
of Brentwood, including but not limited to the following enclosed
places:
1. Elevators;
2. Restrooms;
3. Libraries, educational facilities, child-care and adult day-care
facilities, museums, auditoriums, aquariums and art galleries;
4. Any health-care facility, health clinic or ambulatory care facilities,
including but not limited to laboratories associated with the
rendition of health care treatment, hospitals, nursing homes,
doctors' offices and dentists' offices;
Section
215.1830
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.1840
AO:232
Section 215.1850. Responsibilities of Proprietors, Owners and
Managers. [Ord. No. 4243 §§1 — 2, 8-16-2010; Ord. No. 4575 §§1 —
2, 10-20-2014]
Section 215.1860. Where Smoking Is Not Regulated. [Ord. No. 4243
§§1 — 2, 8-16-2010; Ord. No. 4575 §§1 — 2, 10-20-2014]
5. Any place of entertainment or recreation, including but not limited
to gymnasiums, theaters, concert halls, bingo halls, billiard halls,
bowling alleys, arenas, health spas, swimming pools and roller and
ice skating rinks;
6. Any place used for exhibiting a motion picture, stage drama,
lecture, musical recital, or other similar performance;
7. Shopping malls;
8. Bars;
9. Restaurants;
10. Convenience facilities;
11. All public areas and waiting rooms of public transportation
facilities, including but not limited to bus and train facilities;
12. All facilities, buildings, and all vehicles owned, leased or operated
by the City of Brentwood;
13. Rooms in which meetings or hearings open to the public are held,
except where such meetings or hearings are in a private residence;
and
14. Any vehicle of public transportation, including, but not limited to,
buses, limousines for hire and taxicabs;
A. A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a place
listed in Section 215.1840 shall not knowingly permit, cause, suffer or
allow any person to violate the provisions of this Article in such place. It
shall be an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of this Article that
a person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls a place
listed in Section 215.1840 has asked that the lighted cigarette, cigar,
pipe or other tobacco product be extinguished or asked the person to
leave the establishment if that person has failed or refused to
extinguish the lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe or other tobacco products.
B. A person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls a place
listed in Section 215.1840 shall clearly and conspicuously post "No
Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of
a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle
with a red bar across it) near all entrances where smoking is prohibited
by this Article.
Section
215.1840
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1860
AO:233
Section 215.1870. Penalty for Violation of This Article. [Ord. No.
4243 §§1 — 2, 8-16-2010; Ord. No. 4575 §§1 — 2, 10-20-2014]
Section 215.1880. Other Applicable Laws. [Ord. No. 4243 §§1 — 2,
8-16-2010; Ord. No. 4575 §§1 — 2, 10-20-2014]
This Article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where
it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article to the contrary,
smoking shall be permitted in any and all places not specified in Section
215.1840. In particular, but not by limitation, the following shall not be
subject to this Article.
1. Private residences, except when used as licensed child care
facilities, adult day-care facilities, health-care facilities or enclosed
places of employment.
2. Private vehicles.
3. Twenty-five percent (25%) of hotel and motel rooms may be
permanently designated as smoking rooms.
4. Retail tobacco stores and vapor product stores that derive more
than eighty percent (80%) of their total gross revenue from the sale
of loose tobacco, cigarettes, cigars, pipes or other tobacco-related
products and/or vapor products, and which are not merely a
department or subsection of a larger commercial establishment.
A. A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by this
Article shall be guilty of an Article violation, punishable by a fine of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first violation and fifty dollars
($50.00) for each subsequent violation.
B. A person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls a public
place or place of employment and who fails to comply with this Article
shall be guilty of an Article violation, punishable by:
1. A fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first violation;
2. A fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation
within a one-year period; and
3. A fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a third or subsequent
violation within a one-year period.
C. Each day on which a violation of this Article occurs shall be a separate
and distinct violation.
Section
215.1860
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.1890
AO:234
Section 215.1890. Construction. [Ord. No. 4243 §§1 — 2, 8-16-2010;
Ord. No. 4575 §§1 — 2, 10-20-2014]
This Article shall be strictly construed in any interpretation of its meaning.
The provisions of this Article are severable. If any provision or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction the remaining provisions shall continue in full force
and effect.
Section 215.1900. Enforcement of Article. [Ord. No. 4243 §§1 — 2,
8-16-2010; Ord. No. 4575 §§1 — 2, 10-20-2014]
Section 215.1910. Prohibition of Smoking by Chief of Police or
Ordinance. [Ord. No. 4243 §§1 — 2, 8-16-2010; Ord. No. 4575 §§1 —
2, 10-20-2014]
Nothing in this Article shall be construed to limit the authority of the Fire
Marshal to designate locations in which smoking may be prohibited nor to
repeal any order by the Fire Marshal prohibiting smoking in any location,
nor to repeal any ordinance prohibiting smoking in any location.
A. The authority to administer the provisions of this Article is vested in the
Fire Marshal.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer may call upon the Fire and Police
Departments and other departments of the City to aid in the
enforcement of the provisions of this Article.
C. Notice of the provisions of this Article shall be given to all applicants for
a business license in the City of Brentwood, Missouri.
D. Any person who desires to register a complaint under this Article may
initiate enforcement with the fire marshal.
Section
215.1890
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1910
AO:235

ARTICLE XV
Social Host Regulations
Section 215.1915. Legislative Findings. [Ord. No. 4431 §1,
5-20-2013]
A. The Board of Aldermen finds as follows:
1. The City of Brentwood, pursuant to the police powers delegated to
it by the Missouri Constitution, has the authority to enact laws
which promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its
residents.
2. The occurrence of loud or unruly gatherings on private property
and motel rooms where alcoholic beverages or controlled
substances are served to or consumed by underage persons is
harmful to the underage persons themselves and a threat to public
health, safety, quiet enjoyment of residential property, other
property and general welfare.
3. Underage persons often obtain alcoholic beverages and controlled
substances at gatherings held at private residences, rented
residential premises or at motel rooms that are under the control of
a person who knows or should know of the underage service and/or
consumption. Persons responsible for the occurrence of loud or
unruly gatherings on private property and motel rooms over which
they have possession or control have failed to ensure that alcoholic
beverages or controlled substances are neither served to nor
consumed by underage persons at these parties.
4. Problems associated with loud or unruly gatherings at which
alcoholic beverages and controlled substances are served to or
consumed by underage persons are difficult to prevent and deter
unless the Police Department has the legal authority to abate the
party or gathering by directing or ordering the host or other
responsible person to disperse the party or gathering.
5. Control of loud or unruly gatherings on private property or hotel
rooms where alcoholic beverages and controlled substances are
served to or consumed by underage persons is necessary when
such activity is determined to be a threat to the peace, health,
safety or general welfare of the public.
6. Persons held responsible for abetting or tolerating loud or unruly
gatherings will be more likely to properly supervise or stop such
conduct at gatherings held on property under their possession or
control.
7. In the past and present, law enforcement, fire and other emergency
response services personnel have and are required to respond,
sometimes on multiple occasions, to loud or unruly gatherings on
Section
215.1915
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1915
AO:237
Section 215.1920. Purposes. [Ord. No. 4431 §1, 5-20-2013]
Section 215.1925. Definitions. [Ord. No. 4431 §1, 5-20-2013]
For the purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ADULT — Any person twenty-one (21) years of age or older.
ALCOHOL — Any substance containing any form of alcohol including, but
not limited to, ethanol, methanol, propanol and isopropanol.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — The same meaning as "intoxicating liquor" as
that term is defined in Chapter 600 of the Municipal Code of the City of
Brentwood.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES — The same meaning as that term is defined
in Section 195.010 of the Missouri Revised Statutes.
JUVENILE — Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
LOUD OR UNRULY GATHERING — A party or gathering of two (2) or more
underage persons at or on a residence, other private property or motel room
upon which loud or unruly conduct occurs. Such loud or unruly conduct
includes, but is not limited to:
private property and motel rooms at which alcoholic beverages
and controlled substances are served to or possessed or consumed
by underage persons, and responses to such gatherings result in
a disproportionate expenditure of public safety resources of the
City of Brentwood, which are underwritten by municipal taxes paid
by its taxpayers and residents and delaying police responses to
regular and emergency calls to the rest of the City.
A. The purposes of this Article are:
1. To protect public health, safety and general welfare;
2. To enforce laws prohibiting the service to and consumption and use
of alcoholic beverages and controlled substances by underage
persons; and
3. To reduce the costs of providing police, fire and other emergency
response services to loud or unruly gatherings by imposing a civil
fee against social hosts and landowners for the recovery of costs
associated with providing law enforcement, fire and other
emergency response services to loud or unruly gatherings,
including those where alcoholic beverages and controlled
substances are served to or consumed by underage persons.
1. Excessive noise;
2. Excessive traffic;
Section
215.1915
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.1925
AO:238
MOTEL ROOM — Any building, group of buildings, structure, facility, place,
or places of business where five (5) or more guest rooms are provided,
which is owned, maintained, or operated by any person and which is kept,
used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public for hire which can be
construed to be a hotel, motel, motor hotel, apartment hotel, tourist court,
resort, cabins, tourist home, bunkhouse, dormitory, or other similar place
by whatever name called, and includes all such accommodations operated
for hire as lodging establishments for either transient guests, permanent
guests, or for both transient and permanent guests, and further includes
all areas and rooms located therein which are or may be operated for
receptions, parties and meetings.
RESIDENCE OR OTHER PRIVATE PROPERTY — A home, yard, open field,
vacant lot, apartment, condominium or other dwelling unit or a hall or
meeting room, whether occupied as a dwelling, party or other social
function and whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without
compensation.
RESPONSE COSTS — The costs associated with responses by law
enforcement, fire and other emergency response providers to loud or unruly
gatherings including, but not limited to:
Obstruction of public streets or crowds that have spilled into public
streets;
3.
Public drunkenness, unlawful public consumption or possession of
alcohol or alcoholic beverages by underage persons;
4.
Service to or consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages by any
underage person, except as permitted by City Code, State law or
Missouri Constitution;
5.
Assaults, batteries, fights, domestic violence or other disturbances of
the peace;
6.
7. Vandalism;
8. Litter; and
Any other conduct which constitutes a threat to public health, safety,
quiet enjoyment of residential property or general welfare.
A loud or unruly gathering shall constitute a public nuisance and may
be abated by an order of a Police Officer directing the host or other
responsible person to cause all persons in or on said premises who
are not lawful residents thereof to disperse not more than fifteen (15)
minutes after the host or other responsible person receives an order to
do so issued by a Police Officer.
9.
Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, fire or other emergency
response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to,
remaining at or otherwise dealing with loud or unruly gatherings and
the administrative costs attributable to such response(s).
1.
Section
215.1925
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1925
AO:239
RESPONSIBLE PERSON — A person or persons with a right of possession
in the residence, other private property or motel room on which a loud or
unruly gathering is conducted including, but not limited to:
UNDERAGE PERSON — Any person under twenty-one (21) years of age.
Section 215.1930. Responsibility for Proper Management of
Property. [Ord. No. 4431 §1, 5-20-2013]
Every owner, occupant, lessee or holder of any possessory interest of a
residence, other private property or motel room within the City of
Brentwood is required to maintain, manage and supervise the property and
all persons thereon in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of this
Article.
Section 215.1935. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 4431 §1,
5-20-2013]
The cost of any medical treatment to or for any law enforcement, fire or
other emergency response personnel injured responding to, remaining
at or leaving the scene of a loud or unruly gathering.
2.
The cost of repairing any city or emergency services equipment or
property damaged and the cost of the use of any such equipment in
responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of a loud or unruly
gathering.
3.
An owner of the residence or other private property, but not the owner
of a motel;
1.
A tenant or lessee of the residence, other private property or motel
room;
2.
The person(s) in charge of the residence, other private property or
motel room; and
3.
The person(s) who organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts or
controls the gathering or any other person(s) accepting responsibility
for such a gathering.
If a responsible person for the gathering is a juvenile, then the parents
or guardians of that juvenile and the juvenile will be jointly and
severally liable for the response costs incurred pursuant to this Article.
To incur liability for response costs imposed by this Article, the
responsible person for the loud or unruly gathering need not be
present at such gathering resulting in the response giving rise to the
imposition of response costs. This Article therefore imposes vicarious
as well as direct liability upon a responsible person.
4.
A. Violations.
1. It shall be unlawful for any responsible person to allow, permit or
host a loud or unruly gathering at a residence, other private
Section
215.1925
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.1935
AO:240
Section 215.1940. Appeals. [Ord. No. 4431 §1, 5-20-2013]
Any person upon whom a fine is imposed pursuant to section 13-279 shall
have the right to appeal the imposition of such fine in the same manner as
provided for other municipal code violations.
Section 215.1945. Recovery of Response Costs. [Ord. No. 4431 §1,
5-20-2013]
property or motel room. Whenever an adult having control of the
residence, premises or motel room is present at that residence,
premises or motel room at the time an underage person obtains,
possesses, or consumes any alcoholic beverage or controlled
substance, it shall be prima facie evidence that such an adult
had the knowledge or should have had the knowledge that the
underage person obtained, possessed or consumed an alcoholic
beverage or controlled substance at the gathering.
2. No responsible person shall allow a loud or unruly gathering to
take place or continue at said residence, premises or motel room if
an underage person at the party obtains, possesses or consumes
any alcoholic beverages or controlled substances and the
responsible person knows or reasonably should know that the
underage person has obtained, possesses or is consuming alcoholic
beverages or controlled substances at the gathering.
3. This Article shall not apply to family gatherings at which underage
persons are present and supervised by their parents and/or legal
guardians.
B. Fines. A fine may be imposed up to the maximum amount provided for
in Section 100.080 of the Brentwood City Code for any violation of this
Article.
C. The fines imposed pursuant to Subsection (B) are in addition to any
response costs that may be assessed pursuant to this Article.
A. When law enforcement, fire or other emergency response provider
responds to a loud or unruly gathering at a residence, other private
property or motel room within the City of Brentwood within a twelve
(12) month period of a warning given to a responsible person for a loud
or unruly gathering, all responsible persons shall be jointly and
severally liable for the response costs for that response and all
subsequent responses during the warning period.
B. When a law enforcement, fire or other emergency response provider
official makes an initial response to a loud or unruly gathering at a
residence, other private or motel room property within the City of
Brentwood, the official shall inform any responsible person(s) for the
gathering at the scene that:
Section
215.1935
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1945
AO:241
Section 215.1950. Billing and Collection. [Ord. No. 4431 §1,
5-20-2013]
1. The official has determined that a loud or unruly gathering exists;
and
2. Responsible person(s) will be charged for any response costs
required for subsequent responses to the scene for a loud or unruly
gathering within a twelve (12) month period involving the same
responsible person(s).
C. Only one (1) warning will be given to a responsible person(s) pursuant
to this article before the City of Brentwood assesses response costs
pursuant to Section 215.1945. If a responsible person cannot be
identified at the scene, the official may issue a warning to one (1) or
more persons identified in Section 215.1925 under the definition of
"responsible person" and/or subsequently return to the residence, other
private property or motel room and issue the warning to a then-present
responsible person. Warnings given to responsible persons who do not
reside at the residence, other private property or motel room in
question shall be delivered by first class and/or certified mail.
A. The amount of response costs shall be deemed a debt owed to the City
of Brentwood by the responsible person held liable in Section 215.1945
for the loud or unruly gathering and, if a juvenile, by the juvenile's
parents or guardians.
B. Notice of the costs for which the responsible person is liable shall be
mailed via first class and/or certified mail within fourteen (14) days of
the response giving rise to such costs. The notice shall contain the
following information:
1. The name of the person(s) being held liable for the payment of such
costs;
2. The address of the residence, other private property or motel room
where the loud or unruly gathering occurred;
3. The date and time of the response;
4. The law enforcement, fire or emergency service provider who
responded;
5. The date and time of any previous warning given pursuant to
Section 215.1945 and/or previous responses to loud or unruly
gatherings at the residence, other private property or motel room
in question within the previous twelve (12) months; and
6. An itemized list of the response costs for which the person(s) is
being held liable.
C. The responsible person must remit payment of the noticed response
costs to the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice.
Section
215.1945
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
215.1950
AO:242
Section 215.1955. Reservation of Legal Options. [Ord. No. 4431 §1,
5-20-2013]
Nothing in this Article shall be construed as a waiver by the City of
Brentwood of any right to seek reimbursement for actual costs of response
services through other legal remedies or procedures. The procedure
provided for in this Article is in addition to any other statute, ordinance or
law, civil or criminal. This Article in no way limits the authority of peace
officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising
out of conduct regulated by this Article.
Section 215.1960. Severability. [Ord. No. 4431 §1, 5-20-2013]
If any provisions of this Article or its application to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions
or applications of this Article that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application and, to this end, the provisions of this Article are
severable.
Any action to recover such costs will be brought in the name of the City
of Brentwood in the Circuit Court for the County of St. Louis, Missouri.
D. In addition to all other remedies provided for in this Section, if a
responsible person(s) fails to remit the costs assessed hereunder, said
costs shall be certified to the City Clerk who shall cause the costs to be
included in a special tax bill or added to the annual real estate tax bill,
at the collecting official's option, for the property, and the certified
costs shall be collected by the City Collector or other official collecting
taxes in the same manner and procedure for collecting real estate
taxes. Provided, however, that no such costs shall be added to or
collected from the owner of a motel, unless such owner is otherwise
considered to be a responsible person by virtue of his personal rental of
a motel room. If the certified costs are not paid, the tax bill shall be
considered delinquent, and the collection of the delinquent bill shall be
governed by the laws governing delinquent and back taxes. The tax bill
from the date of issuance shall be deemed a personal debt against the
owner and shall also be a lien on the property until paid.
Section
215.1950
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1960
AO:243

ARTICLE XVI
(Reserved)
Section 215.1970. through Section 215.2040. (Reserved)93
93.Editor's Note: Former Article XVI, Offenses Involving Hours of Construction, containing
Sections 215.1970 through 215.1990 was repealed 6-19-2017 by Ord. No. 4782. See now
Sections 500.010, 500.020 and 500.080 of this Code.
Section
215.1970
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1970
AO:245

ARTICLE XVII
Miscellaneous Offenses
Section 215.2050. Fortunetelling. [R.O. 2009 §13-206; Code 1969
§25-19]
The practice of fortunetelling by palmistry, astrology, phrenology,
clairvoyance or other methods is hereby prohibited.
Section
215.2050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.2050
AO:247
Chapter 217
ABANDONED PROPERTY
Cross References — As to maximum charges for towing and storage,
§385.050; as to sale of abandoned property by city, §385.060; as to crime
inquiry and inspection reports required by state law, §385.040.
Section 217.010. Definitions.94
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set out
herein:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Any unattended or unlicensed motor vehicle,
trailer, all-terrain vehicle, outboard motor or vessel removed or subject
to removal from public or private property as provided in this Chapter,
whether or not operational.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation or other legal entity.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The entire width of land between the boundary lines of a
public road or State highway, including any roadway.
ROADWAY — That portion of a public road or State highway ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
TOWING COMPANY — Any person or entity which tows, removes or stores
abandoned property.
Section 217.020. Abandoning Vehicle, Vessel or Trailer — Last
Owner of Record Deemed Owner, Procedures — Penalty — Civil
Liability.
A. A person commits the offense of abandoning a vehicle, vessel, or trailer
if he or she knowingly abandons any vehicle, vessel, or trailer on:
1. The right-of-way of any public road or State highway;
2. On or in any of the waters in this State;
3. On the banks of any stream;
4. On any land or water owned, operated or leased by the State, any
board, department, agency or commission thereof, or any political
subdivision thereof;
5. On any land or water owned, operated or leased by the Federal
government; or
6. On any private real property owned by another without his or her
consent.
94.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, §304.001, RSMo.
Section
215.2050
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
217.020
AO:248
Section 217.030. Open Storage of Inoperable Vehicles or Public
Safety Hazards Prohibited.95
The open storage of inoperable or unlicensed vehicles or other vehicles
deemed by the City to constitute a public safety hazard is prohibited.
Nothing in this Section shall apply to a vehicle which is completely enclosed
within a locked building or locked fenced area and not visible from adjacent
public or private property, nor to any vehicle upon the property of a
B. For purposes of this Section, the last owner of record of a vehicle,
vessel, or trailer found abandoned and not shown to be transferred
pursuant to Sections 301.196 and 301.197, RSMo., shall be deemed
prima facie evidence of ownership of such vehicle, vessel, or trailer at
the time it was abandoned and the person who abandoned the vehicle,
vessel, or trailer or caused or procured its abandonment. The
registered owner of the abandoned vehicle, vessel, or trailer shall not
be subject to the penalties provided by this Section if the vehicle,
vessel, or trailer was in the care, custody, or control of another person
at the time of the violation. In such instance, the owner shall submit
such evidence in an affidavit permitted by the court setting forth the
name, address, and other pertinent information of the person who
leased, rented, or otherwise had care, custody, or control of the vehicle,
vessel, or trailer at the time of the alleged violation. The affidavit
submitted pursuant to this Subsection shall be admissible in a court
proceeding adjudicating the alleged violation and shall raise a
rebuttable presumption that the person identified in the affidavit was in
actual control of the vehicle, vessel, or trailer. In such case, the court
has the authority to terminate the prosecution of the summons issued to
the owner and issue a summons to the person identified in the affidavit
as the operator. If the vehicle, vessel, or trailer is alleged to have been
stolen, the owner of the vehicle, vessel, or trailer shall submit proof that
a police report was filed in a timely manner indicating that the vehicle
or vessel was stolen at the time of the alleged violation.
C. The offense of abandoning a vehicle, vessel, or trailer is an ordinance
violation.
D. Any person convicted pursuant to this Section shall be civilly liable for
all reasonable towing, storage, and administrative costs associated with
the abandonment of the vehicle, vessel, or trailer. Any reasonable
towing, storage, and administrative costs in excess of the value of the
abandoned vehicle, vessel, or trailer that exist at the time the property
is transferred pursuant to Section 304.156, RSMo., shall remain the
liability of the person convicted pursuant to this Section so long as the
towing company, as defined in Chapter 304, RSMo., provided the title
owner and lienholders, as ascertained by the Department of Revenue
records, a notice within the time frame and in the form as described in
Subsection 1 of Section 304.156, RSMo.
95.State Law Reference — For similar provisions, §304.159, RSMo.
Section
217.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
217.030
AO:249
business licensed as salvage, swap, junk dealer, towing or storage facility so
long as the business is operated in compliance with its business license and
the property is in compliance with applicable zoning ordinances.
Section 217.040. Towing of Abandoned Property on Private Real
Property.96
A. Generally. The City, including the City Police Department, may tow
motor vehicles from real property which are deemed a public safety
hazard pursuant to Section 217.030 or are derelict, junk, scrapped,
disassembled or otherwise harmful to the public health. The City shall
perform such tow pursuant to the terms of Section 217.050. When a
City agency other than the Police Department authorizes a tow under
this Subsection, it shall report the tow to the Police Department within
two (2) hours with a crime inquiry and inspection report.
B. Towing Authorized By City Police Department. If a person abandons
property on any real property owned by another without the consent of
the owner or person in possession of the real property, at the request of
the person in possession of the real property, any City Police Officer
may authorize a towing company to remove such abandoned property
from the property in the following circumstances:
1. The abandoned property is left unattended for more than fortyeight
(48) hours; or
2. In the judgment of a Police Officer, the abandoned property
constitutes a safety hazard or unreasonably interferes with the use
of the real property by the person in possession.
C. Towing Authorized By Real Property Owner, Lessee Or Property Or
Security Manager.
1. The owner of real property or lessee in lawful possession of the real
property or the property or security manager of the real property
may authorize a towing company to remove abandoned property or
property parked in a restricted or assigned area without
authorization by a Law Enforcement Officer only when the owner,
lessee or property or security manager of the real property is
present. A property or security manager must be a full-time
employee of a business entity. An authorization to tow pursuant to
this Subsection may be made only under any of the following
circumstances:
a. Sign. There is displayed, in plain view at all entrances to the
property, a sign not less than seventeen (17) by twenty-two
(22) inches in size, with lettering not less than one (1) inch in
height, prohibiting public parking and indicating that
unauthorized abandoned property or property parked in a
96.State Law References — For similar provisions, §§304.157.1 — 2, 304.157.4 — 9, 304.158.2
— 4, 304.158.8 — 9, RSMo.
Section
217.030
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
217.040
AO:250
restricted or assigned area will be removed at the owner's
expense, disclosing the maximum fee for all charges related
to towing and storage, and containing the telephone number
of the local traffic law enforcement agency where information
can be obtained or a twenty-four (24) hour staffed emergency
information telephone number by which the owner of the
abandoned property or property parked in a restricted or
assigned area may call to receive information regarding the
location of such owner's property.
b. Unattended on owner-occupied residential property. The
abandoned property is left unattended on owner-occupied
residential property with four (4) residential units or less and
the owner, lessee or agent of the real property in lawful
possession has notified the City Police Department, and ten
(10) hours have elapsed since that notification.
c. Unattended on other private real property. The abandoned
property is left unattended on private real property and the
owner, lessee or agent of the real property in lawful possession
of real property has notified the City Police Department, and
ninety-six (96) hours have elapsed since that notification.
2. Pursuant to this Section, any owner or lessee in lawful possession
of real property that requests a towing company to tow abandoned
property without authorization from a City Police Officer shall at
that time complete an abandoned property report which shall be
considered a legal declaration subject to criminal penalty pursuant
to Section 575.060, RSMo. The report shall be in the form
designed, printed and distributed by the Missouri Director of
Revenue and shall contain the following:
a. The year, model, make and abandoned property identification
number of the property, and the owner and any lienholders, if
known;
b. A description of any damage to the abandoned property noted
by owner, lessee or property or security manager in possession
of the real property;
c. The license plate or registration number and the State of
issuance, if available;
d. The physical location of the property and the reason for
requesting the property to be towed;
e. The date the report is completed;
f. The printed name, address and telephone number of the
owner, lessee or property or security manager in possession of
the real property;
Section
217.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
217.040
AO:251
g. The towing company's name and address;
h. The signature of the towing operator;
i. The signature of the owner, lessee or property or security
manager attesting to the facts that the property has been
abandoned for the time required by this Section and that all
statements on the report are true and correct to the best of the
person's knowledge and belief and that the person is subject to
the penalties for making false statements;
j. Space for the name of the law enforcement agency notified of
the towing of the abandoned property and for the signature of
the Law Enforcement Official receiving the report; and
k. Any additional information the Missouri Director of Revenue
deems appropriate.
3. Any towing company which tows abandoned property without
authorization from the City Police Department pursuant to
Subsection (B) of this Section shall deliver a copy of the abandoned
property report to the City Police Department. The copy may be
produced and sent by facsimile machine or other device which
produces a near exact likeness of the print and signatures required,
but only if the City Police Department has the technological
capability of receiving such copy and has registered the towing
company for such purpose. The report shall be delivered within two
(2) hours if the tow was made from a signed location pursuant to
Subsection (C)(1)(a) of this Section, otherwise the report shall be
delivered within twenty-four (24) hours.
4. The City Police Department, after receiving such abandoned
property report, shall record the date on which the abandoned
property report is filed with the Police Department and shall
promptly make an inquiry into the National Crime Information
Center (NCIC) and any statewide Missouri law enforcement
computer system to determine if the abandoned property has been
reported as stolen. The Police Department shall enter the
information pertaining to the towed property into the statewide law
enforcement computer system and a Police Officer shall sign the
abandoned property report and provide the towing company with a
signed copy.
5. The City Police Department, after receiving notification that
abandoned property has been towed by a towing company, shall
search the records of the Missouri Department of Revenue and
provide the towing company with the latest owner and lienholder
information on the abandoned property, and if the tower has online
access to the Department of Revenue's records, the tower shall
comply with the requirements of Section 304.155, RSMo. If the
abandoned property is not claimed within ten (10) working days,
the towing company shall send a copy of the abandoned property
Section
217.040
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
217.040
AO:252
report signed by a Law Enforcement Officer to the Department of
Revenue.
6. No owner, lessee or property or security manager of real property
shall knowingly authorize the removal of abandoned property in
violation of this Section.
7. Any owner of any private real property causing the removal of
abandoned property from that real property shall state the grounds
for the removal of the abandoned property if requested by the
registered owner of that abandoned property. Any towing company
that lawfully removes abandoned property from private property
with the written authorization of the property owner or the
property owner's agent who is present at the time of removal shall
not be held responsible in any situation relating to the validity of
the removal. Any towing company that removes abandoned
property at the direction of the landowner shall be responsible for:
a. Any damage caused by the towing company to the property in
the transit and subsequent storage of the property; and
b. The removal of property other than the property specified by
the owner of the private real property from which the
abandoned property was removed.
D. Damage To Property. The owner of abandoned property removed from
private real property may recover for any damage to the property
resulting from any act of any person causing the removal of, or
removing, the abandoned property.
E. Real Property Owner Liability. Any owner of any private real property
causing the removal of abandoned property parked on that property is
liable to the owner of the abandoned property for double the storage or
towing charges whenever there has been a failure to comply with the
requirements of this Chapter.
F. Written Authorization Required — Delegation Of Authority To Tow.
1. Except for the removal of abandoned property authorized by the
City Police Department pursuant to this Section, a towing company
shall not remove or commence the removal of abandoned property
from private real property without first obtaining written
authorization from the real property owner. All written
authorizations shall be maintained for at least one (1) year by the
towing company.
2. General authorization to remove or commence removal of
abandoned property at the towing company's discretion shall not
be delegated to a towing company or its affiliates except in the case
of abandoned property unlawfully parked within fifteen (15) feet of
a fire hydrant or in a fire lane designated by a Fire Department or
the State Fire Marshal.
Section
217.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
217.040
AO:253
Section 217.050. General Provisions and Procedures.97
G. Towing Company Liability. Any towing company, or any affiliate of a
towing company, which removes, or commences removal of, abandoned
property from private property without first obtaining written
authorization from the property owner or lessee, or any employee or
agent thereof, who is present at the time of removal or commencement
of the removal, except as permitted in Subsection (F) of this Section, is
liable to the owner of the property for four (4) times the amount of the
towing and storage charges, in addition to any applicable ordinance
violation penalty, for a violation of this Section.
A. Payment Of Charges. The owner of abandoned property removed as
provided in this Chapter shall be responsible for payment of all
reasonable charges for towing and storage of such abandoned property
as provided in Section 385.050.
B. Crime Inquiry And Inspection Report. As to Crime Inquiry and
Inspection Reports required by State Law, see Chapter 385 of this
Code, Section 385.040.
C. Reclaiming Property. The owner of such abandoned property, or the
holder of a valid security interest of record, may reclaim it from the
towing company upon proof of ownership or valid security interest of
record and payment of all reasonable charges for the towing and
storage of the abandoned property.
D. Lienholder Repossession. If a lienholder repossesses any motor vehicle,
trailer, all-terrain vehicle, outboard motor or vessel without the
knowledge or cooperation of the owner, then the repossessor shall
notify the City Police Department within two (2) hours of the
repossession and shall further provide the Police Department with any
additional information the Police Department deems appropriate. The
City Police Department shall make an inquiry with the National Crime
Information Center and the Missouri statewide law enforcement
computer system and shall enter the repossessed vehicle into the
statewide law enforcement computer system.
E. Notice To Owner/Tow Lien Claim. Any towing company which comes
into possession of abandoned property pursuant to this Chapter and
who claims a lien for recovering, towing or storing abandoned property
shall give notice to the title owner and to all persons claiming a lien
thereon, as disclosed by the records of the Missouri Department of
Revenue or of a corresponding agency in any other State. The towing
company shall notify the owner and any lienholder within ten (10)
business days of the date of mailing indicated on the notice sent by the
Missouri Department of Revenue pursuant to Section 304.156, RSMo.,
97.State Law References — For similar provisions, §§304.155.5 — 6, 304.155.11 — 12,
304.158.1, 304.158.5, 304.158.7, RSMo.
Section
217.040
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
217.050
AO:254
by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall contain the
following:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the storage facility;
2. The date, reason and place from which the abandoned property
was removed;
3. A statement that the amount of the accrued towing, storage and
administrative costs are the responsibility of the owner, and that
storage and/or administrative costs will continue to accrue as a
legal liability of the owner until the abandoned property is
redeemed;
4. A statement that the storage firm claims a possessory lien for all
such charges;
5. A statement that the owner or holder of a valid security interest of
record may retake possession of the abandoned property at any
time during business hours by proving ownership or rights to a
secured interest and paying all towing and storage charges;
6. A statement that, should the owner consider that the towing or
removal was improper or not legally justified, the owner has a right
to request a hearing as provided in this Section to contest the
propriety of such towing or removal;
7. A statement that if the abandoned property remains unclaimed for
thirty (30) days from the date of mailing the notice, title to the
abandoned property will be transferred to the person or firm in
possession of the abandoned property free of all prior liens; and
8. A statement that any charges in excess of the value of the
abandoned property at the time of such transfer shall remain a
liability of the owner.
F. Physical Search Of Property. In the event that the Missouri Department
of Revenue notifies the towing company that the records of the
Department of Revenue fail to disclose the name of the owner or any
lienholder of record, the towing company shall attempt to locate
documents or other evidence of ownership on or within the abandoned
property itself. The towing company must certify that a physical search
of the abandoned property disclosed no ownership documents were
found and a good faith effort has been made. For purposes of this
Section, "good faith effort" means that the following checks have been
performed by the company to establish the prior State of registration
and title:
1. Check of the abandoned property for any type of license plates,
license plate record, temporary permit, inspection sticker, decal or
other evidence which may indicate a State of possible registration
and title;
Section
217.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
217.050
AO:255
2. Check the law enforcement report for a license plate number or
registration number if the abandoned property was towed at the
request of a law enforcement agency;
3. Check the tow ticket/report of the tow truck operator to see if a
license plate was on the abandoned property at the beginning of
the tow, if a private tow; and
4. If there is no address of the owner on the impound report, check
the law enforcement report to see if an out-of-state address is
indicated on the driver license information.
G. Petition In Circuit Court. The owner of the abandoned property
removed pursuant to this Chapter or any person claiming a lien, other
than the towing company, within ten (10) days after the receipt of
notification from the towing company pursuant to Subsection (E) of this
Section may file a petition in the Associate Circuit Court in the County
where the abandoned property is stored to determine if the abandoned
property was wrongfully taken or withheld from the owner. The petition
shall name the towing company among the defendants. The petition
may also name the agency ordering the tow or the owner, lessee or
agent of the real property from which the abandoned property was
removed. The Missouri Director of Revenue shall not be a party to such
petition but a copy of the petition shall be served on the Director of
Revenue.
H. Notice To Owner. Notice as to the removal of any abandoned property
pursuant to this Chapter shall be made in writing within five (5)
working days to the registered owner and any lienholder of the fact of
the removal, the grounds for the removal, and the place to which the
property has been removed by either:
1. The public agency authorizing the removal; or
2. The towing company, where authorization was made by an owner
or lessee of real property.
If the abandoned property is stored in any storage facility, a
copy of the notice shall be given to the operator of the facility.
The notice provided for in this Section shall include the amount
of mileage if available shown on the abandoned property at the
time of removal.
I. Tow Truck Requirements. Any towing company which tows abandoned
property for hire shall have the towing company's name, City and State
clearly printed in letters at least three (3) inches in height on the sides
of the truck, wrecker or other vehicle used in the towing.
J. Storage Facilities. Persons operating or in charge of any storage facility
where the abandoned property is stored pursuant to this Chapter shall
accept cash for payment of towing and storage by a registered owner or
the owner's agent claiming the abandoned property.
Section
217.050
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
217.050
AO:256
Chapter 220
NUISANCES
Cross References — As to dangerous buildings, §§500.270 et seq.; as to
derelict vehicles, §§390.050 et seq.; as to trees and shrubs, ch. 230.
State Law References — Nuisance abatement authorized, §§71.780, 79.370,
RSMo.
K. Disposition Of Towed Property. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Section 301.227, RSMo., any towing company who has complied with
the notification provisions in Section 304.156, RSMo., including notice
that any property remaining unredeemed after thirty (30) days may be
sold as scrap property may then dispose of such property as provided in
this Subsection. Such sale shall only occur if at least thirty (30) days
have passed since the date of such notification, the abandoned property
remains unredeemed with no satisfactory arrangements made with the
towing company for continued storage, and the owner or holder of a
security agreement has not requested a hearing as provided in Section
304.156, RSMo. The towing company may dispose of such abandoned
property by selling the property on a bill of sale as prescribed by the
Director of Revenue to a scrap metal operator or licensed salvage
dealer for destruction purposes only. The towing company shall forward
a copy of the bill of sale provided by the scrap metal operator or
licensed salvage dealer to the Director of Revenue within two (2) weeks
of the date of such sale. The towing company shall keep a record of
each such vehicle sold for destruction for three (3) years that shall be
available for inspection by law enforcement and authorized Department
of Revenue officials. The record shall contain the year, make,
identification number of the property, date of sale, and name of the
purchasing scrap metal operator or licensed salvage dealer and copies
of all notifications issued by the towing company as required in this
Chapter. Scrap metal operators or licensed salvage dealers shall keep a
record of the purchase of such property as provided in Section 301.227,
RSMo. Scrap metal operators and licensed salvage dealers may obtain a
junk certificate as provided in Section 301.227, RSMo., on vehicles
purchased on a bill of sale pursuant to the Section.
Section
217.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
217.050
AO:257

ARTICLE I
In General
Section 220.010. Nuisances Prohibited — Conditions and Acts
Which Constitute a Nuisance.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant or any agent,
servant, representative or employee of any such owner, lessee or
occupant having control of any occupied lot or land or any part thereof
in the City of Brentwood or within one-half (½) mile of the corporate
limits of the City of Brentwood, Missouri, to cause, permit or maintain a
nuisance on any such lot or land. Additionally, it is unlawful for any
person or his/her agent, servant, representative or employee to cause
or maintain a nuisance on the land or property of another with or
without permission. Each day that a nuisance shall be maintained is a
separate offense.
B. The following conditions, acts and business operations are hereby
declared to be nuisances affecting public health:
1. Stagnant water and water collected and allowed to stand for more
than thirty-six (36) hours and the presence of containers, old tires,
debris or other conditions which lend themselves to the collection
and retention of pools or puddles of water which may become
stagnant. This Subsection shall not include swimming pools,
decorative or patio ponds or fountains or other containers where
the water is continuously filtered, cleaned or cycled.
2. Accumulations, wheresoever they may occur, of manure, rubbish,
garbage, refuse and human and industrial, noxious or offensive
waste.
3. Except as provided in this Code, any storage or accumulation on
any premises or any open lot of any lumber, bricks, stones, gravel,
concrete, dirt, sand or similar materials, unless the same shall be
stored in permanently constructed structure which is fully
enclosed.
4. The presence of debris of any kind including, but not limited to,
weed cuttings, cut and fallen trees, limbs and shrubs, rubbish and
trash, rocks or bricks, tin, steel, parts of derelict cars or trucks,
broken furniture, any flammable material which may endanger
public safety, or any material which is unhealthy or unsafe.
5. Any accumulation, deposit or outside storage of any vehicular or
equipment parts, inoperable appliances and other equipment, junk
or material of any nature where said accumulation, deposit or
outside storage may constitute an attractive nuisance, danger to
children, provide a breeding or nesting area for vermin, rodents
and other animals, or collect stagnant water.
Section
220.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.010
AO:259
6. Any and all infestation of flies, fleas, roaches, lice, ticks, rats, mice,
fly maggots, mosquito larvae and hookworm larvae.
7. The keeping of animals and fowls in any area within the City where
the keeping of such animals is not permitted or in any unclean or
filthy pen, shed or other enclosure.
8. All diseased animals running at large.
9. Carcasses of dead animals not buried or destroyed within twentyfour
(24) hours after death.
10. Grass, brush and weeds more than eight (8) inches in height.
11. Dead or dying trees, limbs and shrubs.
12. The shining of artificial light onto public or private property as to
be an annoyance, hurt, injury or inconvenience to other persons.
13. Any noise which exceeds the limitations or which is otherwise in
violation of the provisions of this Code.
14. The presence on any property of any steel-jawed animal traps or
similar devices, unless authorized by the Police Department.
15. Buildings in such a state of disrepair as to affect the health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of Brentwood or which are maintained in
violation of the zoning or building codes of the City.
16. Any accumulation or storage of firewood in the front yard of any lot,
other than in a commercially manufactured decorative firewood
rack on the front porch, or in the rear yard of any lot unless evenly
piled or stacked either on open racks elevated not less than six (6)
inches above the ground or on a durably paved surface.
17. The maintenance, storage or use of any furniture outside a fully
enclosed structure, unless the furniture is designed and built for
exterior use and to resist damage and deterioration by the
elements.
18. Water or other liquid diverted from a sump pump or other facility,
structure or device which flows onto streets and sidewalks.
19. Any land disturbance activity or area where vegetation has been
cleared or has not been maintained or other condition which
results in the run-off of mud, dirt, rocks or any other material onto
sidewalks, streets, or other rights-of-way or into creeks, streams,
drainage ditch or any storm water system or facility.
20. The discharge onto any street, sidewalk or right-of-way or into any
creek, stream, drainage ditch or storm water system of any waste
materials, liquids, vapor, fat, gasoline, benzene, naphtha, oil or
petroleum product, mud, straw, lawn clippings, tree limbs or
branches, metal or plastic objects, rags, garbage or any other
Section
220.010
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
220.010
AO:260
substance which is capable of causing an obstruction to the flow
of water drainage or the storm system or interfere with the proper
operation of the system or which will pollute the natural creeks or
waterways or cause a hazard to the public.
21. The pollution of any well, cistern, spring, underground water,
stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage or industrial wastes
or other substances harmful to human beings.
22. Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders in
unreasonable quantities, or the presence of any gas, vapor, fume,
smoke, dust or any other toxic substance on, in or emitted from the
equipment of any premises in quantities sufficient to be toxic,
harmful or injurious to the health of any employee or to the
premises, occupant or to any other person.
23. Any vehicle used for garbage or rubbish disposal which is not
equipped with a water-tight metal body and provided with a tight
metal cover or covers and so constructed as to prevent any of the
contents from leaking, spilling, falling or blowing out of such
vehicle at any time, except while being loaded, or not completely
secured and covered so as to prevent offensive odors from escaping
therefrom or exposing any part of the contents at any time.
24. Foul odors in quantities sufficient to be detected on adjoining
property.
25. Any partly dismantled, wrecked, dilapidated, abandoned or nonoperative
automobile or other motor vehicle or parts thereof which
are found upon any private property, and which are not housed in a
garage, basement or other enclosed building. Any motor vehicle,
automobile or other elements thereof found disassembled upon
private property shall be considered to be dismantled, abandoned,
wrecked or dilapidated for the purpose of this Chapter when such
automobile or other vehicle is found lacking essential component
parts which prevent it from being immediately operative under its
own power or which has a deflated tire or tires, or which vehicle or
automobile is not properly licensed and registered with a current
license plate displayed on the vehicle and with a proper current
vehicle registration in possession of the person in charge of the
property upon which the vehicle or automobile is located.
26. The presence of any graffiti displayed on exterior surfaces of
property. "Graffiti" is hereby defined as any word, phrase, motto,
name, design, symbol or picture written, scribbled, painted, drawn,
etched or scratched directly onto any portion of public property or
onto an exterior surface on private property.
27. Any obstruction or encumbrance of any street, curb, alley, cul-desac,
sidewalk or right-of-way within the City by placing or causing
to be placed barricades, objects or other obstructions, including,
but not limited to, signs, boxes, stones, junk, portable basketball
Section
220.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.010
AO:261
Section 220.020. Inspections.
Section 220.030. Notice of Nuisance and Hearing.
hoops, etc., on such streets, curbs, alleys, cul-de-sacs, sidewalks
or right-of-way unless such placement is permitted by the City or
permitted under the provisions of this Code.
28. Any business operation or establishment, although licensed or
permitted, which is operating in violation of any law, ordinance, or
permit or plan condition or which is causing or maintaining any
condition which is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of
the inhabitants of the area.
29. All other acts, practices, conduct, business, occupation callings,
trades, uses of property and all other things detrimental or certain
to be detrimental to the health of the inhabitants of the City of
Brentwood.
A. For the purpose of examining the sanitary condition thereof and for the
discovery and abatement of public nuisances therein, any code
enforcement officer, police officer or other official, agent or employee of
the City are hereby authorized to:
1. Inspect property from any adjoining public property or from
adjoining private property if the owner of the neighboring private
property has given consent to such entry; and
2. Enter and inspect all property, buildings and parts of buildings and
other premises pursuant to lawful authority which shall include
consent of the owner of the property, valid administrative search
warrant or in areas where the owner of which has no expectation of
privacy.
A. Before any action is taken with respect to any nuisance, the Director of
Planning and Development or his/her designee shall give written notice
to the person or persons causing or maintaining such nuisance and
shall order such person or persons to abate the same within a
reasonable time to be specified in such notice. If the City contemplates
abatement of the nuisance, then the notice shall also set forth the date,
time and place for hearing and shall order such person to appear before
the Director of Planning and Development or his or her designee, at
such time and place as the Director of Planning and Development may
direct to show cause, if any, why the nuisance should not be abated.
B. Such notice may be served by the code enforcement officer or any
police officer of the City. A copy of such notice shall be kept by the
officer serving the same who shall make his or her written return
thereon stating how, when, on whom and where he or she served the
same and subscribe his or her name thereto. Such notice may be served
by delivering the same to the person or persons to be notified or a copy
Section
220.010
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
220.030
AO:262
Section 220.040. Penalty for Causing or Maintaining a Nuisance —
Proceedings in Municipal Court.
Section 220.050. Ordinances Not to Be Construed as Limiting Any
Official's Power of Abatement.
Nothing in this Chapter or other ordinances relating to public nuisances,
including the failure to set forth a particular condition as constituting
a nuisance, or denominated by a particular ordinance as offenses or
prescribing penalties therefore shall be construed as limiting or interfering
with the duties and powers of any City Official relative to the condemnation
and abatement of any matter which in law constitutes a public nuisance.
thereof left at the usual place of abode of such person with a member of
the family over the age of fifteen (15) years, unless otherwise provided
in this Chapter.
C. Provided that if the nuisance is being maintained upon property to
which record title is held by a person or corporation not a resident of
this City, a notice prescribed in this Section may be served by posting a
copy thereof in plain view upon such property at least ten (10) days
before any further action be taken by the City with regard to said
nuisance and mailing a copy to the person maintaining the nuisance at
the address as reflected in the County tax or real estate records.
A. Every person, occupant, tenant, owner or every officer or agent or
employee of any corporation or other entity who shall cause or maintain
any nuisance and who shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the same
within the reasonable time required and specified in the notice of the
code enforcement officer shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in this Code. Each and
every day such nuisance is maintained after such notice shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense punishable in such manner.
B. Any code enforcement officer or police officer of this City is hereby
authorized to issue a citation requiring an appearance before the
Municipal Judge at the date and time as specified in the citation. The
citation shall, in sufficient detail, describe the nuisance and state the
name of the person to appear. The form of the citation shall be approved
by the Municipal Judge. In lieu of a citation, any code enforcement
officer or police officer of this City is hereby authorized to file a
complaint with the Municipal Prosecutor detailing the circumstances of
the nuisance and the person responsible therefor; such complaint shall
serve as a basis to file and issue an appropriate Information and
Summons to the person maintaining a nuisance in order to charge and
proceed in all respects in the Municipal Court as in other cases
involving violations of City ordinance.
Section
220.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.060
AO:263
Section 220.060. Authority to Abate Emergency Conditions.
In cases where it reasonably appears that there is an immediate danger
to the health, safety or welfare of the public due to the existence of a
nuisance, the City shall have authority to immediately abate the nuisance in
an appropriate manner.
Section 220.070. Abatement of Nuisances, Generally.
A. In addition to other remedies and enforcement procedures set forth in
this Code, the City may proceed to abate the nuisance in accordance
with the provisions of this Section.
1. Nuisances caused by high grass, weeds, brush and vegetation may
be abated in accordance with the separate procedure for such
nuisance as set forth in this Chapter or in accordance with the
provisions of this Section.
2. Nuisances caused by an accumulation of trash, litter and debris
may be abated in accordance with the specific procedure for such
nuisance as set forth in this Chapter or in accordance with the
provisions of this Section.
3. For all other nuisances, the City shall proceed as follows:
a. The Director of Planning and Development or his/her designee
shall have issued a notice of the violation in accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter and shall have included notice of
hearing. Every person required to appear shall have at least
ten (10) days' notice thereof.
b. The hearing shall be conducted by the Director of Planning and
Development or his or her designee. If after hearing all the
evidence, it is determined that a nuisance exists, the Director
of Planning and Development or his/her designee shall order
the person to abate the nuisance within twenty (20) days or
within such other time as the Director may deem reasonable.
Such order shall be served in the manner provided in this
Section for service of the notice of violation. The order may
further provide that the appropriate City Official be directed to
abate the nuisance if the order is not obeyed within the time
period established, and that a special tax bill be issued for the
costs of abating the nuisance.
c. The decision of the Director of Planning and Development or
his/her designee may be appealed by filing an appeal, on such
forms as prescribed by the City, with the Mayor within seven
(7) days from the Director's decision. The appeal form shall set
forth, at a minimum, the detailed grounds for such appeal and
such further information as requested on the appeal form. The
Mayor shall review the decision of the Director of Planning and
Development or his/her designee either, within the Mayor's
Section
220.060
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
220.070
AO:264
Section 220.080. Authority to Suspend or Revoke Business License
or Other Permits as Means to Abate Nuisance Caused by Business
Establishment.
sole discretion, upon the record previously made or upon a new
hearing and shall issue a written decision to all parties; such
decision may be subject to judicial review in the Circuit Court
of St. Louis County by filing an appropriate Petition for Judicial
Review within fifteen (15) days of the Mayor's decision.
d. If the nuisance has not been abated within the established time
period, the appropriate City Official shall proceed to abate the
nuisance in the manner provided by the order of the Director
or the Mayor, and the cost of same shall be assessed as a
special tax against the property so improved or upon which
such work was done and shall be a lien against said property.
The City Clerk, or his or her designee, shall cause a special tax
bill to be issued therefor against the owner thereof when
known, and if not known then against the unknown persons,
and the certified bills of such assessment shall describe therein
the property upon which the work was done.
The costs and expenses incurred by the City shall include the
actual costs billed by third parties performing the abatement
and paid by the City; costs billed by the City Attorney related
to the abatement and paid by the City; costs of mailing or
publication of notices; and costs related to time spent by City
personnel in performing tasks related to the abatement and
in preparation of the tax bill, lien, or other paperwork (these
costs shall be based on the time spent in quarter of an hour
increments multiplied by the hourly rate of pay for the
employee).
All City departments shall determine and document the costs
and expenses related to abatement of a nuisance which shall
be provided to the City Clerk, or his or her designee, for proper
billing of such costs and expenses and for general oversight
purposes.
e. If the bill is not paid within the time period established for
payment, Notice of a Special Tax Lien shall be recorded with
the Recorder of Deeds office.
f. The cost of abating nuisances on private property shall be
levied and assessed on each lot in proportion to the amount of
work done and material used in abating the nuisance located
on each such lot.
A. In addition to the other methods of abatement and enforcement as
provided in this Code, a business license or other permit may be
Section
220.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.080
AO:265
suspended or revoked in the event that a business operation or
establishment is found to be maintaining a nuisance.
B. The Director of Planning and Development or his/her designee shall
issue a Notice of Violation to the operation or establishment that has
caused or is maintaining the nuisance that such nuisance exists and
order the property owner and owner or operator of the business (if
different than the property owner) to appear before the City Clerk, or
his or her designee, at such time and place as determined by the City
Clerk to show cause, if any, why the business license or other permit
should not be suspended or revoked. Every person required to appear
shall have at least ten (10) days' notice thereof.
C. Such notice shall be signed by the Director of Planning and
Development or his/her designee or Chief of Police and shall be served
upon that person by delivering a copy thereof to the person, or by
leaving a copy at his/her residence with some member of the family or
household over fifteen (15) years of age, or upon any corporation by
delivering the copy thereof to the registered agent or to any other
officer at any business office of the corporation within the City. If the
notice cannot be given for the reason that the person named in the
notice or his/her agent cannot be found in the City, of which fact the
return upon such notice of the officer serving the same shall be
conclusive evidence, such notice shall be mailed to such person and
posted at the property which is the site of the nuisance or mailed to
such person and published in a newspaper within the City once at least
seven (7) days before time fixed for the parties to appear. The cost of
the mailing and publication shall be assessed against the property
owner and/or business owner.
D. If after hearing all the evidence, it is determined that a nuisance exists,
the City Clerk, or his or her designee, shall order the property owner
and the owner or operator of the business to abate the nuisance within
twenty (20) days or within such other time as may be reasonable. Such
order shall be served in the manner provided in this Section for service
of the Notice of Violation. The order may further provide that if the
nuisance is not abated within the time prescribed, then the business
license or other permit shall be suspended for a certain period of time
or revoked without further proceedings.
E. The decision of the City Clerk may be appealed by filing an appeal, on
such forms as prescribed by the City, with the Board of Aldermen within
seven (7) days from the City Clerk's decision. The appeal form shall set
forth, at a minimum, the detailed grounds for such appeal and such
further information as requested on the appeal form. The Board, as a
whole, may review the matter or assign the matter to one (1) of its
members as a hearing officer. The Board or hearing officer shall review
the decision of the City Clerk either, within its sole discretion, upon the
record previously made or upon a new hearing and shall issue a written
decision to all parties; such decision may be subject to judicial review in
Section
220.080
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
220.080
AO:266
Section 220.090. Equitable and Other Relief.
In addition to the other remedies provided in this Code, if a person has
violated or continues to violate the provisions of this Chapter, the City may
petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person
from activities which would create further violations or compelling the
person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. In addition,
the City may utilize any other remedy, at law or in equity, in order to enforce
the provisions of this Chapter. The City shall recover all attorneys' fees,
court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this Section.
Section 220.100. through Section 220.140. (Reserved)
the Circuit Court of St. Louis County by filing an appropriate Petition
for Judicial Review within fifteen (15) days of the decision.
F. If the nuisance is not abated or other provisions of the order are not
obeyed within the established time period, the business license or other
permit shall, in the discretion of the City Clerk, be suspended for a
certain period of time or revoked without further proceedings.
G. Upon suspension or revocation of a business license, the owner and/or
operator of the business shall immediately cease operation of the
business at the location set forth in the order.
Section
220.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.100
AO:267

ARTICLE II
Litter, Trash and Debris
Section 220.150. Litter, Trash and Debris.
Section 220.160. through Section 220.200. (Reserved)
A. The Accumulation Of Litter, Trash Or Debris Declared To Be A
Nuisance. The accumulation of any litter, trash and/or debris upon any
lot or ground within the City is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
B. Unlawful To Maintain Such Nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any
person to create or maintain a nuisance as defined in Subsection (A).
C. Liability. Whenever trash, litter or debris, in violation of this Section, is
allowed to accumulate on any part of any lot or ground within this City,
the owner of the ground, or in case of joint tenancy, tenancy by
entireties or tenancy in common, each owner thereof shall be liable.
D. Notice. The Director of Planning and Development or his/her designee
shall give at least five (5) days' notice of the first (1st) violation within a
calendar year to the owner of the property; the notice shall be sent via
regular mail to the owner's last known address and/or posted on the
property. The notice shall order the nuisance abated within five (5) days
of the date of the notice. The Director of Planning and Development or
his/her designee shall hold a hearing during this five (5) day period if a
hearing is requested by the property owner.
E. No Notice For Repeat Violations Within Same Calendar Year. If litter,
trash or debris is allowed to accumulate on the same property in
violation of this Section more than once during the same calendar year,
the Director of Planning and Development or his/her designee may,
without further notification, have the litter, trash or debris removed and
the cost of the same shall be billed in the manner described in this
Section.
F. Disposition. In the event that the litter, trash or debris is not removed as
ordered, the Director of Planning and Development or his/her designee
may have the litter, trash or debris removed and the cost of the same
shall be billed in the manner as other nuisance abatement costs.
Section
220.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.160
AO:269

ARTICLE III
Accumulations of Materials
Section 220.210. Method of Stacking Firewood, Lumber, Wood and
Materials. [R.O. 2009 §16-31; Ord. No. 3072 §2, 6-4-1990]
It shall be unlawful for any person to store, stack or permit to accumulate
on any alley, lot or premises, improved or vacant, in the City, any firewood,
lumber, wood, boxes, containers or materials, unless the same shall be
evenly piled or stacked on open racks that are elevated above the ground
at such elevation that such materials do not attract or harbor rats, mice,
snakes, termites or other vermin.
Section 220.220. Unsafe Storage of Building Materials, Fuels. [R.O.
2009 §13-181; Code 1969 §16-2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to store any lumber, wood, coal, rock or
other material or substance upon any lot or premises within this City in such
manner as to endanger public health or safety.
Section 220.230. Pollution. [R.O. 2009 §13-205; Code 1969 §16-1]
No person shall suffer any filth or unclean water, any foul or nauseous liquid
or foul or nauseous substance of any kind whatever to escape from his/
her premises into or upon any adjacent ground or into any street, gutter,
pavement or other public place.
Section
220.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.230
AO:271
Chapter 225
PARKS AND RECREATION
Cross Reference — As to library, ch. 140.
State Law Reference — Parks and recreation generally, ch. 90, RSMo.
Section 225.010. Department.
There is hereby established a Department of Parks and Recreation.
Section 225.020. Director.
There is hereby established the office of Director of Parks and Recreation.
Section 225.030. Closing Hours. [R.O. 2009 §17-3; Code 1969
§25-23; Ord. No. 3269 §1, 3-1-1993]
The City parks are open from sunrise to one-half (½) hour after sunset
except for Hanley and Brentwood Parks. These two (2) parks will be open
from sunrise to 11:00 P.M. when lighted facilities are in use. Exceptions may
be granted for use outside such hours by permit issued by the Director of
Parks and Recreation.
Section 225.040. Restrictions on Use of Parks. [Ord. No. 4721 § 1,
7-18-2016]
A. Injuring Trees, Shrubbery, Natural Life And Other Property Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to disfigure, damage or in any way
injure or destroy, either in part or in whole, or carry away any tree,
shrub, plant, flower, stone, or stone work, bench, chair set, stand,
structure, fence or property, fish, or animal, or anything belonging to or
kept therein; or to post or affix or inscribe any handbill, poster, card,
device, or inscription to or on any tree, fence, or structure, within the
park. No one may plant, affix or mount any item in a park without the
express written consent of the Director of Parks and Recreation.
B. Hunting Prohibited. No person shall pursue, trap or kill any wildlife in
any manner on park land. Firearms, guns or weapons of any kind are
strictly prohibited on park land.
C. Operation Of Motor Vehicles Prohibited. Motor vehicles are prohibited
on park land and trails with the exception of park service and
emergency vehicles. Motor vehicles are allowed on parking lots and
roadways only.
D. Parking In Designated Areas Only. No person shall park any vehicle in
an area not designated for that purpose.
E. Possession Of Alcohol. Notwithstanding anything provided in Section
600.040(A) of this Code, no person shall be allowed to bring any
intoxicating liquors, as defined in Section 600.030 of this Code, into the
Section
220.230
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
225.040
AO:272
Section 225.050. Reservations of Park Facilities.
Brentwood Recreation Complex without the approval from the Director
of Parks and Recreation or his/her designee.
F. Location Of Fires. Fires may be built only in barbecue grills provided by
the City and must be extinguished before leaving the park.
G. Disposal Of Trash. Trash, rubbish and debris of all kinds shall be
deposited in the containers provided for that purpose. All areas shall be
left in a clean and orderly condition. Dumping or depositing trash,
rubbish or debris in or on any part of the park land or facilities other
than in the receptacles provided is strictly prohibited.
H. Glass Containers Prohibited. Glass containers of any type with a
capacity of less than 25.3 ounces (750 milliliters) are not permitted in
any park.
I. Animals. No person shall bring onto park land a dog or other domestic
animal unless such animals are at all times restrained on a leash. No
leash on which a dog or other animal is tethered or restrained shall be
of greater length than six (6) feet. In addition, any person bringing a
domestic animal into the park shall have with him or her an instrument
and container to remove from the park any wastes deposited by his or
her animal. No person shall allow a dog or other domesticated animal
into any waters or waterways in the park for any purposes. No person
shall permit the running of a dog at large. Domestic animals are
prohibited in and around all playgrounds located on park grounds, and
restrooms except for Seeing Eye dogs. No vicious animal of any kind
shall be brought onto park land at any time even though restrained as
described above.
J. Solicitations Prohibited. Solicitation of any business or service is
prohibited. No person, firm, or corporation is permitted to offer or
advertise merchandise or other goods for sale or hire. The maintaining
of a concession or the use of any park facility, building, trail, road, or
other park property for commercial purposes is prohibited except upon
written consent and approval of the Director of Parks and Recreation.
K. Smoking. Smoking is prohibited in the restrooms and on or within ten
(10) feet of the playgrounds. Smoking is prohibited in the recreational
facilities.
L. Skateboarding. Skateboarding is prohibited upon or about the park
stairs or railings and within or upon all pavilions or decks and the
railings or furnishings contained or incorporated therein.
A. Application for a park facility reservation must be made at the office of
the Director of Parks and Recreation.
1. Residents and non-residents may reserve park areas and
recreational facilities so long as that applicant is present for the
Section
225.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
225.050
AO:273
Chapter 230
TREES AND SHRUBS
Cross References — As to shrubbery impeding sidewalks and public ways,
§§505.070 et seq.
event. Businesses and other permitted organizations may reserve
the park for events related to the business located in the City or
services provided in the City, but not for their personal use.
2. Procedure regarding park facility reservation applications.
a. The Director of Parks and Recreation, or that person's
designee, shall act upon applications for reservations and shall
devise and utilize a standard "Facility Reservation Application"
form which provides information necessary to establish
accountability and scheduling.
b. The Director of Parks and Recreation, or that person's
designee, shall possess reasonable discretion in approving or
denying applications for reservations and may deny a permit to
any applicant who has abused park privileges in the past by
violation of park rules, including parking restrictions, or whose
applications for the reserved use cannot be accommodated due
to the unreasonable interference with the primary rights of
City residents to continuous park access and enjoyment.
c. Reservation permits for use of the park and recreational
facilities require a fee to be paid along with a signed
application.
d. The grassy areas and playgrounds within the parks may not be
reserved or excluded from public access.
Section
225.050
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
225.050
AO:274
ARTICLE I
In General
Section 230.010. Planting, Injuring, Etc., in Public Places Without
Permission. [R.O. 2009 §24-1; Code 1969 §41-1]
It shall be unlawful to plant, set, pull up, cut down, burn, destroy, remove,
trim or in any manner injure any tree, shrub, vine or flower standing in
any public street, boulevard, alley, park or other public place without first
obtaining the written consent of the City Engineer or Public Works Official.
Section 230.020. Obstructing Entrance of Water and Air to Roots.
[R.O. 2009 §24-2; Code 1969 §41-2]
It shall be unlawful to place any stone, cement or other substance about any
tree, shrub, vine or flower in any of the public streets, boulevards, parks,
alleys or other public places in such way as will impede the free entrance
of water or air to the roots thereof and in all cases an open space of ground
about the trunks thereof not less than four (4) feet square shall be provided.
Section 230.030. Attaching Wires. [R.O. 2009 §24-3; Code 1969
§41-4]
It shall be unlawful to attach in any manner whatsoever an electric wire,
telephone wire or other wire of any kind to any tree, shrub, vine or flower
standing in any of the public streets, boulevards, alleys, parks or other
public places or to string such wire so that the same comes in contact with
any branch or other part of such tree, vine, shrub or flower without having
first obtained the permission in writing of the City Engineer or Public Works
Official to do so.
Section 230.040. Limitation on Corner Lot. [R.O. 2009 §24-4; Code
1969 §41-5]
Section 230.050. through Section 230.090. (Reserved)
A. A "corner lot", for the purposes of this Section, is any lot abutting on
two (2) streets at their intersection.
B. No obstruction of any kind that is a traffic hazard shall be permitted on
any corner lot or corner property for a distance of ten (10) feet from the
corner property line parallel to the line of traffic.
Section
230.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
230.050
AO:275

ARTICLE II
Diseased or Dead Trees
Section 230.100. Infected Trees Declared Public Nuisance. [R.O.
2009 §24-16; Code 1969 §41-6]
Any tree, whether living or in a dead or dying condition, wherever located
within the City which shall be infected with the fungus Coratostomella Ulmi
or with the virus disease Phloem Necrosis is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and shall be removed as provided in this Article.
Section 230.110. Dead or Dying Trees Declared to Be Public
Nuisances. [R.O. 2009 §24-17; Code 1969 §41-7]
Any tree in a dead or dying condition, wherever located within the City,
whether or not the same is then infested with any disease referred to in
Section 230.100, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be
removed as provided in this Article.
Section 230.120. Removal of Infected or Dead Trees. [R.O. 2009
§24-18; Code 1969 §41-8]
If the Public Works Official shall determine that any tree within the City is in
a dead or dying condition or is infected with any of the diseases referred to
in Section 230.100, he/she shall, if the tree is in any public street, ground or
place or upon any property owned by the City, immediately remove the same
in such manner as to prevent as fully as possible the occurrence or spread of
any such disease. If such tree is located on private property, a written notice
shall be served upon the owner of record of such property, a written notice
that such tree is so infected or in a dead or dying condition and that the
same shall be removed under the supervision of the Public Works Official
within ten (10) days after the service of such notice. Such notice shall also
notify the owner that unless an appeal is filed as provided by this Article or
unless the tree is removed as provided in this Article, the City will proceed
with the removal of such tree, causing the cost to be assessed as a special
tax bill against the property. If such owner cannot be found, a copy of such
notice shall be posted upon the tree designated in such notice.
Section 230.130. Appeals From Decision of Public Works Official.
[R.O. 2009 §24-19; Code 1969 §41-9]
Any owner of record of property upon which is located any tree determined
by the Public Works Official to be in a dead or dying condition or infected
with any of the diseases referred to in Section 230.100 may, by notice in
writing served upon the Director of Planning and Development or his/her
designee within the time limited for removal of the tree as provided in the
notice served or posted as provided in Section 230.120, request a hearing
upon the determination. The hearing shall be at such time and place within
the City as the Director of Planning and Development shall determine, upon
at least four (4) days' prior written notice to the appellant. The hearing
Section
230.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
230.130
AO:277
shall be informal and the appellant and the City representatives may submit
such testimony or other evidence bearing upon any question presented by
the appellant's request for hearing. At the conclusion of such hearing the
Director of Planning and Development shall render a written finding; and if
such finding is that the tree in question is in a dead or dying condition or is
infected with any of the diseases referred to in Section 230.100, then such
owner shall remove the tree as provided in Section 230.120, within three (3)
days of service upon him/her or of posting as provided in Section 230.120
of a copy of such finding.
Section 230.140. Abatement by City — Assessment of Cost as
Special Tax Bill. [R.O. 2009 §24-20; Code 1969 §41-10]
If any tree subject to removal as provided in this Article, shall not be
removed after the notice and within the time limited in Section 230.120 or,
in the event of appeal, in Section 230.130, then the Public Works Official
shall cause the tree to be removed and burned in such manner as to prevent
as fully as possible the occurrence or spread of any disease referred to
in Section 230.100. He/she shall certify the cost of the same to the City
Clerk/Administrator, who shall cause a special tax bill therefore against the
property to be prepared and collected with other taxes against the property.
The tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be a lien upon the property
with the same priority as general taxes assessed against the property for
the current calendar year. The lien shall continue until the tax is paid. The
special tax bill shall be prima facie evidence of the recitals therein and of
its validity and no mere clerical error or informality in the same or in the
proceedings leading to its issuance shall be a defense thereto. Such tax
bills, if not paid by December thirty-first (31st) of the calendar year in which
issued, shall bear interest of the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum from
and after such date.
Section 230.150. Enforcement of Article — Right of Entry. [R.O.
2009 §24-21; Code 1969 §41-11]
The Departments of Public Works and Planning and Development are
charged with the enforcement of this Article and, to that end, the Public
Works Superintendent, Director of Planning and Development and their
representatives may enter upon private property at all reasonable hours for
the purpose of inspecting trees thereon and may remove such specimens
as they deem necessary for purposes of analysis to determine whether or
not the same are infected with any of the diseases referred to in Section
230.100.
Section
230.130
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
230.150
AO:278
Chapter 235
SOLID WASTE
State Law References — Hazardous waste management, §§260.360 et seq.,
RSMo.; authority of city to collect and dispose of garbage, §§71.680, 71.690,
RSMo.
Section
230.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
230.150
AO:279

Article I
In General
Section 235.010. Parking Garbage Truck Within City in Excess of
Two Hours. [R.O. 2009 §20-1; Code 1969 §30-2; Ord. No. 4155 §1,
12-1-2008]
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle used
for the purpose of carrying or hauling garbage, recycling or rubbish on
any public or private property in the City for a period in excess of two (2)
hours on any one (1) day. It shall also be unlawful for any person to permit
same to be done on any private property owned by or under the control
of such person. Such two (2) hour period shall not include the time during
which vehicles are stopped, stood or parked in any building or enclosure
adapted to permanent or continuous occupancy for business or storage or
time during which vehicles are actually engaged in the process of hauling
or carrying of such garbage, recycling and rubbish.
Section 235.020. Accumulation of Garbage, Recycling or Rubbish.
[R.O. 2009 §20-2; Code 1969 §30-22; Ord. No. 3231 §2, 7-20-1992;
Ord. No. 4155 §1, 12-1-2008]
It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or permit the
accumulation of garbage, recycling or rubbish upon his/her premises
beyond a time reasonably necessary for the collection and disposal thereof,
but in no event exceeding fourteen (14) days. However, used yard wastes
may be stored in accordance with Article III of this Chapter for the purpose
of composting.
Section 235.030. through Section 235.070. (Reserved)
Section
235.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.030
AO:281

Article II
Municipal Collection Service
Section 235.080. Pre-Collection Requirements. [R.O. 2009 §20-16;
Code 1969 §30-20; Ord. No. 3184 §1, 1-6-1992; Ord. No. 3231 §6,
7-20-1992; Ord. No. 4155 §1, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 4285 §1,
6-20-2011]
Section 235.090. Collection Practices. [R.O. 2009 §20-17; Code
1969 §30-21; Ord. No. 2738 §1, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 2887 §1,
10-5-1987; Ord. No. 4155 §1, 12-1-2008]
A. Containers.
1. Disposal of garbage, recycling or rubbish. Each householder
producing or responsible for the disposal of garbage, recycling or
rubbish shall provide, except where the city has furnished recycle
containers, and renew when necessary, plastic bags or a container
for garbage, and for any refuse which might be offensive by reason
of odor, dust, insects or vermin. The container shall not be less than
ten (10) or more than ninety-five (95) gallons capacity, unless it is a
recycle cart furnished by the City, of water-tight, metal and/or
plastic construction, with a tight-fitting lid and with handles
sufficiently strong for workers to empty conveniently.
2. Disposal of yard wastes, grass clippings, leaves and branches. Each
householder producing or responsible for the disposal of yard
wastes shall provide, and renew when necessary, biodegradable
paper bags or a container for yard wastes. The container shall not
be less than ten (10) or more than ninety-five (95) gallons capacity,
unless it is a container furnished by the City, of water-tight, metal
and/or plastic construction, with a tight-fitting lid and with handles
sufficiently strong for workers to empty conveniently. Plastic bags
shall not be used for the collection of yard wastes.
B. Boxes And Cartons To Be Collapsed. All boxes and cartons shall be
collapsed before being placed for collection.
C. Weights And Limits On Containers. Biodegradable yard waste bags
shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds. Limbs and brush shall be bundled
with string, rope or twine not more than four (4) feet long and two (2)
feet in any other direction. Root balls shall be removed from bushes,
shrubs, and trees left for disposal. Dirt, soil, or rock is not considered
"yard waste". Containers thirteen (13) gallons or less shall not exceed
twenty-five (25) pounds. Containers fourteen (14) gallons to sixty-five
(65) gallons shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds. Containers sixty-six (66)
gallons or larger shall be wheeled, able to be mechanically lifted, and
not exceed seventy-five (75) pounds. All weight limits shall include the
containers.
Section
235.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.090
AO:283
Section 235.100. Scavenging Prohibited. [R.O. 2009 §20-18; Ord.
No. 3116 §1, 2-19-1991; Ord. No. 3596 §1, 4-6-1998]
Ownership of designated recyclable materials or solid waste set out by the
adjacent owner, lessee or occupant of a residential dwelling, commercial
establishment or City-operated recycling centers for collection by the City
or its designated agent shall be vested in the City. It shall be unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation other than the aforesaid adjacent owner,
lessee or occupant of said residential dwelling, commercial establishment
or City-operated recycling centers to take, steal or disturb any of the
recyclable materials, solid waste or any container which may be used for
the storage and collection of the materials including, but not limited to,
newspapers, beverage cans, glass, aluminum and plastic containers for
food and beverages and any other materials which may be designated for
recycling and solid waste by the City.
Section 235.110. through Section 235.150. (Reserved)
A. Containers shall be placed for collection of trash, rubbish, recycling and
garbage no more than twelve (12) hours before the scheduled time of
collection by authorized trash collectors and the empty containers shall
be removed from the place of pickup on streets, alleys or sidewalks
within twelve (12) hours after the pickup of such trash, rubbish,
recycling or garbage. Except at times for collection of trash, recycling
and garbage from dwellings, all trash, recycling and garbage
containers shall be placed in locations which cause the appearance of
the containers to be as inconspicuous as possible, in order to prevent
such containers from detracting from the general appearance of the
areas in which they are located.
B. No solid waste vehicle, commercial or residential, will be allowed to
commence collection before 7:00 A.M., nor to continue after 9:00 P.M.
Section
235.090
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
235.110
AO:284
Article III
Composting
Section 235.160. Maintenance. [R.O. 2009 §20-22; Ord. No. 3231 §4,
7-20-1992]
Section 235.170. Ingredients. [R.O. 2009 §20-23; Ord. No. 3231 §4,
7-20-1992]
A. All compost piles shall be maintained using approved composting
procedures to comply with the following requirements:
1. All compost piles shall be enclosed in a freestanding compost bin.
Each compost bin shall be no larger in volume than seventy-five
(75) cubic feet for properties ten thousand (10,000) square feet and
less in size, with an additional seventy-five (75) cubic feet
permitted for each additional ten thousand (10,000) square feet of
space. Compost bins shall be no taller than five (5) feet.
2. All compost piles shall be maintained so as to prevent the attraction
or harborage of rodents and pests. The presence of rodents in or
near a compost pile shall be cause for the City to issue a complaint.
3. All compost piles shall be maintained, so as to prevent unpleasant,
rotten-egg-like, putrefactive, sweet, sour or pungent odors.
4. Unless written permission has been granted by the adjoining
property owner, no compost pile shall be located less than five (5)
feet from the rear property side and maintains same yard setbacks
as in that zoning district or within twenty (20) feet of any home,
patio, pool or similar structure on the adjacent property. All
compost piles shall be at least five (5) feet behind the front building
setback line.
5. No compost pile shall be located where it will impede the natural
free flow of storm water drainage.
A. No compost pile shall contain any of the following:
1. Lakeweeds;
2. Food scraps;
3. Fish, fowl, meat or other animal products;
4. Manure;
5. Animal carcasses;
6. Items not normally composted.
B. Permitted ingredients shall include:
1. Yard wastes;
Section
235.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.170
AO:285
Section 235.180. Private Use Only. [R.O. 2009 §20-24; Ord. No. 3231
§4, 7-20-1992]
Compost piles established in accordance with this Article are for private use
only. There shall be no commercial provision of material to be composted or
commercial use of the product of such composting.
Section 235.190. through Section 235.260. (Reserved)
2. Commercial compost additives;
3. Wood chips.
Section
235.170
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
235.190
AO:286
Article IV
Litter
DIVISION 1
Generally
Section 235.270. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §20-31; Code 1969 §21-1;
Ord. No. 3091 §1, 10-1-1990; Ord. No. 3231 §1, 7-20-1992; Ord. No.
4155 §1, 12-1-2008]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — A litter storage and collection
receptacle.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature which:
COMPOSTING — A controlled biological reduction of organic wastes to
humus.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
1. Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
2.
Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged
for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause
shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is
taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such
meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when
either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the
dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary
rules of public peace, safety and good order. Nothing contained in this
clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place
of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind
without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law
of this State or under this Code or other ordinance of this City;
3.
While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
4.
Section
235.270
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.270
AO:287
LITTER — Any tacks, nails, washers, wire, scrap metal, glass, crockery,
sharp stones or other substances injurious to the feet of persons or animals
or the tires of vehicles; any paper, rubbish, garbage or debris of any and all
kinds; any mud, dirt, sand, gravel, rock, stone or other excavated material
or substance dug, scooped, blasted or removed from the earth of any lot
or tract of land; and any and all hazard or obstruction to the movement of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper, mailed or of general circulation.
NON-COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine,
paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or
copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of
a commercial handbill or newspaper.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other public area in the City, owned or used by the City and devoted to
active or passive recreation.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure,
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
and shall include any yard, ground, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule
or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or
other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Non-putrescible solid wastes, including recycling, consisting
of both combustible and non-combustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, aluminum and tin/steel cans, plastic, yard clippings,
leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials and any other
approved recycling materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
Section 235.280. Depositing in Public Places Prohibited —
Exception. [R.O. 2009 §20-32; Code 1969 §21-2]
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the City except in public receptacles, in authorized
private receptacles for collection or in official City dumps.
Section
235.270
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
235.290
AO:288
Section 235.290. Placement in Receptacles or Compost So as to
Prevent Scattering. [R.O. 2009 §20-33; Code 1969 §21-3; Ord. No.
3231 §3, 7-20-1992]
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles or persons placing yard waste in compost piles in accordance
with Article III of this Chapter, shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk
or other public place or upon private property.
Section 235.300. Sweeping Into Gutters Prohibited — Abutting
Owners to Keep Sidewalks Clean. [R.O. 2009 §20-34; Code 1969
§21-4]
No person shall sweep or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place
within the City the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from
any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
Section 235.310. Merchants' Duty to Keep Sidewalks Free of Litter.
[R.O. 2009 §20-35; Code 1969 §21-5]
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the City the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business
within the City shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises
free of litter.
Section 235.320. Throwing From Vehicle. [R.O. 2009 §20-36; Code
1969 §21-6]
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the City or upon private
property.
Section 235.330. Trucks Spreading Debris. [R.O. 2009 §20-37; Code
1969 §21-7]
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the City
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck
within the City, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any
street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or
foreign matter of any kind.
Section
235.290
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.340
AO:289
Section 235.340. Depositing in Parks Prohibited — Exception. [R.O.
2009 §20-38; Code 1969 §21-8]
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the City except
in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park
or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not
provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided
in this Article.
Section 235.350. Depositing in Foundations, Ponds, Etc. [R.O. 2009
§20-39; Code 1969 §21-9]
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the City.
Section 235.360. Depositing on Occupied Private Property. [R.O.
2009 §20-40; Code 1969 §21-15]
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the City, whether owned by such person or not; except that the owner
or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place or upon any private property.
Section 235.370. Owner to Maintain Premises. [R.O. 2009 §20-41;
Code 1969 §21-16]
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided that this Section shall not
prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection.
Section 235.380. Depositing on Open or Vacant Property. [R.O.
2009 §20-42; Code 1969 §21-17]
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the City whether owned by such person or not.
Section 235.390. Notice to Property Owner to Remove Litter. [R.O.
2009 §20-43; Code 1969 §21-18]
The City Engineer is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner
of any open or vacant private property within the City or the agent of such
owner to properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property which
is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by
registered mail, addressed to the owner at his/her last known address.
Section
235.340
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
235.400
AO:290
Section 235.400. Failure of Owner to Remove Litter — Removal by
City. [R.O. 2009 §20-44; Code 1969 §21-19]
Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent notified to remove
litter, to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the public health, safety
or welfare within ten (10) days after receipt of written notice provided
for in Section 235.390 or within twelve (12) days after the date of such
notice if the same is returned to the City post office department because
of its inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly
addressed to the last known address of such owner or agent, the City
Engineer is hereby authorized and empowered to pay for the disposing of
such litter or to order its disposal by the City.
Section 235.410. Recovery of Costs Incurred in Removal of Litter by
City. [R.O. 2009 §20-45; Code 1969 §21-20]
When the City has effected the removal of dangerous litter or has paid for
its removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of six
percent (6%) per annum from the date of the completion of the work, if not
paid by the property owner prior thereto, shall be charged to the owner
of such property on the next regular tax bill forwarded to such owner by
the City. Such charge shall be due and payable by the owner at the time of
payment of such bill.
Section 235.420. through Section 235.460. (Reserved)
Section
235.400
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.420
AO:291

DIVISION 2
Handbills
Section 235.470. Throwing or Distributing Handbills in Public
Places. [R.O. 2009 §20-61; Code 1969 §21-10]
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or non-commercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the City.
It shall be unlawful within the City for any person to hand out or distribute
on any sidewalk, street or other public place any handbill to any person who
is not willing to accept it.
Section 235.480. Placing Handbills on Vehicles. [R.O. 2009 §20-62;
Code 1969 §21-11]
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute literature or handbills in or
upon motor vehicles except in a manner that will prevent same from being
blown or scattered by the elements.
Section 235.490. Depositing Handbills on Uninhabited or Vacant
Premises. [R.O. 2009 §20-63; Code 1969 §21-12]
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or non-commercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.
Section 235.500. Distribution of Handbills on Posted Property.
[R.O. 2009 §20-64; Code 1969 §21-13]
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial
handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone
thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous
position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words "No
Trespassing", "No Peddlers or Agents", "No Advertisement" or any similar
notice, indicating in any matter that the occupants of the premises do not
desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed or to have any
such handbills left upon such premises.
Section 235.510. Distributing Handbills at Inhabited Private
Premises. [R.O. 2009 §20-65; Code 1969 §21-14]
A. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited,
except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the
owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private
premises; provided that in case of inhabited private premises which are
not posted, as provided in this Article, such person, unless requested by
anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such
handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is
so placed or deposited as to be secure or prevent such handbill from
being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or
Section
235.470
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.510
AO:293
Section 235.520. through Section 235.530. (Reserved)
other public places and except that mailboxes may not be so used when
so prohibited by Federal law or regulations.
B. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the distribution of mail
by the United States, nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall
be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place or upon private property.
Section
235.510
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
235.520
AO:294
Article V
Commercial Refuse
Section 235.540. Disposal. [R.O. 2009 §20-70; Ord. No. 2995 §2,
3-6-1989]
Section 235.550. Container. [R.O. 2009 §20-71; Ord. No. 2995 §2,
3-6-1989]
All solid refuse shall, prior to disposal, be kept in leak-proof, non-absorbent
containers which shall be kept covered with tight-fitting lids.
Section 235.560. Penalty for Violation. [R.O. 2009 §20-72; Ord. No.
2995 §2, 3-6-1989]
The Building Official or his/her designate shall be charged with the
enforcement of this Article. Any business found to be in violation of this
Article shall receive notice of the violation and shall be given a specified
period of time within which to remedy the situation giving rise to the
violation. Failure to remedy the situation within the specified time shall
result in the issuance of a court summons. Upon conviction of a violation
under this Article, punishment as set out in Section 100.080 of this Code
shall be imposed.
A. Each business shall make arrangements with private commercial refuse
haulers for the removal and disposal of all solid refuse materials from
the premises of the business.
B. All solid refuse material shall be removed from the premises and
disposed of with sufficient frequency and in such a manner as to
prevent a nuisance. All businesses in which food or beverage are
served, sold, manufactured or processed shall remove and dispose of
such refuse not less often than twice weekly. All other businesses shall
remove and dispose of such refuse not less often than once weekly.
Section
235.540
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.560
AO:295

Article VI
Penalty
Section 235.570. Penalty for Violation of This Chapter. [R.O. 2009
§20-73; Ord. No. 3231 §7, 7-20-1992]
Every owner or operator shall be responsible for maintaining all property
under his/her control in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter.
Upon conviction of a violation of this Chapter, punishment as set out in
Section 100.080 of this Code shall be imposed.
Section
235.570
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.570
AO:297
Chapter 240
HUMAN RIGHTS
Cross References — As to mayor and board of aldermen, ch. 110; as to
boards, commissions, etc., §120.170; as to buildings and building
regulations, ch. 500; as to licenses, taxation and miscellaneous business
regulations, ch. 605; as to offenses against the administration of justice,
§§215.150 et seq.; as to municipal court, ch. 125; as to nuisances, ch. 220;
as to zoning, ch. 400.
Section
235.570
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
235.570
AO:298
ARTICLE I
In General
Section 240.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §10-1; Ord. No. 3005 §1,
4-17-1989]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall mean:
BECAUSE or BECAUSE OF — As it relates to the adverse decision or action,
the protected criterion which was the motivating factor.
COMMISSION — The City of Brentwood Commission on Human Rights.
COMPLAINANT — A person who has filed a complaint with the Commission
alleging that another person has engaged in a prohibited discriminatory
practice.
DISABILITY — A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits
one (1) or more of a person's major life activities, being regarded as having
such an impairment, or a record of having such an impairment, which with
or without reasonable accommodation does not interfere with performing
the job, utilizing the place of public accommodation, or occupying the
dwelling in question. For purposes of this Chapter, the term "disability" does
not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as
such term is defined by Section 195.010, RSMo.; however, a person may be
considered to have a disability if that person:
DISCRIMINATION — Conduct proscribed herein, taken because of race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, or age as it relates to
employment, disability or familial status as it relates to housing.
DWELLING — Any building, structure or portion thereof located within
the City which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as,
a residence by one (1) or more families and any vacant land which is
offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such
building, structure or portion thereof.
FAMILIAL STATUS —
Has successfully completed a supervised drug rehabilitation program
and is no longer engaging in the illegal use of, and is not currently
addicted to, a controlled substance or has otherwise been rehabilitated
successfully and is no longer engaging in such use and is not currently
addicted;
1.
Is participating in a supervised rehabilitation program and is no longer
engaging in illegal use of controlled substances; or
2.
Is erroneously regarded as currently illegally using, or being addicted
to, a controlled substance.
3.
One (1) or more individuals who have not attained the age of eighteen
(18) years being domiciled with:
1.
Section
240.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
240.010
AO:299
HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS — Housing:
PERSON — Includes one (1) or more individuals, corporations,
partnerships, associations, organizations, labor organizations, legal
representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, trustees,
trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries or other organized groups of
persons.
RENT — Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for
consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE — Any act that is unlawful
under this Chapter.
A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual;
or
a.
The designee of such parent or other person having such custody,
with the written permission of such parent or other person.
b.
The protection afforded against discrimination because of familial
status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of
securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of
eighteen (18) years.
2.
Provided under any State or Federal program that the Commission
determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly
persons, as defined in the State or Federal program;
1.
Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons sixty-two (62) years of age
or older; or
2.
Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one (1) person fiftyfive
(55) years of age or older per unit.
Housing qualifies as housing for older persons under this Chapter if:
1. The housing has significant facilities and services specifically
designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons, or
if the provision of such facilities and services is not practicable,
that such housing is necessary to provide important housing
opportunities for older persons; and
2. At least eighty percent (80%) of the units are occupied by at least
one (1) person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit; and
3. The owner or manager of the housing has published and adhered to
policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by said owner
or manager to provide housing for persons fifty-five (55) years of
age or older.
3.
Section
240.010
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
240.010
AO:300
ARTICLE II
Commission on Human Rights
Section 240.020. Commission on Human Rights Created. [R.O. 2009
§10-2; Ord. No. 3005 §1, 4-17-1989]
Section 240.030. Appointment of Members. [R.O. 2009 §10-3; Ord.
No. 3005 §1, 4-17-1989]
The Mayor, with the approval of a majority of the Board of Aldermen,
shall appoint from among the members of the Board of Aldermen three
(3) persons to serve on the Commission on Human Rights. The City Clerk/
Administrator shall also be a member.
Section 240.040. Meetings — Records. [R.O. 2009 §10-4; Ord. No.
3005 §1, 4-17-1989]
Section 240.050. Conflict of Interest. [R.O. 2009 §10-5; Ord. No.
3005 §1, 4-17-1989]
No member shall hear, discuss with other members of the Commission or
act on any item which would constitute a conflict of interest for that member
as established in Sections 105.450 et seq., RSMo.
Section 240.060. Functions, Powers and Duties.
A. There is hereby created a Commission on Human Rights.
B. The function of the Commission shall be to encourage fair treatment for
and to foster mutual understanding and respect among and to
discourage discrimination against any racial, ethnic, religious or other
group protected by this Chapter, members of these groups or disabled
persons.
A. The Commission may provide such rules and regulations as it may deem
necessary to carry out the provisions of this Chapter. The Commission
may by rule establish a regular meeting time and procedures for giving
notice of its meetings and shall file these regulations in the office of the
City Clerk/Administrator. The Commission shall have the authority to
call special meetings as it deems necessary.
B. The Commission may adopt rules for the transaction of business and
keep a record of its proceedings.
A. The Commission shall have the following functions, powers and duties:
1. To encourage fair treatment for and to foster mutual understanding
and respect among, and to discourage discrimination against, any
racial, ethnic, religious or other group protected by this Chapter,
members of these groups or persons with disabilities.
Section
240.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
240.060
AO:301
2. To formulate and carry out educational programs designed to
minimize or eliminate those discriminatory practices made
unlawful by Article III of this Chapter.
3. To receive and investigate complaints alleging any discriminatory
practices made unlawful by Article III of this Chapter.
4. To implement the purposes of this Chapter by conference,
conciliation and persuasion so that persons may be guaranteed
their civil rights and good will be fostered.
5. To provide mediation services to resolve incidences of alleged
discriminatory practices made unlawful by Article III of this
Chapter.
6. To cooperate with other organizations, private and public, to
discourage discrimination.
7. To advise the Board of Aldermen on human rights issues.
8. To hold public hearings on the state of human rights and relations
in the City and on specific human rights issues.
9. To sponsor or initiate specifically targeted workshops and ongoing
programs to improve human relations and to decrease tensions in
the City.
10. To present informational programs on human rights to school,
business, service and other organizations.
11. To formulate policies and to adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind
suitable rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this
Chapter and said policies of the Commission in connection
therewith.
12. To provide each year to the Board of Aldermen a full written report
of all its activities and of its recommendations.
Section
240.060
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
240.060
AO:302
ARTICLE III
Discriminatory Practices
Section 240.070. Unlawful Housing Practices.
A. It shall be an unlawful housing practice:
1. To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, to deny or otherwise
make unavailable a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial status.
2. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial
status.
3. To make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published
any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination because of race, color, religion, national origin,
ancestry, sex, disability or familial status, or an intention to make
any such preference, limitation or discrimination.
4. To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national
origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial status that any dwelling is
not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in
fact so available.
5. To induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any
dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective
entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons because of a
particular race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex,
disability or familial status.
6. To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a
disability of:
a. That buyer or renter;
b. A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
c. Any person associated with that buyer or renter.
7. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a
disability of:
a. That person;
Section
240.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
240.070
AO:303
b. A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
c. Any person associated with that person.
B. For purposes of Sections 240.070, 240.080 and 240.090, discrimination
includes:
1. A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person with the disability,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be
occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to
afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in
the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do
so, condition permission for a modification on the renter's agreeing
to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed
before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted;
2. A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices or services when such accommodations may be necessary
to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling; or
3. In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily
dwellings for first (1st) occupancy after March 13, 1991, a
failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a manner
that:
a. The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are
readily accessible to and usable by persons with a disability;
b. All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow
passage by persons with a disability in wheelchairs; and
c. All premises within such dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
(1) An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
(2) Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other
environmental controls in accessible locations;
(3) Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later
installation of grab bars; and
(4) Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
C. As used in Subdivision (3) of Subsection (B) of this Section, the term
"covered multi-family dwelling" means:
1. Buildings consisting of four (4) or more units if such buildings have
one (1) or more elevators; and
Section
240.070
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
240.070
AO:304
Section 240.080. Discrimination in Commercial Real Estate Loans.
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance
company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose
business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real
estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance because of race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial status
to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, construction,
improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against
him/her in fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or
conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial status of
such person or of any person associated with him/her in connection with
such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective
owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwellings in relation to which
such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given.
Section 240.090. Discrimination in Selling or Renting by Real
Estate Agencies Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers'
organization or other service organization or facility relating to the business
of selling or renting dwellings because of race, color, religion, national
origin, ancestry, sex, disability or familial status.
Section 240.100. Discrimination in Public Accommodations
Prohibited — Exceptions.
2. Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four (4) or more
units.
D. Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American
National Standard for Buildings and Facilities providing accessibility
and usability for people with physical disabilities, commonly cited as
"ANSI A117.1", suffices to satisfy the requirements of Subsection
(B)(3)(a) of this Section.
A. All persons within the City of Brentwood are free and equal and shall be
entitled to the full and equal use and enjoyment within this State of any
place of public accommodation, as hereinafter defined, without
discrimination or segregation because of race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, ancestry or disability.
B. It is an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person, directly or
indirectly, to refuse, withhold from or deny any other person or to
attempt to refuse, withhold from or deny any other person any of the
accommodations, advantages, facilities, services or privileges made
available in any place of public accommodation, as defined in Section
213.010, RSMo., and this Section, or to segregate or discriminate
Section
240.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
240.100
AO:305
Section 240.110. Additional Unlawful Discriminatory Practices.
Section 240.120. Exemptions.
against any such person in the use thereof because of race, color,
religion, national origin, sex, ancestry or disability.
C. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to a private club, a place of
accommodation owned by or operated on behalf of a religious
corporation, association or society or other establishment which is not
in fact open to the public, unless the facilities of such establishments
are made available to the customers or patrons of a place of public
accommodation as defined in Section 213.010, RSMo., and this Section.
A. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice:
1. To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the commission of acts
prohibited under this Chapter or to attempt to do so;
2. To retaliate or discriminate in any manner against any other person
because such person has opposed any practice prohibited by this
Chapter or because such person has filed a complaint, testified,
assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation,
proceeding or hearing conducted pursuant to this Chapter;
3. For the City to discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion,
national origin, sex, ancestry, age as it relates to employment,
disability or familial status as it relates to housing; or
4. To discriminate in any manner against any other person because of
such person's association with any person protected by this
Chapter.
A. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to invalidate or limit any law
of the State or of the City that requires dwellings to be designed and
constructed in a manner that affords persons with disabilities greater
access than is required by this Chapter.
B. Nothing in Sections 240.070, 240.080 and 240.090:
1. Requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose
tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of
other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others.
2. Limits the applicability of any reasonable local restriction
regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy
a dwelling, nor does any provision of said Sections regarding
familial status apply with respect to housing for older persons.
3. Shall prohibit conduct against a person because such person has
been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal
Section
240.100
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
240.120
AO:306
manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as defined by
Section 195.010, RSMo.
C. Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association or society or any non-profit institution or organization
operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious
organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental or
occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving
preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is
restricted on account of race, color or national origin. Nor shall
anything in this Chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the
public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes
provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial
purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its
members or from giving preference to its members.
D. Nothing in this Chapter, other than the prohibitions against
discriminatory advertising in Subsection (A)(3) of Section 240.070,
shall apply to:
1. The sale or rental of any single-family house by a private individual
owner, provided the following conditions are met:
a. The private individual owner does not own or have any interest
in more than three (3) single-family houses at any one time;
and
b. The house is sold or rented without the use of a real estate
broker, agent or salesperson or the facilities of any person in
the business of selling or renting dwellings and without
publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement. If the
owner selling the house does not reside in it at the time of the
sale or was not the most recent resident of the house prior to
such sale, the exemption in this Section applies to only one (1)
such sale in any twenty-four (24) month period; or
2. Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and
occupies one (1) of such living quarters as his/her residence.
Section
240.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
240.120
AO:307

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement Procedures
Section 240.130. Complaints.
Section 240.140. Complaints — Investigation, Conciliation and
Mediation.
A. Any individual who claims to be aggrieved by a discriminatory practice
may file with the Commission a verified complaint in writing stating the
name and address of the person alleged to have committed such
practice, the particulars thereof, and such other information as may be
required by the Commission.
B. Any complaint filed under this Section in which affirmative relief is
sought shall state what relief is sought or proposed.
C. All such complaints shall be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days
of the date of the alleged discriminatory practice.
D. An individual who files a complaint with the Commission shall be
advised of the possibility of filing a complaint with the Missouri
Commission on Human Rights.
A. Complaints shall be investigated and conciliated or mediated by
individuals who have been approved by the Commission and trained in
investigation, conciliation and mediation.
B. Upon filing of a complaint, the Chairperson of the Commission shall
designate an individual to investigate the allegations. The individual
shall promptly investigate such allegations, and if he/she determines
that probable cause exists for crediting the allegations of the complaint,
he/she shall thereupon undertake to eliminate the alleged
discriminatory practice or practices by conference, conciliation and
persuasion or mediation and shall inform the Commission of the results
of such efforts. If the individual determines that no such probable cause
exists, he/she shall so report to the Commission, which shall thereupon
dismiss the complaint without further proceedings, or direct further
investigation or, if it determines that probable cause exists for crediting
the allegations of the complaint, direct that the alleged discriminatory
practice or practices be the subject of conference, conciliation and
persuasion or mediation. Neither the members of the Commission nor
any person participating in the investigation shall disclose what has
occurred in the course of such efforts to conciliate. The determination
of probable cause shall be made, and the investigation and conciliation
or mediation shall be conducted, in accordance with such rules,
regulations and guidelines as the Commission shall prescribe.
C. If such efforts fail to eliminate the alleged discriminatory practice or
practices, the complainant shall be referred to the Missouri
Commission on Human Rights.
Section
240.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
240.150
AO:309
Section 240.150. Prosecutions — Time Limitations.
A. No prosecution for a violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be
commenced unless a complaint shall have first been filed with the
Commission and efforts of the Commission to eliminate the alleged
violation have failed.
B. The period of limitation for any violation of this Chapter shall not run
during any time while a complaint involving the alleged violation is
pending before the Commission.
Section
240.150
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
240.150
AO:310
Chapter 300
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 300.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §14-1; Code 1969 §22-1;
Ord. No. 2949 §1, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 2960 §1, 10-3-1988; Ord. No.
2962 §1, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 3078 §1, 8-6-1990]
The following words and phrases, when used in this Title, mean:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — The definition for abandoned property shall be
the same as that set out in Section 217.010 of this Code.
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — Any motorized vehicle manufactured and used
exclusively for off-highway use which is fifty (50) inches or less in width,
with an unladen dry weight of six hundred (600) pounds or less, traveling
on three (3), four (4) or more low pressure tires, with a seat designed to be
straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
ALLEY or ALLEYWAY — Any street with a roadway of less than twenty (20)
feet in width.
AUTOCYCLE — A three-wheeled motor vehicle, which the drivers and
passengers ride in a partially or completely enclosed non-straddle seating
area, that is designed to be controlled with a steering wheel and pedals, and
that has met applicable Department of Transportation National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration requirements or Federal motorcycle safety
standards.
BUSINESS DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to and including a
highway when within any six hundred (600) feet along the highway there
are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes including, but not
limited to, hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public
buildings which occupy at least three hundred (300) feet of frontage on
one (1) side or three hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the
highway.
CENTRAL BUSINESS (OR TRAFFIC) DISTRICT — All streets and portions
of streets within the area described by City ordinance as such.
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle designed or regularly
used for carrying freight and merchandise or more than eight (8)
passengers but not including vanpools or shuttle buses.
CONGESTED DISTRICT — Any district lawfully designated by ordinance as
a congested district.
CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY — Every highway, street or roadway in
respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons
have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only
and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over the highway, street or roadway.
CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECK — A search of criminal records, including
criminal history record information as defined in Section 43.500, RSMo.,
Section
240.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
300.010
AO:311
maintained by the Missouri State Highway Patrol in the Missouri criminal
records repository or by the Federal Bureau of Investigation as part of
its criminal history records, including but not limited to, any record of
conviction, plea of guilty or nolo contendre, or finding of guilty in any State
for any offense related to alcohol, controlled substances, or drugs.
CROSSWALK —
CURB — The lateral boundaries of that portion of the street designated for
the use of vehicles, whether marked with curbstones or not.
CURB LOADING ZONE — A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.
DRIVE-IN — A place where the occupants of motor vehicles are served
while seated in the vehicle including, but not limited to, drive-in theaters,
restaurants and filling stations.
DRIVER — Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — A vehicle of any of the following types:
That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the
edges of the traversable roadway.
1.
Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface.
2.
A vehicle operated by the State Highway Patrol, the State Water Patrol,
the Missouri Capitol Police, a Conservation Agent or a State Park
Ranger, those vehicles operated by enforcement personnel of the State
Highways and Transportation Commission, Police or Fire Department,
Sheriff, Constable or Deputy Sheriff, Federal Law Enforcement Officer
authorized to carry firearms and to make arrests for violations of the
laws of the United States, Traffic Officer or Coroner or by a privately
owned emergency vehicle company;
1.
A vehicle operated as an ambulance or operated commercially for the
purpose of transporting emergency medical supplies or organs;
2.
Any vehicle qualifying as an emergency vehicle pursuant to Section
310.070 of this Title;
3.
Any wrecker or tow truck or a vehicle owned and operated by a public
utility or public service corporation while performing emergency
service;
4.
Any vehicle transporting equipment designed to extricate human
beings from the wreckage of a motor vehicle;
5.
Section
300.010
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
300.010
AO:312
FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE — A space adjacent to a curb for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight (or
passengers).
HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
IMPROVED STREET OR HIGHWAY — A street or highway which has been
paved with gravel, macadam, concrete, brick or asphalt, or improved in any
manner by adding material or substance so as to present a surface other
than the original earth surface.
INTERSECTION —
Any vehicle designated to perform emergency functions for a civil
defense or emergency management agency established pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 44, RSMo.;
6.
Any vehicle operated by an authorized employee of the Department of
Corrections who, as part of the employee's official duties, is responding
to a riot, disturbance, hostage incident, escape or other critical
situation where there is the threat of serious physical injury or death,
responding to mutual-aid call from another criminal justice agency, or
in accompanying an ambulance which is transporting an offender to a
medical facility;
7.
Any vehicle designated to perform hazardous substance emergency
functions established pursuant to the provisions of Sections 260.500 to
260.550, RSMo.
8.
Any vehicle owned by the State Highways and Transportation
Commission and operated by an authorized employee of the
Department of Transportation that is marked as a Department of
Transportation emergency response or motorist assistance vehicle.
9.
Any vehicle owned and operated by the civil support team of the
Missouri National Guard while in response to or during operations
involving chemical, biological, or radioactive materials, or in support
of official requests from the State of Missouri involving unknown
substances or hazardous materials, or as may be requested by the
appropriate State agency acting on behalf of the Governor.
10.
The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral
curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at,
right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict;
1.
Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by
an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
In the event such intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways
2.
Section
300.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
300.010
AO:313
INTOXICATING LIQUOR — Includes any spirits, wine, ale, malt or other
liquor or combination of liquor a part of which is spirituous, vinous, malt or
fermented and all preparations for beverage purposes containing in excess
of three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) of alcohol by weight.
LANED ROADWAY — A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
LIVE LOAD — The weight of the cargo of a commercial motor vehicle, in
addition to that of the chassis and body of the vehicle.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively
upon tracks, except farm tractors and motorized bicycles.
MOTORBUS — A motor vehicle designed or regularly used for carrying
more than eight (8) passengers.
MOTORCYCLE — Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use
of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in
contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — Any two-wheeled or three-wheeled device having
an automatic transmission and a motor with a cylinder capacity of not more
than fifty (50) cubic centimeters which produces less than three (3) gross
brake horsepower and is capable of propelling the device at a maximum
speed of not more than thirty (30) miles per hour on level ground.
MOTORTRICYCLE — A motor vehicle upon which the operator straddles
or sits astride that is designed to be controlled by handle bars and is
operated on three (3) wheels, including a motorcycle while operated with
any conveyance, temporary or otherwise, requiring the use of a third wheel.
A motortricycle shall not be included in the definition of all-terrain vehicle.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named herein,
they shall mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current
use in the City.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES — All signs, signals, markings and
devices not inconsistent with this Title placed or erected by authority of
a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic.
ONE-WAY STREET — A street where vehicles are by law required to move
in one (1) direction only.
OPERATOR — Any person who operates or drives a motor vehicle.
PARK or PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
PARKING LOT — An area on public or private property where spaces are
provided gratuitously or for hire for the parking of motor vehicles, provided
that nothing in this definition shall be construed to include driveways or
thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways
of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
Section
300.010
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
300.010
AO:314
other portions of single-family residential lots used by the occupant and his/
her invitees for parking automobiles, nor spaces on public streets where
parking is permitted.
PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE — A place adjacent to a curb reserved
for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers.
PATHWAY — Any trail or path used by the public as a trail or path for hiking
or walking by pedestrians.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot.
PERSON — Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or
corporation.
PNEUMATIC TIRES — Tires of rubber or other substances and fabric
inflated with air.
POLICE OFFICER — Every officer of the municipal Police Department or
any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY — Every way or place in private ownership
and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or
implied permission from the owner but not by other persons.
PRIVATE WAYS — Private streets and alleyways, roadways and driveways
at tourist courts, trailer camps and hotels and multiple-family dwellings and
entrance drives into garages, repair shops and other mercantile business,
commercial and industrial establishments.
RAILROAD — A carrier of persons or property upon cars operated upon
stationary rails.
RAILROAD TRAIN — A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle designed,
constructed or modified so that it may be used for the purpose of temporary
housing quarters, including sleeping and eating facilities which are
permanently attached to the motor vehicle. Nothing herein shall prevent
any motor vehicle being registered as a commercial motor vehicle if the
motor vehicle could otherwise be so registered.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business district when the property on such
highway for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is in the main
improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
RESIDENTIAL AREAS — All areas within the City, access to which by motor
vehicle entails or requires travel upon any residential streets as defined in
Section 365.080(A)(2).
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right of one (1) vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a
lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching
Section
300.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
300.010
AO:315
under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise
to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
ROADWAY — That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a
highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway",
as used herein, shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all
such roadways collectively.
SAFETY ZONE — The area of space officially set apart within a roadway for
the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
SCHOOL ZONE — A space in any street lawfully designated by ordinance
for the safety of persons going to and returning from public, private or
parochial schools.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for use of
pedestrians.
SKATEBOARD OR OTHER LIKE INSTRUMENT — Any non-motorized
instrument used to transport a person or persons by means of wheels,
rollers, etc., propelled solely be the force of its rider and shall not include
any wagon or other device not so propelled.
SOLID TIRES — Tires of rubber or other resilient material, other than
pneumatic tires.
STAND or STANDING — The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving
or discharging passengers.
STATE HIGHWAY — A highway maintained by the State as a part of the
State highway system.
STOP — When required, complete cessation from movement.
STOP or STOPPING — When prohibited, any halting even momentarily of a
vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a Police Officer or
traffic control sign or signal.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the uses of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel. "State highway", a highway maintained by
the State of Missouri as a part of the State highway system.
TAXICAB — A motor vehicle, other than motorbus or service car, offered for
or engaged in carrying passengers for hire.
THROUGH HIGHWAY — Every highway or portion thereof on which
vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to
which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to
yield right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to
Section
300.010
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
300.010
AO:316
either a stop sign or a yield sign when such signs are erected as provided in
this Title.
TRACTOR or TRUCK-TRACTOR — A self-propelled motor vehicle designed
for drawing other vehicles, but not for the carriage of any load when
operating independently. When attached to a semi-trailer, it supports a part
of the weight thereof.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for purposes
of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device, whether manually, electrically
or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
to proceed.
TRAILER — Any vehicle without motive power designed for carrying
property or passengers on its own structure and for being drawn by a
self-propelled vehicle, except those running exclusively on tracks, including
a semi-trailer or vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in
conjunction with a self-propelled vehicle that a considerable part of its own
weight rests upon and is carried by the towing vehicle. The term "trailer"
shall not include cotton trailers as defined in Subdivision (8) of Section
301.010, RSMo., and shall not include manufactured homes as defined in
Section 700.010, RSMo.
URBANIZED AREA — An area with a population of fifty thousand (50,000)
or more designated by the Bureau of the Census within boundaries to
be fixed by the State Highways and Transportation Commission and local
officials in cooperation with each other and approved by the Secretary of
Transportation. The boundary of an urbanized area shall, at a minimum,
encompass the entire urbanized area as designed by the Bureau of the
Census.
UTILITY VEHICLE — Any motorized vehicle manufactured and used
exclusively for off-highway use which is more than fifty (50) inches but no
more than sixty-seven (67) inches in width, with an unladen dry weight of
two thousand (2,000) pounds or less, traveling on four (4) or six (6) wheels,
to be used primarily for landscaping, lawn care or maintenance purposes.
VEHICLE — Any mechanical device on wheels designed primarily for use or
used on highways, except motorized bicycles, vehicles propelled or drawn
by horses or human power, or vehicles used exclusively on fixed rails or
tracks, cotton trailers, or motorized wheelchairs operated by handicapped
persons.
WALKWAYS — Any portion of streets and roads or areas adjacent thereto
that are marked for pedestrian use by painted stripes, concrete bumper
strips, railroad ties or occasional posts or any other method whatsoever
which designates such area as a pedestrian walkway.
Chapter 305
TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
Section
300.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
305.010
AO:317
Section 305.010. Records of Traffic Violations.
Section 305.020. Police Department to Investigate Accidents.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to investigate traffic accidents,
to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with
violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents.
Section 305.030. Traffic Accident Reports.
The Police Department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic
accident reports. Such reports shall be available for the use and information
of the City Traffic Engineer.
Section 305.040. Police Department to Submit Annual Traffic Safety
Report.
Section 305.050. City Traffic Engineer.
A. The Police Department shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic
ordinances of the City or of the State vehicle laws of which any person
has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all
such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all
types of violations and the total of each. Said record shall accumulate
during at least a five (5) year period and from that time on the record
shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five (5) year
period.
B. All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be
serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be
kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms.
C. All such records and reports shall be public records.
A. The Police Department shall annually prepare a traffic report which
shall be filed with the Mayor. Such report shall contain information on
traffic matters in the City as follows:
1. The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the
number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident
data.
2. The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent
data on the safety activities of the Police.
3. The plans and recommendations of the Police Department for
future traffic safety activities.
A. The office of City Traffic Engineer is established. The City Engineer or
other designated City Official shall serve as City Traffic Engineer in
addition to his/her other functions and shall exercise the powers and
duties with respect to traffic as provided in this Title.
Section
305.010
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
305.050
AO:318
Section 305.060. Emergency and Experimental Regulations.
Chapter 310
ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS
Section 310.010. Authority of Police and Fire Department Officials.
Section 310.020. Obedience to Police and Fire Department Officials.
No person shall knowingly fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a Police Officer or Fire Department official.
B. The City Traffic Engineer shall determine the installation and proper
timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, conduct engineering
analyses of traffic accidents and devise remedial measures, conduct
engineering investigation of traffic conditions, plan the operation of
traffic on the streets and highways of the City, and cooperate with other
City Officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic
conditions, and carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by
ordinances of the City.
A. The Chief of Police by and with the approval of the City Traffic Engineer
is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective
the provisions of the traffic ordinances of the City and to make and
enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or
special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall
remain in effect for more than ninety (90) days.
B. The City Traffic Engineer may test traffic control devices under actual
conditions of traffic.
A. It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department or such
officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police to enforce all traffic laws
of the City and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to traffic in the
City.
B. Officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by the
Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand
or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided that, in the event of
a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as
conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic
laws.
C. Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of an incident, may
direct or assist the Police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.
Section
305.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
310.030
AO:319
Section 310.030. Use of Coasters, Roller Skates and Similar Devices
Restricted. [Ord. No. 4619 §1, 4-6-2015]
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle, skateboard or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except
while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing such person
shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to pedestrians.
Section 310.040. Public Employees to Obey Traffic Regulations.
The provisions of this Title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by
or used in the service of the United States Government, this State, County
or City and it shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the
provisions of this Title, except as otherwise permitted in this Title.
Section 310.050. Emergency Vehicles — Use of Lights and Sirens —
Right-of-Way — Stationary Vehicles, Procedure — Penalty.
A. Upon the immediate approach of an emergency vehicle giving audible
signal by siren or while having at least one (1) lighted lamp exhibiting
red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance
of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle or a flashing blue
light authorized by Section 310.060 of this Chapter, the driver of every
other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to
a position parallel to, and as far as possible to the right of, the traveled
portion of the highway and thereupon stop and remain in such position
until such emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise
directed by a Police or Traffic Officer.
B. Upon approaching a stationary vehicle displaying lighted red or red and
blue lights, or a stationary vehicle displaying lighted amber or amber
and white lights, the driver of every motor vehicle shall:
1. Proceed with caution and yield the right-of-way, if possible with due
regard to safety and traffic conditions, by making a lane change
into a lane not adjacent to that of the stationary vehicle, if on a
roadway having at least four (4) lanes with not less than two (2)
lanes proceeding in the same direction as the approaching vehicle;
or
2. Proceed with due caution and reduce the speed of the vehicle,
maintaining a safe speed for road conditions, if changing lanes
would be unsafe or impossible.
C. Responsibilities Of Driver Of Emergency Vehicle.
1. The driver of any "emergency vehicle" defined in Section 300.010
of this Code shall not sound the siren thereon or have the front red
lights or blue lights on except when such vehicle is responding to
an emergency call or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected law
violator, or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire.
Section
310.030
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
310.050
AO:320
Section 310.060. Sirens And Flashing Lights Emergency Use —
Persons Authorized — Violation — Penalty.
2. The driver of an emergency vehicle may:
a. Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of Sections 304.014
to 304.025, RSMo., and the provisions of this Code;
b. Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
c. Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as the driver does
not endanger life or property;
d. Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions.
3. The exemptions granted to an emergency vehicle pursuant to
Subsection (C)(2) of this Section shall apply only when the driver of
any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell,
siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when
the vehicle is equipped with at least one (1) lighted lamp displaying
a red light or blue light visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of
such vehicle.
D. No person shall purchase an emergency light as described in this
Section without furnishing the seller of such light an affidavit stating
that the light will be used exclusively for emergency vehicle purposes.
A. Motor vehicles and equipment, not otherwise defined in this Title as an
authorized emergency vehicle, which are operated by any member of an
organized Fire Department, ambulance association or rescue squad,
whether paid or volunteer, may be operated on streets and highways in
this City as an emergency vehicle under the provisions of Section
310.050 of this Chapter, while responding to a fire call or ambulance
call or at the scene of a fire call or ambulance call and while using or
sounding a warning siren and using or displaying thereon fixed,
flashing or rotating blue lights, but sirens and blue lights shall be used
only in bona fide emergencies.
B. Use Of Other Authorized Lights.
1. Notwithstanding Subsection (A) of this Section, the following
vehicles may use or display fixed, flashing, or rotating red or red
and blue lights:
a. Emergency vehicles, as defined in Section 304.022, RSMo.,
when responding to an emergency.
b. Vehicles operated as described in Subsection (A) of this
Section.
Section
310.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
310.060
AO:321
c. Vehicles and equipment owned or leased by a contractor or
subcontractor performing work for the Department of
Transportation, except that the red or red and blue lights shall
be displayed on vehicles or equipment described in this
Subsection only between dusk and dawn, when such vehicles
or equipment are stationary, such vehicles or equipment are
located in a work zone as defined in Section 304.580, RSMo.,
highway workers, as defined in Section 304.580, RSMo., are
present, and such work zone is designated by a sign or signs.
No more than two (2) vehicles or pieces of equipment in a work
zone may display fixed, flashing or rotating lights under this
Subsection.
2. The following vehicles and equipment may use or display fixed,
flashing, or rotating amber or amber and white lights:
a. Vehicles and equipment owned or leased by the State
Highways and Transportation Commission and operated by an
authorized employee of the Department of Transportation.
b. Vehicles and equipment owned or leased by a contractor or
subcontractor performing work for the Department of
Transportation, except that the amber or amber and white
lights shall be displayed on vehicles described in this
Subsection only when such vehicles or equipment are located
in a work zone, as defined in Section 304.580, RSMo., highway
workers, as defined in Section 304.580, RSMo., are present,
and such work zone is designated by a sign or signs.
c. Vehicles and equipment operated by a utility worker
performing work for the utility, except that the amber or amber
and white lights shall be displayed on vehicles described in this
Subsection only when such vehicles are stationary, such
vehicles or equipment are located in a work zone, as defined in
Section 304.580, RSMo., a utility worker is present, and such
work zone is designated by a sign or signs. As used in this
Subsection, the term "utility worker" means any employee
while in performance of his or her job duties, including any
person employed under contract of a utility that provides gas,
heat, electricity, water, steam, telecommunications or cable
services, or sewer services, whether privately, municipally, or
cooperatively owned.
C. Permits for the operation of such vehicles equipped with sirens or blue
lights shall be in writing and shall be issued and may be revoked by the
Chief of an organized Fire Department, organized Ambulance
Association, Rescue Squad, or the State Highways and Transportation
Commission and no person shall use or display a siren or blue lights on
a motor vehicle, fire, ambulance, or rescue equipment without a valid
permit authorizing the use. A permit to use a siren or lights as
heretofore set out does not relieve the operator of the vehicle so
Section
310.060
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
310.060
AO:322
Section 310.070. Notice to Police.98 [R.O. 2009 §14-76; Code 1969
§22-20; Ord. No. 2951 §1, 10-3-1988]
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or more to one (1) person shall immediately by
the quickest means of communication give notice of such accident to the
Police Department.
Section 310.080. Written Report of Accident.
The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident
resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or total property damage
to an apparent extent of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more to one (1)
person shall, within five (5) days after such accident, forward a written
report of such accident to the Police Department. The provisions of this
Section shall not be applicable when the accident has been investigated at
the scene by a Police Officer while such driver was present thereat.
Section 310.090. When Driver Unable to Report.
Section 310.100. Leaving the Scene of an Accident.99
equipped with complying with all other traffic laws and regulations.
Violation of this Section constitutes an ordinance violation.
A. Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving
immediate notice of an accident as required in Section 310.080 and
there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident
capable of doing so, such occupant shall give or cause to be given the
notice not given by the driver.
B. Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report
of an accident as required in Section 310.090 and such driver is not the
owner of the vehicle, then the owner of the vehicle involved in such
accident shall, within five (5) days after the accident, make such report
not made by the driver.
A. A person commits the offense of leaving the scene of an accident when:
1. Being the operator of a vehicle or a vessel involved in an accident
resulting in injury or death or damage to property of another
person; and
2. Having knowledge of such accident he or she leaves the place of
the injury, damage or accident without stopping and giving the
following information to the other party or to a Law Enforcement
98.State Law References — Similar provisions, §§300.110, 577.060, RSMo.
99.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
310.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
310.100
AO:323
Chapter 315
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Section 315.010. Authority to Install Traffic Control Devices.
The City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain traffic control signs,
signals and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of
the City to make effective the provisions of said ordinances and may place
and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he/she may deem
necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of the City or
under State law or to guide or warn traffic.
Section 315.020. Manual and Specifications for Traffic Control
Devices.
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual
and specifications approved by the State Highways and Transportation
Commission or resolution adopted by the Board of Aldermen of the City. All
signs or signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as
practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the City. All traffic
Officer, or if no Law Enforcement Officer is in the vicinity, then to
the nearest law enforcement agency:
a. His or her name;
b. His or her residence, including {MuniType} and street
number;
c. The registration or license number for his or her vehicle or
vessel; and
d. His or her operator's license number, if any.
B. For the purposes of this Section, all Law Enforcement Officers shall
have jurisdiction, when invited by an injured person, to enter the
premises of any privately owned property for the purpose of
investigating an accident and performing all necessary duties
regarding such accident.
C. A Law Enforcement Officer who investigates or receives information of
an accident involving an all-terrain vehicle and also involving the loss of
life or serious physical injury shall make a written report of the
investigation or information received and such additional facts relating
to the accident as may come to his or her knowledge, mail the
information to the Department of Public Safety, and keep a record
thereof in his or her office.
D. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the operation of allterrain
vehicles when property damage is sustained in sanctioned allterrain
vehicle races, derbies and rallies.
Section
310.100
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
315.020
AO:324
control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Title shall be official traffic control devices.
Section 315.030. Obedience to Traffic Control Devices.
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic
control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions
of this Title, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or Police Officer, subject
to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in
this Title.
Section 315.040. When Official Traffic Control Devices Required for
Enforcement Purposes.
No provision of this Title for which official traffic control devices are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and
place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever
a particular Section does not state that official traffic control devices are
required, such Section shall be effective even though no devices are erected
or in place.
Section 315.050. Official Traffic Control Devices — Presumption of
Legality.
Section 315.060. Traffic Control Signal Legend — Right Turn on
Red Light — When.
A. Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position
approximately conforming to the requirements of this Title, such
devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or
direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by
competent evidence.
B. Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of
this Title and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements
pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the
requirements of this Title, unless the contrary shall be established by
competent evidence.
A. Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting
different colored lights or colored lighted arrows, successively one (1)
at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall
be used except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend,
and said lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and
pedestrians as follows:
1. Green indication.
a. Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place
Section
315.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
315.060
AO:325
prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to
other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
b. Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in
combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow or such other movement as is permitted by other
indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an
adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the
intersection.
c. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as
provided in Section 315.070, pedestrians facing any green
signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may
proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
2. Steady yellow indication.
a. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby
warned that the related green movement is being terminated
or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately
thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection.
b. Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise
directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in Section
315.070, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to
cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no
pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway.
3. Steady red indication.
a. Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection
and shall remain standing until a green indication is shown
except as provided in paragraph (b) of this Subsection.
b. The driver of a vehicle which is stopped as close as practicable
at the entrance to the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, then at the entrance to the intersection
in obedience to a red signal may cautiously enter the
intersection to make a right turn but shall yield the right-ofway
to pedestrians and other traffic proceeding as directed by
the signal at the intersection, except that the State Highways
and Transportation Commission with reference to an
intersection involving a State highway, and local authorities
Section
315.060
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
315.060
AO:326
Section 315.070. Pedestrian Control Signals.
Section 315.080. Flashing Signals.
with reference to an intersection involving other highways
under their jurisdiction, may prohibit any such right turn
against a red signal at any intersection where safety conditions
so require, said prohibition shall be effective when a sign is
erected at such intersection giving notice thereof.
c. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as
provided in Section 315.070, pedestrians facing a steady red
signal alone shall not enter the roadway.
4. In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of
this Section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which
by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be
made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the
stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking,
the stop shall be made at the signal.
A. Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words
"Walk" or "Don't Walk" or appropriate symbols are in place, such signals
shall indicate as follows:
1. "WALK": Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the rightof-
way by the drivers of all vehicles.
2. "WAIT" or "DON'T WALK": No pedestrian shall start to cross the
roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has
partially completed his/her crossing on the walk signal shall
proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the wait signal is
showing.
A. Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic
sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
1. Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when
marked or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and the
right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after
making a stop at a stop sign.
2. Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.
Section
315.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
315.080
AO:327
Section 315.090. Lane Direction Control Signals.
When lane direction control signals are placed over the individual lanes of
a street or highway, vehicular traffic may travel in any lane over which a
green signal is shown but shall not enter or travel in any lane over which a
red signal is shown.
Section 315.100. Display of Unauthorized Signs, Signals or
Markings.
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway an
unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an
imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or
signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides
from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control
device or any railroad sign or signal.
Section 315.110. Interference With Official Traffic Control Devices
or Railroad Signs or Signals.
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any
railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon or any
other part thereof.
Section 315.115. Turnable Signs — School Stops. [R.O. 2009
§14-121; Code 1969 §22-88]
The City Engineer shall install appropriate turnable signs on all streets
hereby designated as school stop streets and it shall be the duty of the
Police Department to turn such signs so as to stop traffic at the appointed
hours and so as to permit traffic to proceed uninterrupted at such times as
the streets are not school stops.
Section 315.120. Vehicles To Approach Slow-Children Streets With
Caution. [Ord. No. 4619 §2, 4-6-2015100]
Every operator of a vehicle or other conveyance traveling on any street
in designated areas where signs shall be posted "SLOW-CHILDREN" shall
slow such vehicle or other conveyance and approach with caution.
Section 315.130. (Reserved)101
B. This Section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be
governed by the rules as set forth in Section 335.090 of this Title.
100. Editor's Note: Section 2 of this ordinance repealed former Section 315.120, Authority to
Establish Play Streets.
101. Editor's Note: Former Section 315.130, Play Streets, was repealed 4-6-2015 by Ord. No.
4619 §2.
Section
315.080
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
315.140
AO:328
Section 315.140. City Traffic Engineer to Designate Crosswalks and
Establish Safety Zones.
Section 315.150. Traffic Lanes.
Chapter 320
SPEED REGULATIONS
Section 320.010. State Speed Laws Applicable.
The State traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable
upon all streets within the City, except that the City may by ordinance
declare and determine upon the basis of engineering and traffic
investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon
specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for
any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared
when signs are in place giving notice thereof.
Section 320.020. Regulation of Speed by Traffic Signals.
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic
signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe
manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable
within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs
giving notice thereof.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized:
1. To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where
in his/her opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing
the roadway and at such other places as he/she may deem
necessary.
2. To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as he/she may deem necessary for the protection of
pedestrians.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes
upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment
of traffic is necessary.
B. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another
vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
Section
315.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
320.030
AO:329
Section 320.030. General Speed Limit.
Except where otherwise provided by signs erected pursuant to duly passed
and approved ordinances, no person shall operate a vehicle on any street in
the City in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour.
Section 320.033. Speed Limit in Alleys. [R.O. 2009 §14-188; Code
1969 §22-48]
No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle on any alley, except
emergency vehicles on emergency runs, at a rate of speed in excess of
fifteen (15) miles per hour.
Section 320.037. Speed Limits on Specific Streets. [R.O. 2009
§14-189; Code 1969 §§22-44, 22-46 — 22-47, 22-47A]
The speed of vehicles on the streets listed in Schedule I shall not exceed the
limits provided for same in such Schedules.
Section 320.040. Slow Speed — Regulations.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. Peace
Officers may enforce the provisions of this Section by directions to drivers,
and in the event of apparent willful disobedience to this provision and
refusal to comply with direction of an officer in accordance herewith, the
continued slow operation by a driver is an ordinance violation.
Section 320.050. Special Speed Limits on Roadways.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon those portions of the
roadways which are set forth and described in Schedule I at a rate of speed
in excess of that speed limit set for such portions of the roadways by said
Schedule.
Section 320.060. Accelerating From Stops, Etc. [R.O. 2009 §14-190;
Code 1969 §22-37]
The operator of a motor vehicle shall not accelerate his/her motor vehicle
from any stop, stop sign or electric traffic signal or driveway at a high
and excessive rate of speed so as to endanger pedestrian and other traffic
present, taking into consideration the traffic, its character, its volume,
surface of the street or roadway, the width of the street or alley and the
hazard or danger at the intersection and any other conditions then existing,
including the person's ability to safely brake his/her vehicle in the event of
an emergency, nor shall the operator of a motor vehicle so accelerate his/
her motor vehicle, whether from a stopped or moving position, or brake his/
her motor vehicle from a moving position, so as to cause the tires thereof to
squeal upon the pavement or ground, when said activity is not necessary to
avoid a collision.
Section
320.030
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
320.060
AO:330
Chapter 325
TURNING MOVEMENTS
Section 325.010. Required Position and Method of Turning at
Intersection.
A. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
1. Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge
of the roadway, except where multiple turn lanes have been
established.
2. Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that
portion of the right-half of the roadway nearest the centerline
thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it
enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the
centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable,
the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the
left of the center of the intersection.
3. Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection
where traffic is restricted to one (1) direction on one (1) or more of
the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any
such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme
left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of
travel of such vehicle and after entering the intersection the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as
practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving
in such direction upon the roadway being entered, except where
multiple turn lanes have been established.
4. Designated two-way left turn lanes. Where a special lane for
making left turns by drivers proceeding in opposite directions have
been indicated by official traffic control devices:
a. A left turn shall not be made from any other lane;
b. A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane except when preparing
for or making a left turn from or into the roadway or when
preparing for or making a U-turn when otherwise permitted by
law;
c. A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane for a distance more
than five hundred (500) feet.
Section
320.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
325.020
AO:331
Section 325.020. Authority to Place and Obedience to Turning
Markers.
Section 325.030. Authority to Place Restricted Turn Signs.
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine those
intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or Uturn
and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such
turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at
other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs
or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.
Section 325.040. Obedience to No-Turn Signs.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or Uturn
is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any
such sign.
Section 325.045. U-Turns.102 [R.O. 2009 §14-233; Code 1969 §22-55;
Ord. No. 3203 §1, 5-4-1992]
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so
as to proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement can be made
in safety and without backing or otherwise interfering with other traffic;
provided that the operator of any vehicle shall not turn the same so as to
proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a congested district
designated in Schedule VIII.
Section 325.050. Limitations on Turning Around.
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon
any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in
safety and without interfering with other traffic.
Chapter 330
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
A. The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons or
signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to
be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as
prescribed by law or ordinance.
B. When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of
such indications.
102. State Law References — Similar provisions, §§300.235, 304.341, RSMo.
Section
325.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
330.010
AO:332
Section 330.010. Authority to Sign One-Way Streets and Alleys.
Whenever any ordinance of the City designates any one-way street or
alley, the City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice
thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are
in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall
be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
Section 330.020. One-Way Streets and Alleys.
Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described and
designated by ordinance, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated
direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and
maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction
is prohibited.
Section 330.030. Authority to Restrict Direction of Movement on
Streets During Certain Periods.
Chapter 335
STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS, RAILROAD CROSSINGS
A. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and
designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which
vehicular traffic shall proceed in one (1) direction during one (1) period
and the opposite direction during another period of the day and shall
place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other
devices to give notice thereof. The City Traffic Engineer may erect signs
temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the roadway.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of
such markings, signs, barriers or other devices so placed in accordance
with this Section.
Section
330.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
330.030
AO:333

ARTICLE I
Generally
Section 335.010. Through Streets Designated.
Those streets and parts of streets described by ordinances of the City are
declared to be through streets for the purposes of Sections 335.010 to
335.090.
Section 335.020. Signs Required at Through Streets.
Whenever any ordinance of the City designates and describes a through
street, it shall be the duty of the City Traffic Engineer to place and maintain
a stop sign, or on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation at
any intersection a yield sign, on each and every street intersecting such
through street unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all
times by traffic control signals; provided however, that at the intersection of
two (2) such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and
a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the
approaches of either of said streets as may be determined by the City Traffic
Engineer upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study.
Section 335.030. Other Intersections Where Stop or Yield Required.
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate
intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through
streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one (1) or more
entrances to any such intersection in which event he/she shall cause to be
erected a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required, or whether
vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at such
intersection as prescribed in Subsection (A) of Section 335.040 in which
event he/she shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where
obedience thereto is required.
Section 335.033. School Stops. [R.O. 2009 §14-157; Code 1969
§22-87(a)]
Between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M. on all days of the week on
which any school within the City is in session, every operator of any vehicle
proceeding on a street declared by Schedule XII, Table XII-A to be a school
stop shall cause such vehicle or other conveyance to stop before entering
upon or crossing over such street.
Section 335.037. School Crossings. [R.O. 2009 §14-156; Code 1969
§22-87(b)]
Between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M. on all days of the week on
which any school within the City is in session, every operator of any vehicle
proceeding on or through a school crossing designated in Schedule XII,
Table XII-B shall cause such vehicle to enter the crossing with caution.
Section
335.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
335.040
AO:335
Section 335.040. Stop and Yield Signs.
Section 335.050. Vehicle Entering Stop Intersection.
Except when directed to proceed by a Police Officer or traffic control signal,
every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop
sign shall stop as required by Subsection (B) of Section 335.040 and after
having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered
the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely
on said highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when
such driver is moving across or within the intersection.
Section 335.060. Vehicle Entering Yield Intersection.
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such
sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and shall
yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on
another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during
the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection; provided
however, that if such a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the
intersection, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision
shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his/her failure to yield right-of-way.
Section 335.070. Emerging From Alley, Driveway or Building.
The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging
from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior
to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway or driveway and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as
may be necessary to avoid collision and upon entering the roadway shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
Section 335.080. Stop When Traffic Obstructed.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there
is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
A. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety to
stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked
stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway.
B. Except when directed to proceed by a Police Officer or traffic control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection
indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall
stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest
the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching
traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection.
Section
335.040
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
335.080
AO:336
accommodate the vehicle he/she is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed.
Section 335.090. Obedience to Signal Indicating Approach of Train.
A. Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this Section, the
driver of such vehicle shall stop within fifty (50) feet but not less than
fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall not
proceed until he/she can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall
apply when:
1. A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning
of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
2. A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad
train;
3. An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous
proximity to such crossing.
B. No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier
is closed or is being opened or closed.
C. No person shall drive a vehicle through a railroad crossing when there
is not sufficient space to drive completely through the crossing.
D. No person shall drive a vehicle through a railroad crossing unless such
vehicle has sufficient undercarriage clearance necessary to prevent the
undercarriage of the vehicle from contacting the railroad crossing.
E. Every commercial motor vehicle as defined in Section 302.700, RSMo.,
shall, upon approaching a railroad grade crossing, be driven at a rate of
speed which will permit said commercial motor vehicle to be stopped
before reaching the nearest rail of such crossing and shall not be driven
upon or over such crossing until due caution has been taken to
ascertain that the course is clear. This Section does not apply to
vehicles which are required to stop at railroad crossings pursuant to
Section 304.030, RSMo.
Section
335.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
335.090
AO:337

ARTICLE II
Violation of Public Safety and the Automated Enforcement of Traffic
Control Signal Regulations
Section 335.100. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §14-412; Ord. No. 4048 §1,
11-20-2006; Ord. No. 4323 §1, 3-5-2012]
The following terms, when used in this Article, shall mean:
AUTOMATED RED LIGHT ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM —
MUNICIPAL COURT — The Municipal Court or Associate Circuit Court as
elected by the municipality to hear ordinance violations pursuant to Section
479.040, RSMo.
OPERATOR — A person who operates or drives a motor vehicle and has the
same meaning as "DRIVER".
OWNER — The owner of a motor vehicle as shown on the motor vehicle
registration records of the Missouri Department of Revenue or the
analogous department or agency of another State or country. The term
"owner" includes:
RECORDED IMAGE — An image recorded by an automated red light
enforcement system that depicts the rear and side of a motor vehicle and is
automatically recorded on a digital image.
Consists of a camera and vehicle sensor or sensors installed to work in
conjunction with an electrically operated traffic control signal.
1.
Is capable of producing exactly two (2) high resolution color digital
recorded images that show:
a. The traffic control signal while it is emitting a steady red signal;
b. The offending vehicle; and
The license plate of the offending vehicle.
All of these elements are required in a single recorded image
from the same camera unit which captured each of the two (2)
images. One (1) of the images must be of sufficient resolution
to clearly show all three (3) elements in either the first (1st)
image captured immediately prior to the violation, or in the
second (2nd) image captured sequentially after the first (1st)
image, and while the vehicle is in the intersection while the
traffic signal is emitting a steady red signal.
c.
2.
3. No recorded images will be taken of the occupants of the vehicle.
1. A lessee of a motor vehicle under a lease of six (6) months or more; or
The lessee of a motor vehicle rented or leased from a motor vehicle
rental or leasing company, but does not include the motor vehicle rental
or leasing company itself.
2.
Section
335.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
335.100
AO:339
SYSTEM LOCATION — The approach to an intersection toward which an
automated red light enforcement system is directed and in operation.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — A traffic control device that displays
alternating red, amber and green lights intended to direct traffic when to
stop at or proceed through an intersection.
Section 335.110. Violation of Public Safety and the Automated Red
Light Enforcement System Authorized. [R.O. 2009 §14-413; Ord. No.
4048 §1, 11-20-2006]
A person commits the offense of violation of public safety when such person
fails to comply with the rules and regulations when a steady red signal
appears at an intersection and the violation is detected through the
automated red light enforcement system which is authorized for installation
and operation within the City for the purpose of enforcing the regulations
as provided for herein.
Section 335.120. Violation of Public Safety at Intersections. [R.O.
2009 §14-414; Ord. No. 4323 §2, 3-5-2012]
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, a person commits the
infraction of violation of public safety at an intersection when a motor
vehicle of which that person is an owner is present in an intersection
while the traffic control signal for the intersection is emitting a steady
red signal for the direction of travel or orientation of that vehicle in or
through the intersection, unless the motor vehicle is in the process of
making a lawful turn or unless the motor vehicle entered the
intersection while the traffic control signal for the intersection was
emitting a steady yellow signal for the direction of travel or orientation
of that vehicle in or through the intersection and the motor vehicle did
not obstruct the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians. Provided
however, that an infraction shall be excused upon submission of a
sufficient sworn statement that the presence of the motor vehicle in the
intersection was justified because:
1. The traffic control signal was not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to an ordinarily observant person;
2. The operator of the motor vehicle was acting in compliance with
the lawful order or direction of a Police Officer;
3. The operator of the motor vehicle violated the instruction of the
traffic control signal in order to yield the right-of-way to an
immediately approaching authorized emergency vehicle;
4. The motor vehicle was being operated as part of a funeral
procession pursuant to Section 194.503, RSMo.;
5. The motor vehicle was being operated as an authorized emergency
vehicle as defined and in compliance with Section 304.022, RSMo.;
Section
335.100
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
335.120
AO:340
Section 335.130. Warning Signs. [R.O. 2009 §14-416; Ord. No. 4048
§1, 11-20-2006]
Any automated traffic control system on a street or highway must be
identified by appropriate advance warning signs conspicuously posted
either at the major entrances to the City or not more than three hundred
(300) feet from the location of an automated traffic control system located
at an intersection. All advance warning signs shall be approved by the Police
Department.
Section 335.140. Fines. [R.O. 2009 §14-417; Ord. No. 4048 §1,
11-20-2006; Ord. No. 4073 §1, 6-18-2007]
The fine established for violation of the automated red light enforcement
system shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
6. The motor vehicle was a stolen vehicle and being operated by a
person other than the owner without the effective consent of the
owner (but this shall not be a justification for such an operator) and
the theft was timely reported to the appropriate Law Enforcement
Agency;
7. The license plate and/or tags depicted in the recorded image(s)
were stolen and being displayed on a motor vehicle other than the
motor vehicle for which they were issued (but this shall not be a
justification for the operator of the motor vehicle) and the theft was
timely reported to the appropriate Law Enforcement Agency;
8. Ownership of the motor vehicle had in fact been transferred prior
to the violation (provided State records substantiate this
statement);
9. The motor vehicle was present in the intersection because it was
inoperable.
Liability hereunder is based on ownership, without regard to
whether the owner was operating the motor vehicle at the time
of the violation, except that, as provided in Section 304.120.4,
RSMo., no liability shall be imposed on the owner of a motor
vehicle when the vehicle is being permissively used by a lessee
if the owner furnishes the name, address and operator's license
number of the person renting or leasing the motor vehicle
at the time the violation occurred to the City within thirty
(30) days from the time of receipt of written request for such
information.
Section
335.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
335.140
AO:341
Chapter 340
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
Section 340.010. Following Emergency Vehicle Prohibited.
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow
any emergency vehicle traveling in response to an emergency call closer
than five hundred (500) feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the
block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
Section 340.020. Crossing Fire Hose.
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department
when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire
or alarm of fire without the consent of the Fire Department official in
command.
Section 340.030. Funeral Processions.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall mean:
FUNERAL DIRECTOR — A person licensed as a funeral director
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 333, RSMo.
FUNERAL LEAD VEHICLE or LEAD VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle
equipped with at least one (1) lighted circulating lamp exhibiting an
amber or purple light or lens or alternating flashing headlamps visible
under normal atmospheric conditions for a distance of five hundred
(500) feet from the front of the vehicle. A hearse or coach properly
equipped may be a lead vehicle.
ORGANIZED FUNERAL PROCESSION — Two (2) or more vehicles
accompanying the remains of a deceased person from a funeral
establishment, church, synagogue or other place where a funeral
service has taken place to a cemetery, crematory or other place of
final disposition or a funeral establishment, church, synagogue or other
place where additional funeral services will be performed if directed by
a licensed funeral director from a licensed establishment.
B. Driving Rules.
1. Except as otherwise provided for in this Section, pedestrians and
operators of all other vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle which is a part of an organized funeral procession.
2. Notwithstanding any traffic control device or right-of-way provision
prescribed by State or local law, when the funeral lead vehicle in an
organized funeral procession lawfully enters an intersection, all
vehicles in the procession shall follow the lead vehicle through the
intersection. The operator of each vehicle in the procession shall
Section
335.140
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
340.030
AO:342
Section 340.040. Driving in Procession.
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the righthand
edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead
as close as is practicable and safe.
exercise the highest degree of care toward any other vehicle or
pedestrian on the roadway.
3. An organized funeral procession shall have the right-of-way at all
intersections regardless of any traffic control device at such
intersections, except that operators of vehicles in an organized
funeral procession shall yield the right-of-way to any approaching
emergency vehicle pursuant to the provisions of law or when
directed to do so by a Law Enforcement Officer.
4. All vehicles in an organized funeral procession shall follow the
preceding vehicle in the procession as closely as is practical and
safe under the conditions.
5. No person shall operate any vehicle as part of an organized funeral
procession without the flashing emergency lights of such vehicle
being lighted.
6. Any person who is not an operator of a vehicle in an organized
funeral procession shall not:
a. Drive between the vehicles comprising an organized funeral
procession while such vehicles are in motion and have the
flashing emergency lights lighted pursuant to Subsection
(B)(5) above, except when required to do so by a Law
Enforcement Officer or when such person is operating an
emergency vehicle giving an audible or visual signal;
b. Join a funeral procession for the purpose of securing the rightof-
way; or
c. Attempt to pass any vehicle in an organized funeral procession,
except where a passing lane has been specifically provided.
7. When an organized funeral procession is proceeding through a red
signal light as permitted herein, a vehicle not in the organized
funeral procession shall not enter the intersection unless such
vehicle may do so without crossing the path of the funeral
procession.
8. No ordinance, regulation or any other provision of law shall
prohibit the use of a motorcycle utilizing flashing amber lights to
escort an organized funeral procession on the highway.
C. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this Section shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
Section
340.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.050
AO:343
Section 340.050. When Permits Required for Parades and
Processions.
No procession or parade containing twenty-five (25) or more persons or
ten (10) or more vehicles except the forces of the United States Army or
Navy, the military forces of this State, and the forces of the Police and
Fire Departments shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except
in accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police and such other
regulations as are set forth herein which may apply.
Section 340.060. Vehicle Shall Not Be Driven on a Sidewalk —
Prohibition on Obstruction of Bicycle Lanes — Drivers to Yield to
Bicycles in Designated Bicycle Lanes.
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except
on a permanent or temporary driveway. A designated bicycle lane shall not
be obstructed by a parked or standing motor vehicle or other stationary
object. A motor vehicle may be driven in a designated bicycle lane only for
the purpose of a lawful maneuver to cross the lane or to provide for safe
travel. In making an otherwise lawful maneuver that requires traveling in
or crossing a designated bicycle lane, the driver of a motor vehicle shall
yield to any bicycle in the lane. As used in this Section, the term "designated
bicycle lane" shall mean a portion of the roadway or highway that has been
designated by the Governing Body having jurisdiction over such roadway or
highway by striping with signing or striping with pavement markings for the
preferential or exclusive use of bicycles.
Section 340.070. Limitations on Backing.
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can
be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
Section 340.080. Opening and Closing Vehicle Doors.
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available
to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall
any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to
moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.
Section 340.090. Riding on Motorcycles — Additional Passenger —
Requirements.
A. A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent
and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any
other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless
such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one (1) person, in which
event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if
designed for two (2) persons or upon another seat firmly attached to the
rear or side of the operator.
Section
340.050
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
340.090
AO:344
Section 340.100. Riding Bicycle on Sidewalks — Limitations —
Motorized Bicycles Prohibited.
Section 340.105. All Motorized Vehicles Prohibited From Pathways
and Walkways. [R.O. 2009 §14-410; Ord. No. 2939 §1, 7-18-1988]
Motorized vehicles are prohibited on or about pathways and/or walkways
within the City limits of Brentwood. However, this Section does not apply to
emergency vehicles, City vehicles and utility companies providing service,
maintenance or emergency responses.
Section 340.107. Motorized Skateboards, Motorized Go-Carts and
Motorized Minibikes. [R.O. 2009 §14-17; Ord. No. 3338 §1,
5-2-1994; Ord. No. 3855 §1, 12-16-2002]
B. The operator of a motorized bicycle shall ride only astride the
permanent and regular seat attached thereto and shall not permit more
than one (1) person to ride thereon at the same time, unless the
motorized bicycle is designed to carry more than one (1) person. Any
motorized bicycle designed to carry more than one (1) person must be
equipped with a passenger seat and footrests for the use of a passenger.
A. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.
B. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible
signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
C. No person shall ride a motorized bicycle upon a sidewalk.
A. No person shall use, operate or permit the use or operation of any
motorized skateboard, motorized go-cart, motorized minibike or like
motorized instrument on any sidewalk, street, parking lot or other
public place in the City.
B. The use of any motorized skateboard, motorized go-cart, motorized
minibike or other like motorized instrument as defined in Section
300.010 is hereby permitted on private driveways and parking lots with
the permission of the private property owner. Any person who shall use,
operate or permit to be used or operate any motorized skateboard,
motorized go-cart, motorized minibike or like motorized instrument
shall do so in a careful and prudent manner and not in a manner so as to
cause or be likely to cause danger to any person or property.
C. The user of any such motorized skateboard, motorized go-cart,
motorized minibike or like motorized instrument shall give way to any
pedestrian, motor vehicle or any other user of such parking lot or
driveway and shall not interfere with the proper use of any public way
by any other person.
D. Penalties for violations of this Section shall be as follows:
Section
340.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.107
AO:345
Section 340.110. All-Terrain Vehicles — Prohibited — Exceptions —
Operation Under an Exception — Prohibited Uses — Penalty.
1. First (1st) offense. Confiscation of motorized skateboard, motorized
go-cart, motorized minibike or like motorized instrument, with
return after one (1) week;
2. Second (2nd) offense. Ten dollars ($10.00) fine to parents or
natural guardians of the offender, if a minor;
3. Third (3rd) and subsequent offenses. An additional ten dollar
($10.00) fine for each subsequent offense.
A. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle, as defined in Section
300.010, upon the streets and highways of this City, except as follows:
1. All-terrain vehicles owned and operated by a governmental entity
for official use;
2. All-terrain vehicles operated for agricultural purposes or industrial
on-premises purposes between the official sunrise and sunset on
the day of operation.
B. No person shall operate an off-road vehicle, as defined in Section
304.001, RSMo., within any stream or river in this City, except that offroad
vehicles may be operated within waterways which flow within the
boundaries of land which an off-road vehicle operator owns, or for
agricultural purposes within the boundaries of land which an off-road
vehicle operator owns or has permission to be upon, or for the purpose
of fording such stream or river of this State at such road crossings as
are customary or part of the highway system. All Law Enforcement
Officials or Peace Officers of this State and its political subdivisions
shall enforce the provisions of this Subsection within the geographic
area of their jurisdiction.
C. A person operating an all-terrain vehicle on a street or highway
pursuant to an exception covered in this Section shall have a valid
license issued by a State authorizing such person to operate a motor
vehicle but shall not be required to have passed an examination for the
operation of a motorcycle, and the vehicle shall be operated at speeds
of less than thirty (30) miles per hour. When operated on a street or
highway, an all-terrain vehicle shall have a bicycle safety flag, which
extends not less than seven (7) feet above the ground, attached to the
rear of the vehicle. The bicycle safety flag shall be triangular in shape
with an area of not less than thirty (30) square inches and shall be
dayglow in color.
D. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle:
1. In any careless way so as to endanger the person or property of
another;
Section
340.107
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
340.110
AO:346
Section 340.115. Utility Vehicles, Operation on Highway and in
Streams or Rivers Prohibited — Exceptions — Passengers Prohibited
— Violations, Penalty.
2. While under the influence of alcohol or any controlled substance;
or
3. Without a securely fastened safety helmet on the head of an
individual who operates an all-terrain vehicle or who is being towed
or otherwise propelled by an all-terrain vehicle, unless the
individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
E. No operator of an all-terrain vehicle shall carry a passenger, except for
agricultural purposes.
A. No person shall operate a utility vehicle, as defined in Section 300.010
of this Title, upon the highways of this City or State, except as follows:
1. Utility vehicles owned and operated by a governmental entity for
official use;
2. Utility vehicles operated for agricultural purposes or industrial onpremises
purposes between the official sunrise and sunset on the
day of operation, unless equipped with proper lighting;
3. Utility vehicles operated by handicapped persons for short
distances occasionally only on the State's secondary roads when
operated between the hours of sunrise and sunset;
4. The City may issue special permits for utility vehicles to be used on
highways within the City limits by licensed drivers. Fees of fifteen
dollars ($15.00) may be collected and retained by the City for such
permits.
B. No person shall operate a utility vehicle within any stream or river in
this City or State, except that utility vehicles may be operated within
waterways which flow within the boundaries of land which a utility
vehicle operator owns, or for agricultural purposes within the
boundaries of land which a utility vehicle operator owns or has
permission to be upon, or for the purpose of fording such stream or
river of this City or State at such road crossings as are customary or
part of the highway system. All Law Enforcement Officials shall enforce
the provisions of this Subsection within the geographic area of their
jurisdiction.
C. A person operating a utility vehicle on a highway pursuant to an
exception covered in this Section shall have a valid operator's or
chauffeur's license, except that a handicapped person operating such
vehicle under Subparagraph (3) of Subsection (A) of this Section shall
not be required to have passed an examination for the operation of a
motorcycle, and the vehicle shall be operated at speeds of less than
forty-five (45) miles per hour.
Section
340.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.115
AO:347
Section 340.120. Riding Bicycles, Sleds, Roller Skates by Attaching
to Another Vehicle Prohibited — Pulling a Rider Behind Vehicle
Prohibited.
No person riding upon any bicycle, motorized bicycle, coaster, roller skates,
sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself/herself to any vehicle
upon a roadway. Neither shall the driver of a vehicle knowingly pull a rider
behind a vehicle.
Section 340.130. Controlled Access.
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled access roadway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
Section 340.135. Avoiding Intersections. [R.O. 2009 §14-148; Ord.
No. 2774 §1, 1-20-1986; Ord. No. 3204 §1, 5-4-1992]
No driver shall operate a motor vehicle on any private road or driveway,
parking lot or any area which is not a highway, road or street for the
purpose of avoiding travel upon the right-of-way between one highway, road
or street and the same or another highway, road or street or to avoid any
traffic control device or intersection. In any prosecution for a violation of
this Section, it shall be prima facie evidence that the driver operated a
motor vehicle with said purpose if the movement of said vehicle across
the private road, driveway, parking lot or any area which is not a highway,
road or street was continuous and did not include a full stoppage of said
movement for a period of not less than one (1) minute.
Section 340.140. Railroad Trains Not to Block Streets.
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad
train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as
to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time
longer than five (5) minutes; provided that this Section shall not apply to
a moving train or to one stopped because of an emergency or for repairs
necessary before it can proceed safely.
D. No persons shall operate a utility vehicle:
1. In any careless way so as to endanger the person or property of
another; or
2. While under the influence of alcohol or any controlled substance.
E. No operator of a utility vehicle shall carry a passenger, except for
agricultural purposes. The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply
to any utility vehicle in which the seat of such vehicle is designed to
carry more than one (1) person.
F. A violation of this Section shall be an ordinance violation.
Section
340.115
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
340.150
AO:348
Section 340.150. Driving Through Safety Zone Prohibited.
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone.
Section 340.160. Manner of Operation of Motor Vehicles — Careful
and Prudent. [Ord. No. 4682 §1, 12-7-2015]
Section 340.165. Vehicles Used Primarily for Advertising. [R.O.
2009 §14-161; Code 1969 §22-50]
No person shall operate or drive a vehicle used primarily for advertising
purposes or for the display of posters, placards or any other article for the
inspection of the public at a rate of speed less than six (6) miles per hour,
and the operator of such a vehicle shall move the same continuously and
shall not stop the same except when ordered by any Police Officer or in
obedience to traffic signs or signals.
Section 340.170. Driving to the Right.
A. Every person operating a motor vehicle on the highways of this City
shall drive the vehicle in a careful and prudent manner and at a rate of
speed so as not to endanger the property of another or the life or limb of
any person and shall exercise the highest degree of care.
B. It shall be prima facie evidence that a vehicle operator is not exercising
the highest degree of care if the operator of a moving vehicle engages
in any conduct that causes his or her vision or attention to be obscured,
diminished or directed elsewhere than the path of travel or safe
operation of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, by using a mirror
to engage in grooming; reading anything located in the vehicle other
than operation information displayed on vehicle gauges and equipment;
writing; drawing; manually inputting information into a GPS or
mapping device; or turning one's head substantially away from the path
of travel to observe things in the vehicle or outside the vehicle but
contrary to the path of travel.
A. Upon all public roads or highways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be
driven upon the right-half of the roadway, except as follows:
1. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction pursuant to the rules governing such movement;
2. When placing a vehicle in position for and when such vehicle is
lawfully making a left turn in compliance with the provisions of this
Title;
3. When the right-half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair;
4. Upon a roadway designated by local ordinance as a one-way street
and marked or signed for one-way traffic.
Section
340.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.170
AO:349
B. It is unlawful to drive any vehicle upon any highway or road which has
been divided into two (2) or more roadways by means of a physical
barrier or by means of a dividing section or delineated by curbs, lines or
other markings on the roadway except to the right of such barrier or
dividing section or to make any left turn or semi-circular or U-turn on
any such divided highway, except at an intersection or interchange or at
any signed location designated by the State Highways and
Transportation Commission or the Department of Transportation. The
provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to emergency vehicles, law
enforcement vehicles or to vehicles owned by the Commission or the
Department.
C. Whenever any roadway has been divided into three (3) or more clearly
marked lanes for traffic, the following rules in addition to all other
consistent herewith shall apply:
1. A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver
has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
2. Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes, a vehicle shall
not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and
passing another vehicle where the roadway ahead is clearly visible
and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in
preparation for a left turn, or where such center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is
proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such allocation.
3. Upon all highways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal
speed of traffic thereon shall be driven in the right-hand lane for
traffic or as close as practicable to the right-hand edge or curb,
except as otherwise provided in Sections 304.014 to 304.026,
RSMo.
4. Official signs may be erected by the State Highways and
Transportation Commission or the Highway Patrol may place
temporary signs directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated
lane or allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same
direction and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every
such sign.
5. Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right and, except when a roadway has been
divided into traffic lanes, each driver shall give to the other at least
one-half (½) of the main traveled portion of the roadway whenever
possible.
D. All vehicles in motion upon a highway having two (2) or more lanes of
traffic proceeding in the same direction shall be driven in the righthand
lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle or when
preparing to make a proper left turn or when otherwise directed by
traffic markings, signs or signals.
Section
340.170
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
340.170
AO:350
Section 340.180. Passing Regulations.
E. All trucks registered for a gross weight of more than forty-eight
thousand (48,000) pounds shall not be driven in the far left-hand lane
upon all interstate highways, freeways, or expressways within
urbanized areas of the State having three (3) or more lanes of traffic
proceeding in the same direction. This restriction shall not apply when:
1. It is necessary for the operator of the truck to follow traffic control
devices that direct use of a lane other than the right lane; or
2. The right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair.
F. As used in Subsection (E) of this Section, "truck" means any vehicle,
machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer, or any combination thereof,
propelled or drawn by mechanical power and designed for or used in
the transportation of property upon the highways. The term "truck" also
includes a commercial motor vehicle as defined in Section 300.010 of
this Title.
A. The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to the limitations and
exceptions hereinafter stated:
1. The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and
shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely
clear of the overtaken vehicle; and
2. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of
the overtaking vehicle and shall not increase the speed of such
driver's vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
B. The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
1. When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
2. Upon a City street with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width
for two (2) or more lanes of vehicles in each direction;
3. Upon a one-way street.
The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass another
vehicle upon the right only under the foregoing conditions
when such movement may be made in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the paved or
main traveled portion of the roadway. The provisions of this
Subsection shall not relieve the driver of a slow-moving vehicle
from the duty to drive as closely as practicable to the righthand
edge of the roadway.
Section
340.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.180
AO:351
Section 340.190. Hand and Mechanical Signals.
C. Except when a roadway has been divided into three (3) traffic lanes, no
vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the centerline of a highway or
public road in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of
oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such
overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with
the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction or any vehicle overtaken.
D. No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:
1. When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve of the
highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance
as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach
from the opposite direction.
2. When the view is obstructed upon approaching within one hundred
(100) feet of any bridge, viaduct, tunnel or when approaching
within one hundred (100) feet of or at any intersection or railroad
grade crossing.
A. No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of or turn a vehicle
from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and
until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only
after the giving of an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein.
1. An operator or driver when stopping, or when checking the speed
of the operator's vehicle if the movement of other vehicles may
reasonably be affected by such checking of speed, shall extend
such operator's arm at an angle below horizontal so that the same
may be seen in the rear of the vehicle.
2. An operator or driver intending to turn the vehicle to the right shall
extend such operator's arm at an angle above horizontal so that the
same may be seen in front of and in the rear of the vehicle and shall
slow down and approach the intersecting highway as near as
practicable to the right side of the highway along which such
operator is proceeding before turning.
3. An operator or driver intending to turn the vehicle to the left shall
extend such operator's arm in a horizontal position so that the
same may be seen in the rear of the vehicle and shall slow down
and approach the intersecting highway so that the left side of the
vehicle shall be as near as practicable to the centerline of the
highway along which the operator is proceeding before turning.
4. The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the
hand and arm or by a signal light or signal device in good
mechanical condition of a type approved by the State Highway
Section
340.180
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
340.190
AO:352
Section 340.200. Stopping for School Bus.
Patrol; however, when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that
a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and
rear of such vehicle, then such signals shall be given by such
light or device. A vehicle shall be considered as so constructed or
loaded that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to
the front and rear when the distance from the center of the top
of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or
load exceeds twenty-four (24) inches, or when the distance from
the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the
body or load thereon exceeds fourteen (14) feet, which limit of
fourteen (14) feet shall apply to single vehicles or combinations
of vehicles. The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to
any trailer which does not interfere with a clear view of the hand
signals of the operator or of the signaling device upon the vehicle
pulling such trailer; provided further, that the provisions of this
Section as far as mechanical devices on vehicles so constructed
that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front
and rear of such vehicle as above provided shall only be applicable
to new vehicles registered within this State after the first (1st) day
of January, 1954.
A. The driver of a vehicle upon a highway upon meeting or overtaking
from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the highway
for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children and
whose driver has in the manner prescribed by law given the signal to
stop shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus and shall not
proceed until such school bus resumes motion or until signaled by its
driver to proceed.
B. Every bus used for the transportation of school children shall bear upon
the front and rear thereon a plainly visible sign containing the words
"School Bus" in letters not less than eight (8) inches in height. Each bus
shall have lettered on the rear in plain and distinct type the following:
"State Law: Stop While Bus is Loading and Unloading". Each school bus
subject to the provisions of Sections 304.050 to 304.070, RSMo., shall
be equipped with a mechanical and electrical signaling device approved
by the State Board of Education which will display a signal plainly
visible from the front and rear and indicating intention to stop.
C. Every school bus operated to transport students in the public school
system which has a gross vehicle weight rating of more than ten
thousand (10,000) pounds, which has the engine mounted entirely in
front of the windshield and the entrance door behind the front wheels,
and which is used for the transportation of school children shall be
equipped with a crossing control arm. The crossing control arm, when
activated, shall extend a minimum of five (5) feet six (6) inches from the
face of the front bumper. The crossing control arm shall be attached on
the right side of the front bumper and shall be activated by the same
Section
340.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.200
AO:353
Section 340.210. Right-of-Way at Intersection — Signs at
Intersections.103
controls which activate the mechanical and electrical signaling devices
described in Subsection (B) of this Section. This Subsection may be
cited as "Jessica's Law" in commemoration of Jessica Leicht and all
other Missouri school children who have been injured or killed during
the operation of a school bus.
D. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the driver of a school bus
in the process of loading or unloading students upon a street or
highway shall activate the mechanical and electrical signaling devices,
in the manner prescribed by the State Board of Education, to
communicate to drivers of other vehicles that students are loading or
unloading. A public school district has the authority pursuant to Section
304.050, RSMo., to adopt a policy which provides that the driver of a
school bus in the process of loading or unloading students upon a
divided highway of four (4) or more lanes may pull off of the main
roadway and load or unload students without activating the mechanical
and electrical signaling devices in a manner which gives the signal for
other drivers to stop and may use the amber signaling devices to alert
motorists that the school bus is slowing to a stop; provided that the
passengers are not required to cross any traffic lanes and also provided
that the emergency flashing signal lights are activated in a manner
which indicates that drivers should proceed with caution and, in such
case, the driver of a vehicle may proceed past the school bus with due
caution. No driver of a school bus shall take on or discharge passengers
at any location upon a highway consisting of four (4) or more lanes of
traffic, whether or not divided by a median or barrier, in such manner as
to require the passengers to cross more than two (2) lanes of traffic; nor
shall any passengers be taken on or discharged while the vehicle is
upon the road or highway proper unless the vehicle so stopped is
plainly visible for at least five hundred (500) feet in each direction to
drivers of other vehicles in the case of a highway with no shoulder and a
speed limit greater than sixty (60) miles per hour and at least three
hundred (300) feet in each direction to drivers of other vehicles upon
other highways, and on all highways, only for such time as is actually
necessary to take on and discharge passengers.
E. The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need
not stop upon meeting or overtaking a school bus which is on a different
roadway, which is proceeding in the opposite direction on a highway
containing four (4) or more lanes of traffic, or which is stopped in a
loading zone constituting a part of, or adjacent to, a limited or
controlled access highway at a point where pedestrians are not
permitted to cross the roadway.
103. State Law Reference — This Section has additional penalties based on certain
circumstances, §304.351, RSMo.
Section
340.200
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
340.210
AO:354
Section 340.220. Distance at Which Vehicle Must Follow.
The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than
is reasonably safe and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the roadway. Vehicles being
driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residence district in a
caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing other vehicles, shall be so
operated, except in a funeral procession or in a duly authorized parade, so
as to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or combination of
vehicles as to enable any other vehicle to overtake or pass such vehicles
in safety. This Section shall in no manner affect Section 304.044, RSMo.,
relating to distance between trucks traveling on the highway.
Section 340.225. Vending, Selling or Distributing Prohibited From
Within the Limits of a Highway, Roadway, Street or Alleyway. [R.O.
2009 §14-411; Ord. No. 3545 §5, 6-16-1997]
It is unlawful to vend, sell or distribute merchandise, food or material
from a vehicle, stand or otherwise within the limits of a highway, roadway,
street or alleyway in the City, except under such license, conditions and/
or regulations prescribed by City ordinances; but in no instance shall such
vending be permitted or authorized where the same causes stopping,
A. The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the rightof-
way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
highway, provided however, there is no form of traffic control at such
intersection.
B. When two (2) vehicles enter an intersection from different highways at
approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall
yield the right-of-way to the driver of the vehicle on the right. This
Subsection shall not apply to vehicles approaching each other from
opposite directions when the driver of one (1) of such vehicles is
attempting to or is making a left turn.
C. The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the
left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as
to constitute an immediate hazard.
D. The driver of a vehicle intending to make a left turn into an alley, private
road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching
from the opposite direction when the making of such left turn would
create a traffic hazard.
E. The City may, on any section of road where construction or major
maintenance operations are being effected, fix a speed limit in such
areas by posting of appropriate signs, and the operation of a motor
vehicle in excess of such speed limit in the area so posted shall be
deemed prima facie evidence of careless and imprudent driving and a
violation of Section 340.160.
Section
340.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.225
AO:355
standing or parking in or upon a highway, roadway, street or alleyway, or
when such vending or distributing causes traffic confusion and interferes
with the free and unhindered mobile progression of traffic.
Section 340.230. Parking Lots, Drive-Ins, Etc. — Operation Within.
[R.O. 2009 §14-162; Code 1969 §22-39; Ord. No. 4109 §1, 2-4-2008]
Section 340.235. Parking Lots, Drive-Ins, Etc. — Emerging From.
[R.O. 2009 §14-163; Code 1969 §22-40]
An operator of a vehicle emerging from any parking lot, drive-in or private
way shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk
or onto the sidewalk area extending across the exit from any parking
lot, drive-in or private way and shall, before crossing such sidewalk or
sidewalk area, give warning of his/her intention to do so and shall then
proceed carefully, yielding the right-of-way to vehicles which are already in
motion on the roadway or to persons already upon or near such sidewalk,
sidewalk area or roadway. The Chief of Police, with the consent of the
City Engineer, is hereby authorized to maintain or cause to be maintained
appropriate traffic signs or signals at the exits from such parking lots, driveins
or private ways where in his/her opinion there is particular danger to
pedestrians using the sidewalk or sidewalk area or to vehicles using the
roadway crossing such exits and at such other places as he/she may deem
necessary.
A. Motor vehicles shall be driven and operated with ordinary degree of
care on all parking lots, drive-ins and private ways at a speed not in
excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour, and the operators of such vehicles
are charged with the duty of operating at such lesser speed as will be
consistent with the safety of others using such places, taking into
consideration the amount of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the
visibility and atmospheric conditions and the condition of the pavement.
All regulations provided by other Sections of this Chapter applicable to
motor vehicles with respect to signaling, lights, backing, turning,
stopping, sounding of horns and parking shall apply to vehicles
operated in parking lots, drive-ins and private ways.
B. No person shall park, stop or operate any vehicle or motor vehicle in
such manner as to block or to unnecessarily hold up or delay the normal
movement of other vehicles or motor vehicles so as to encroach upon
lanes marked, set aside or commonly used for driving motor vehicles
upon any street, alley, highway, parking lot, drive-in or private way.
C. The Traffic Commission of the City may designate areas in which double
parking is permitted, and in such areas a person is in violation of this
Section only after failing or refusing to move his/her vehicle upon the
request of the owner or operator of a vehicle that is being blocked, or if
the owner cannot be located within a reasonable time, the Police
Department may take proper steps to move the vehicle.
Section
340.225
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
340.240
AO:356
Section 340.240. Obstruction to Operator's View or Driving
Mechanism.104 [R.O. 2009 §14-12; Code 1969 §22-31]
Section 340.250. Endangerment of an Emergency Responder,
Elements.
A. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive the same
when such vehicle is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat of
such vehicle such number of persons as to obstruct the view of the
operator to the front or sides or to interfere with the operator's control
over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
B. It shall be unlawful for any passenger in a vehicle to ride in such
position so as to interfere with the operator's view ahead or to the sides
or to interfere with the operator's control over the driving mechanism
of the vehicle.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the
meanings set out herein:
ACTIVE EMERGENCY — Any incident occurring on a highway, as the
term "highway" is defined in Section 302.010, RSMo., that requires
emergency services from any emergency responder.
ACTIVE EMERGENCY ZONE — Any area upon or around any highway,
which is visibly marked by emergency responders performing work for
the purpose of emergency response, and where an active emergency, or
incident removal, is temporarily occurring. This area includes the lanes
of highway leading up to an active emergency or incident removal,
beginning within three hundred (300) feet of visual sighting of:
EMERGENCY RESPONDER — Any law enforcement officer, paid or
volunteer firefighter, first responder, emergency medical worker, tow
truck operator, or other emergency personnel responding to an
emergency on a highway.
Appropriate signs or traffic control devices posted or placed by
emergency responders; or
1.
An emergency vehicle displaying active emergency lights or
signals.
2.
B. Offense Of Endangerment Of An Emergency Responder, Elements.
1. A person commits the offense of endangerment of an emergency
responder for any of the following offenses when the offense occurs
within an active emergency zone:
a. Exceeding the posted speed limit by fifteen (15) miles per hour
or more;
b. Passing in violation of Subsection (C)(3) of this Section;
104. State Law References — Motor vehicle licenses, §§301.130 et seq., RSMo.
Section
340.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.250
AO:357
c. Failure to stop for an active emergency zone flagman or
emergency responder, or failure to obey traffic control devices
erected, or personnel posted, in the active emergency zone for
purposes of controlling the flow of motor vehicles through the
zone;
d. Driving through or around an active emergency zone via any
lane not clearly designated for motorists to control the flow of
traffic through or around the active emergency zone;
e. Physically assaulting, attempting to assault, or threatening to
assault an emergency responder with a motor vehicle or other
instrument; or
f. Intentionally striking, moving or altering barrels, barriers,
signs or other devices erected to control the flow of traffic to
protect emergency responders and motorists unless the action
was necessary to avoid an obstacle, an emergency, or to
protect the health and safety of an occupant of the motor
vehicle or of another person.
2. Except for the offense established under Subsection (B)(1)(f) of this
Section, no person shall be deemed to have committed the offense
of endangerment of an emergency responder except when the act
or omission constituting the offense occurred when one or more
emergency responders were responding to an active emergency.
3. No person shall be cited for, or found guilty of, endangerment of an
emergency responder or aggravated endangerment of an
emergency responder, for any act or omission otherwise
constituting an offense under Subsection (B)(1) of this Section, if
such act or omission resulted in whole or in part from mechanical
failure of the person's vehicle, or from the negligence of another
person or emergency responder.
C. Violations, Penalties.
1. Upon the first conviction, finding of guilt or plea of guilty by any
person for a moving violation, as the term "moving violation" is
defined in Section 302.010, RSMo., or any offense listed in Section
302.302, RSMo., other than a violation described in Subsection
(C)(2) of this Section, when the violation or offense occurs within
an active emergency zone, the court shall assess a fine of thirty-five
dollars ($35.00) in addition to any other fine authorized by law.
Upon a second or subsequent conviction, finding of guilt, or plea of
guilty, the court shall assess a fine of seventy-five dollars ($75.00)
in addition to any other fine authorized by law.
2. Upon the first conviction, finding of guilt or plea of guilty by any
person for a speeding violation under either Section 304.009 or
304.010, RSMo., or Chapter 320 of this Code, or a passing violation
under Subsection (C)(3) of this Section, when the violation or
Section
340.250
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
340.250
AO:358
Chapter 342
ALCOHOL-RELATED TRAFFIC OFFENSES
Cross Reference: As to reimbursement of certain costs related to arrest
under this chapter, §125.320(A)(10) of this Code.
Section 342.010. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
DRIVE, DRIVING, OPERATES or OPERATING — Physically driving or
operating a vehicle or vessel.
INTOXICATED or INTOXICATED CONDITION — When a person is under
the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance, or drug, or any combination
thereof.
INTOXICATION-RELATED TRAFFIC OFFENSE — Driving while intoxicated,
driving with excessive blood alcohol content, driving under the influence of
alcohol or drugs in violation of a State law, County or Municipal ordinance,
any Federal offense, or any military offense, or an offense in which the
defendant was operating a vehicle while intoxicated and another person
was injured or killed in violation of any State law, County or Municipal
ordinance, any Federal offense, or any military offense.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER or ARRESTING OFFICER — Includes the
definition of "Law Enforcement Officer" in Section 556.061, RSMo., and
military Policemen conducting traffic enforcement operations on a Federal
military installation under military jurisdiction in the State of Missouri.
offense occurs within an active emergency zone and emergency
responders were present in such zone at the time of the offense or
violation, the court shall assess a fine of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) in addition to any other fine authorized by law. Upon a
second or subsequent conviction, finding of guilt or plea of guilty,
the court shall assess a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00) in
addition to any other fine authorized by law. However, no person
assessed an additional fine under this Subparagraph shall also be
assessed an additional fine under Subsection (C)(1) of this Section.
3. This driver of a motor vehicle shall not overtake or pass another
motor vehicle within an active emergency zone.
4. The additional fines imposed by this Section shall not be construed
to enhance the assessment of court costs.
Section
340.250
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
342.020
AO:359
Section 342.020. Driving While Intoxicated.105
A person commits the offense of driving while intoxicated if he or she
operates a vehicle while in an intoxicated condition.
Section 342.030. Driving With Excessive Blood Alcohol Content.106
Section 342.040. Chemical Test For Alcohol Content — Consent
Implied — Administered — When — How — Videotaping Of Chemical
Or Field Sobriety Test Admissible Evidence.
A. A person commits the offense of driving with excessive blood alcohol
content if such person operates:
1. A vehicle while having eight-hundredths of one percent (0.08%) or
more by weight of alcohol in his or her blood; or
2. A commercial motor vehicle while having four-hundredths of one
percent (0.04%) or more by weight of alcohol in his or her blood.
B. As used in this Section, "percent by weight of alcohol" in the blood shall
be based upon grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) milliliters of
blood or two hundred ten (210) liters of breath and may be shown by
chemical analysis of the person's blood, breath, saliva or urine. For the
purposes of determining the alcoholic content of a person's blood under
this Section, the test shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of Sections 577.020 to 577.041, RSMo.
A. Consent Implied; Test Administered.
1. Any person who operates a motor vehicle upon the public highways
of this City shall be deemed to have given consent, subject to the
provisions of Sections 577.019 to 577.041, RSMo., to a chemical
test or tests of the person's breath, blood, saliva or urine for the
purpose of determining the alcohol or drug content of the person's
blood pursuant to the following circumstances:
a. If the person is arrested for any offense arising out of acts
which the arresting officer had reasonable grounds to believe
were committed while the person was operating a vehicle
while in an intoxicated condition;
b. If the person is under the age of twenty-one (21), has been
stopped by a Law Enforcement Officer, and the Law
Enforcement Officer has reasonable grounds to believe that
such person was operating a vehicle with a blood alcohol
content of two-hundredths of one percent (0.02%) or more by
weight;
105. Note: As to provisions concerning sentencing and suspended imposition of sentence under
certain conditions, see §577.010, RSMo.
106. Note: As to provisions concerning sentencing and suspended imposition of sentence under
certain conditions, see §577.012, RSMo.
Section
342.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
342.040
AO:360
c. If the person is under the age of twenty-one (21), has been
stopped by a Law Enforcement Officer, and the Law
Enforcement Officer has reasonable grounds to believe that
such person has committed a violation of the traffic laws of the
State, or any political subdivision of the State, and such officer
has reasonable grounds to believe, after making such stop, that
such person has a blood alcohol content of two-hundredths of
one percent (0.02%) or greater;
d. If the person is under the age of twenty-one (21), has been
stopped at a sobriety checkpoint or roadblock and the Law
Enforcement Officer has reasonable grounds to believe that
such person has a blood alcohol content of two-hundredths of
one percent (0.02%) or greater; or
e. If the person, while operating a vehicle, has been involved in a
collision or accident which resulted in a fatality or a readily
apparent serious physical injury as defined in Section 556.061,
RSMo., or has been arrested as evidenced by the issuance of a
uniform traffic ticket for the violation of any State law or
County or Municipal ordinance with the exception of
equipment violations contained in Chapters 306 and 307,
RSMo., or similar provisions contained in County or Municipal
ordinances.
2. The test shall be administered at the direction of the Law
Enforcement Officer whenever the person has been has been
stopped, detained, or arrested for any reason.
B. The implied consent to submit to the chemical tests listed in Subsection
(A) of this Section shall be limited to not more than two (2) such tests
arising from the same stop, detention, arrest, incident or charge.
C. To be considered valid, chemical analysis of the person's breath, blood,
saliva, or urine shall be performed, according to methods approved by
the State Department of Health and Senior Services, by licensed
medical personnel or by a person possessing a valid permit issued by
the State Department of Health and Senior Services for this purpose.
D. The person tested may have a physician, or a qualified technician,
chemist, registered nurse or other qualified person at the choosing and
expense of the person to be tested, administer a test in addition to any
administered at the direction of a Law Enforcement Officer. The failure
or inability to obtain an additional test by a person shall not preclude
the admission of evidence relating to the test taken at the direction of a
Law Enforcement Officer.
E. Upon the request of the person who is tested, full information
concerning the test shall be made available to such person.
1. "Full information" is limited to the following:
Section
342.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
342.040
AO:361
Section 342.050. Consumption Of Alcoholic Beverages While
Driving.
Chapter 345
PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES
Section 345.010. Pedestrians Subject to Traffic Control Devices.
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as heretofore declared
in Sections 315.060 and 315.070 of this Title, but at all other places
a. The type of test administered and the procedures followed;
b. The time of the collection of the blood, breath or urine sample
analyzed;
c. The numerical results of the test indicating the alcohol content
of the blood and breath and urine;
d. The type and status of any permit which was held by the person
who performed the test;
e. If the test was administered by means of a breath-testing
instrument, the date of the most recent maintenance of such
instrument.
2. "Full information" does not include manuals, schematics or
software of the instrument used to test the person or any other
material that is not in the actual possession of the State.
Additionally, "full information" does not include information in the
possession of the manufacturer of the test instrument.
F. Any person given a chemical test of the person's breath pursuant to
Subsection (A) of this Section or a field sobriety test may be videotaped
during any such test at the direction of the Law Enforcement Officer.
Any such video recording made during the chemical test pursuant to
this Subsection or a field sobriety test shall be admissible as evidence at
any trial of such person for a violation of any State law or County or
Municipal ordinance, and at any license revocation or suspension
proceeding held pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 302, RSMo.
A. A person commits the offense of consumption of an alcoholic beverage
while driving if he or she operates a moving motor vehicle upon any
public thoroughfare for vehicles, including State roads, County roads
and public streets, avenues, boulevards, parkways or alleys in the City
while consuming any alcoholic beverage.
B. The offense of consumption of an alcoholic beverage while driving is an
ordinance violation and shall not be reflected on any records
maintained by the Department of Revenue.
Section
342.040
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
345.010
AO:362
pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions
stated in this Chapter.
Section 345.020. Pedestrians' Right-of-Way in Crosswalks.
Section 345.030. Pedestrians to Use Right-Half of Crosswalks.
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right-half of
crosswalks.
Section 345.040. Crossing at Right Angles.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except
in a crosswalk.
Section 345.050. When Pedestrian Shall Yield.
Section 345.060. Prohibited Crossing.
A. When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping
if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a
crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon
which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so
closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger.
B. No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is
impossible for the driver to yield.
C. Subsection (A) shall not apply under the conditions stated in Subsection
(B) of Section 345.050.
D. Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross
the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear
shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
A. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
B. Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the rightof-
way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
C. The foregoing rules in this Section have no application under the
conditions stated in Section 345.060 when pedestrians are prohibited
from crossing at certain designated places.
Section
345.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
345.060
AO:363
Section 345.070. Obedience of Pedestrians to Railroad Signals.
No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate
or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge when such gate or barrier
is closed or is being opened or closed.
Section 345.080. Pedestrians Walking Along Roadways.
Section 345.090. Drivers to Exercise Highest Degree of Care.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Title, every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise the highest degree of care to avoid colliding with any
pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn
when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any
child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
Section 345.100. Distance to Be Maintained When Overtaking a
Bicycle.
The operator of a motor vehicle overtaking a bicycle proceeding in the same
direction on the roadway, as defined in Section 300.010, shall leave a safe
distance when passing the bicycle, and shall maintain clearance until safely
past the overtaken bicycle.
Section 345.110. Soliciting Rides. [R.O. 2009 §14-4; Code 1969
§22-118]
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand in a roadway for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the operator of any private vehicle.
A. Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a
crosswalk.
B. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any
business district.
C. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk upon any
street designated by ordinance.
D. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic control devices and, when authorized to
cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the
official traffic control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
A. Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to
walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
B. Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the
opposite direction.
Section
345.060
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
345.110
AO:364
Chapter 350
METHOD OF PARKING
Section 350.010. Standing or Parking Close to Curb.
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped
or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within
eighteen (18) inches of the right-hand curb.
Section 350.020. Signs or Markings Indicating Angle Parking.
Section 350.030. Obedience to Angle Parking Signs or Markers.
On those streets which have been signed or marked by the City Traffic
Engineer for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other
than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs
or markings.
Section 350.040. Permits for Loading or Unloading at an Angle to
the Curb.
Section 350.050. Lamps on Parked Vehicles.
A. The City Traffic Engineer shall determine upon what streets angle
parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets but such
angle parking shall not be indicated upon any Federal-aid or State
highway within the City unless the State Highways and Transportation
Commission has determined by resolution or order entered in its
minutes that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking
without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
B. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where
passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the
left side of the street.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to issue special permits to
permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or
unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions
of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or
lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to
such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein.
B. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of
the special terms or conditions of any such permit.
A. Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked upon a street or highway during
the hours between a half (½) hour after sunset and a half (½) hour
before sunrise and in the event there is sufficient light to reveal any
person or object within a distance of five hundred (500) feet upon such
Section
345.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
350.050
AO:365
Section 350.060. Parking on City-Owned Parking Lots. [R.O. 2009
§14-296; Ord. No. 3376 §1, 1-24-1995]
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a person employed by the City
who has prior written authorization from his/her immediate supervisor, to
park any vehicle on any parking lot owned by the City for a period in excess
of twenty-four (24) consecutive hours.
Chapter 355
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN
SPECIFIED PLACES
Section 355.010. Prohibited or Restricted in Certain Places.107 [R.O.
2009 §14-276; Code 1969 §22-57; Ord. No. 2743 §1, 6-3-1985; Ord.
No. 2959 §1, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 2973 §1, 12-5-1988; Ord. No. 3060
§1, 4-2-1990; Ord. No. 3135 §1, 5-6-1991; Ord. No. 3155 §2,
8-5-1991; Ord. No. 3172 §1, 9-16-1991; Ord. No. 3330 §1, 3-7-1994;
Ord. No. 3554 §1, 7-21-1997; Ord. No. 3667 §1, 10-4-1999; Ord. No.
4005 §1, 2-6-2006]
street or highway, no lights need be displayed upon such parked
vehicle.
B. Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours
between a half (½) hour after sunset and a half (½) hour before sunrise
and there is not sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a
distance of five hundred (500) feet upon such highway, such vehicle so
parked or stopped shall be equipped with one (1) or more lamps
meeting the following requirements: At least one (1) lamp shall display
a white or amber light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet
to the front of the vehicle, and the same lamp or at least one (1) other
lamp shall display a red light visible from a distance of five hundred
(500) feet to the rear of the vehicle, and the location of said lamp or
lamps shall always be such that at least one (1) lamp or combination of
lamps meeting the requirements of this Section is installed as near as
practicable to the side of the vehicle which is closer to passing traffic.
The foregoing provisions shall not apply to a motor-driven cycle.
C. Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or
dimmed.
A. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a Police Officer or official
traffic control device, no person shall:
1. Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
107. State Law Reference — Similar provisions, §300.440, RSMo.
Section
350.050
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
355.010
AO:366
a. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street;
b. On a sidewalk;
c. Within an intersection;
d. On a crosswalk;
e. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty
(30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of
a safety zone, unless the traffic authority indicates a different
length by signs or markings;
f. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
g. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel (see Schedule IX);
h. On any railroad tracks;
i. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
j. Within ten (10) feet of any United States mailbox;
k. On any street, private or public, or entrance to parking areas
or parking area which is less than twenty (20) feet in width;
l. Within fifteen (15) feet of any standpipe or sprinkler
connection designed for use or usable by the Fire Department;
m. In residential areas except in driveways or paved parking
areas;
n. Within a designated fire lane (see Schedule V, Table V-A);
o. Within a designated emergency vehicle lane (see Schedule V,
Table V-B).
2. Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
a. In front of a public or private driveway except if said driveway
is situated on property owned by the operator of the vehicle;
b. Within seven and one-half (7½) feet of a fire hydrant;
c. Within twenty (20) feet of an intersection;
d. Within fifteen (15) feet upon the approach to any flashing
signal, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway (see Schedule II, Table II-A);
e. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any
Section
355.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
355.010
AO:367
Section 355.020. Parking Not to Obstruct Traffic.
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such
a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10)
feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
Section 355.030. Parking in Alleys.
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under
such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of
the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property.
Section 355.040. Parking for Certain Purposes Prohibited.
Section 355.050. Parking Adjacent to Schools.
fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of the entrance, when
properly signposted;
f. At any place where official signs prohibit standing, and
alongside any curb painted yellow, or in any zone or lane
painted yellow or cross-hatched in yellow.
3. Park a vehicle, whether occupied or unoccupied:
a. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
b. At any place where official signs prohibit or restrict parking.
B. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his/her control into
any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is
unlawful.
C. Any person found guilty of parking, standing or stopping within a
designated fire lane or a designated emergency vehicle lane shall be
subject to a fine of eighty-five dollars ($85.00) plus court costs.
A. No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal
purpose of:
1. Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
2. Repair such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating
no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school
property when such parking would, in his/her opinion, interfere with
traffic or create a hazardous situation.
Section
355.010
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
355.050
AO:368
Section 355.060. Parking Prohibited on Narrow Streets.
Section 355.063. Parking on Private Property Used for Retail and
Commercial Purposes. [R.O. 2009 §14-292.1; Ord. No. 4036 §1,
8-21-2006]
Section 355.067. Parking of Recreational Vehicles on Public
Streets. [R.O. 2009 §14-286; Code 1969 §22-65-1]
Section 355.070. Standing or Parking on One-Way Streets.
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand side
of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and
when such signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon
such left-hand side in violation of any such sign.
B. When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of
a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, no person
shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no
parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed
twenty (20) feet or upon one (1) side of a street as indicated by such
signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet.
B. When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets
as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such
street in violation of any such sign.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, permit to be parked or allow
to be parked any vehicle upon any privately owned property used for
retail or commercial purposes in the City without the consent of the
owner of such property.
B. Any person who parks, permits to be parked or allows to be parked any
vehicle upon the privately owned property used for retail or commercial
purposes in the City without the consent of the owner thereof for a
period of more than three (3) consecutive hours shall be subject to a
fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per occurrence, plus court
costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a recreational vehicle
to park the vehicle on the public streets for a period in excess of five (5)
days.
B. A "recreational vehicle" in this Section means a vehicle that is
constructed to be used for recreational purposes such as hunting,
fishing or other sports and, whether self-propelled or a trailer, normally
has accommodations for sleeping.
Section
355.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
355.080
AO:369
Section 355.080. Standing or Parking on One-Way Roadways.
In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and
traffic is restricted to one (1) direction upon any such roadway, no person
shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way
roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The
City Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking
may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and
to erect signs giving notice thereof.
Section 355.090. No Stopping, Standing or Parking Near Hazardous
or Congested Places.
Section 355.100. Physically Disabled Parking. [Ord. No. 4681 §1,
12-7-2015]
A. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and
designate by proper signs places not exceeding one hundred (100) feet
in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would
create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay
to traffic.
B. When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as
authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any
such designated place.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand any vehicle in any
stall or space designated or reserved for physically disabled persons, as
defined in Section 301.142, RSMo., as amended, whether upon public
or private property open to public use, unless the vehicle bears the
State of Missouri license plate or placard for the disabled as provided
for in Section 301.071 or 301.142, RSMo., as amended, or if the vehicle
is registered in another state and bears the license plate or placard for
the disabled issued by the state in which it is registered. The space shall
be indicated by an upright sign whether on a pole or attached to a
building upon which shall be inscribed the international symbol of
accessibility and may also include any appropriate wording such as
"Accessible Parking" to indicate that the space is reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or
card. The sign described in this Subsection shall also state, or an
additional sign shall be posted below adjacent to the sign stating, the
following: "$50 to $300 fine." Beginning August 28, 2011, when any
political subdivision or owner of private property restripes a parking lot
or constructs a new parking lot, one (1) in every four (4) accessible
spaces, but not less than one (1), shall be served by an access aisle a
minimum of ninety-six (96) inches wide and shall be designated "lift van
accessible only" with signs that meet the requirements of the Federal
Americans With Disabilities Act, as amended, and any rules and
regulations established pursuant thereto.
Section
355.080
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
355.100
AO:370
Chapter 360
STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY
Section 360.010. City Traffic Engineer to Designate Curb Loading
Zones.
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine the location
of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain
appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which
the provisions of this Section are applicable.
Section 360.020. Permits for Curb Loading Zones.
The City Traffic Engineer shall not designate or sign any curb loading zone
upon special request of any person unless such person makes application
for a permit for such zone and for two (2) signs to indicate the ends of each
such zone. The City Traffic Engineer upon granting a permit and issuing
such signs shall collect from the applicant and deposit in the City Treasury
a service fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per year or fraction thereof and may by
general regulations impose conditions upon the use of such signs and for
reimbursement of the City for the value thereof in the event of their loss or
B. Any vehicle operator who is not physically disabled shall not use the
handicapped parking space unless there is a physically disabled person
in the vehicle or while the vehicle is being used to transport a physically
disabled person.
C. Spaces for vehicles referred to in Subsection (A) must provide sufficient
space or be opened on one or both sides so as to not impede the free
ingress and egress of the disabled person.
D. The Board of Aldermen may, by ordinance or resolution, designate
parking spaces for vehicles referred to in Subsection (A) upon public
streets of the City and in public off-street parking facilities so long as
such designated parking space does not impede the flow of traffic along
such public street or off-street parking facility. When so designated, the
space shall be indicated by a sign as provided in Subsection (A).
E. Vehicle owners are required to notify the City of the renewal of the
certification of the sticker, placard or license plate issued by the
Missouri Department of Revenue or the appropriate state license
agency of another State or province by October 15 of each year such
renewal is required in order to maintain a reserved handicapped
parking space pursuant to this Section.
F. Any person convicted of violating this Section is guilty of an offense and
shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than three hundred dollars ($300.00). Every day upon which such
violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
Section
355.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
360.020
AO:371
damage and their return in the event of misuse or upon expiration of permit.
Every such permit shall expire at the end of one (1) year.
Section 360.030. Standing in Passenger Curb Loading Zone.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of
time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in
any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the
regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only
for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes.
Section 360.040. Standing in Freight Curb Loading Zones.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone
during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect.
Section 360.050. City Traffic Engineer to Designate Public Carrier
Stops and Stands.
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized and required to establish bus
stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common
carrier motor vehicles on such public streets, in such places and in such
number as he/she shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and
convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand
or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs.
Section 360.060. Stopping, Standing and Parking of Buses and
Taxicabs Regulated.
A. The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided
herein.
B. The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any
place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their
baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone
so designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency.
C. The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger
loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus when
stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position
with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen (18)
inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so
as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
D. The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as
provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a
taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
Section
360.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
360.060
AO:372
Section 360.070. Restricted Use of Bus and Taxicab Stands.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop
or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has
been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver
of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zone.
Chapter 365
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR
PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS
Section 365.010. Application of Chapter.
The provisions of this Title prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle
shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on
official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a Police Officer or
official traffic control device.
Section 365.020. Regulations Not Exclusive.
The provisions of this Title imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve
any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in
specified places or at specified times.
Section 365.030. Parking Prohibited at All Times on Certain
Streets.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the streets described by ordinance.
Section 365.040. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on
Certain Streets.
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle between the hours specified by ordinance of any day except
Sunday and public holidays within the districts or upon any of the streets
described by ordinance.
parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
Section
360.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
365.050
AO:373
Section 365.050. Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited During
Certain Hours on Certain Streets.
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle between the hours specified by ordinance of
any day except Sundays and public holidays within the district or upon any
of the streets described by ordinance.
Section 365.060. Parking Signs Required.
Whenever by this Title or any ordinance of the City any parking time limit is
imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty
of the City Traffic Engineer to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof
and no such regulations shall be effective unless said signs are erected and
in place at the time of any alleged offense.
Section 365.070. Parking on Private Property. [R.O. 2009 §14-292;
Ord. No. 2948 §1, 10-3-1988]
Section 365.080. Overnight Parking Prohibited — Exception. [R.O.
2009 §14-291; Ord. No. 2948 §1, 10-3-1988]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, permit to be parked or allow
to be parked any vehicle:
1. Upon any privately owned property in the City without the consent
of the owner of such privately owned property;
2. Upon any unimproved surface ("unimproved" means any surface
which is not paved, asphalted or surfaced with some other durable,
load-bearing material that has been approved by the Building
Department as a surface suitable for parking of vehicles);
3. Upon any vacant property, whether said property is improved or
unimproved. For the purpose of this Section, "unimproved
property" means any property that does not have an approved
durable, load-bearing surface for the parking of vehicles.
A. Overnight parking on "residential streets" of certain vehicles between
certain hours is to be prohibited. In this regard, the following terms
would be defined as shown:
1. Overnight. Any time during the period of 6:00 P.M. to 6:00 A.M.
2. Residential streets. All streets in the City except:
a. Brentwood Boulevard;
b. Manchester Road;
c. Hanley Road;
Section
365.050
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
365.080
AO:374
Section 365.090. Parking of Commercial Vehicles in Residential or
Multiple Dwelling Use Districts. [R.O. 2009 §14-290; Code 1969
§22-62; Ord. No. 2792 §1, 4-7-1986; Ord. No. 2815 §1, 6-2-1986]
No bus, taxicab, truck, trailer or other vehicle used or designed to be used
for the carrying of passengers, merchandise or freight or to be let for hire or
commercial use of any kind whatsoever shall be parked for a period of more
than two (2) hours, when not in the process of being loaded or unloaded,
d. All streets within Hanley Industrial Court and Brentwood
Industrial Court;
e. Eager Road.
B. Vehicles which would be prohibited include:
1. Any vehicle with a licensed weight of eighteen thousand (18,000)
pounds or more or commonly designed or known as being one (1)
ton or greater;
2. Any vehicle, regardless of licensed weight or common design
weight, which bears printed advertising or placarding of any type
generally associated with the identification of a commercial
enterprise;
3. Any vehicle, whether parked on-street or off-street, which contains,
in an open storage or carrying compartment, any materials
including, but not limited to, debris, trash, tools, equipment and the
like, unless such materials are completely covered by either a
continuous tarpaulin, camper shell or device which will screen such
materials from view.
C. Excluded would be vehicles:
1. Operated by a public or private utility or utility service firms during
the actual rendition of service;
2. While delivering or picking up passengers, materials or services to
a site on said residential streets;
3. One (1) ton or less gross weight owned by occupants of dwelling
structures or guests of such occupants when such commercial
vehicles are parked on the street where such occupants reside and
there is no off-street parking available for such commercial
vehicles.
D. The owner of any vehicle in violation of this Section shall be deemed to
have committed the violation, even if he/she did not park the vehicle.
Upon a second (2nd) or subsequent offense, the vehicle would be
subject to towing at owner's expense.
E. Any officer of a corporation owning or leasing a vehicle in violation shall
be deemed to have committed the violation.
Section
365.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
365.090
AO:375
on any street within the residential or multiple dwelling use districts as
established by and existing pursuant to the zoning ordinance or any other
ordinance of the City. This Section shall not apply to commercial vehicles
one (1) ton or less gross weight owned by occupants of dwelling structures
or guests of such occupants when such commercial vehicles are parked on
the street where such occupant resides and there is no off-street parking
available for such commercial vehicles.
Section 365.100. Parking of Commercial Vehicles on Certain
Streets Prohibited — Exception. [R.O. 2009 §14-293; Code 1969
§22-64; Ord. No. 2948 §1, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 3822 §1, 3-18-2002]
It shall be unlawful for any operator to park any commercial vehicle, except
for pickups or delivery of merchandise, in the locations listed in Schedule
IV, Table IV-O.
Section 365.110. Restrictions on Trucks and Commercial Vehicles.
[R.O. 2009 §14-151; Code 1969 §§22-43, 22-43(1) — 22-43(3); Ord.
No. 2662 §1, 11-21-1983; Ord. No. 2818 §1(22-43(A)), 7-7-1986;
Ord. No. 2950 §1, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 2951 §1, 10-3-1988; Ord. No.
3119 §1, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 4377 §1, 10-15-2012]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any commercial vehicle or
motorbus at any time at the locations designated in Schedule XI, Table
XI-A, except where necessary for the picking up or delivery of
merchandise or for providing services at the location.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any truck, tractor, trailer,
tractor-trailer combination or commercial vehicle licensed or
registered for or weighing more than eighteen thousand (18,000)
pounds gross weight at any time at the locations designated in
Schedule XI, Table XI-E, except where necessary for the picking up or
delivery of merchandise or for providing services at the locations.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any truck, tractor, trailer,
tractor-trailer combination or commercial vehicle licensed or
registered for or weighing more than twelve thousand (12,000) pounds
gross weight at any time at the locations designated in Schedule XI,
Table XI-C.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any truck, tractor, trailer
or tractor-trailer combination or commercial vehicle licensed or
registered for or weighing more than eighteen thousand (18,000)
pounds gross weight at any time at the locations designated in
Schedule XI, Table XI-D.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any truck, tractor, trailer
or tractor-trailer combination unit in the locations prohibited in
Schedule IX. Any person violating the provisions of this Subsection who
shall damage such bridge shall be liable for the amount of such damage
in addition to being subject to the other penalties provided by this Code.
Section
365.090
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
365.110
AO:376
Chapter 370
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT
Appropriate signs advising the public that trucks, tractors, trailers or
tractor-trailer combination units are prohibited from operating upon or
over such bridge shall be posted at each end of the bridge.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any truck, tractor, trailer,
tractor-trailer combination unit or commercial vehicle licensed or
registered for or weighing more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds
gross weight at any time over or upon any bridge in the locations
designated in Schedule XI, Table XI-C. Any person violating the
provisions of this Subsection who shall damage such bridge shall be
liable for the amount of such damage in addition to being subject to the
other penalties provided by this Code. Appropriate signs advising the
public that trucks, tractors, trailers or tractor-trailer combination units
in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds are prohibited from
operating upon or over such bridge shall be posted at each end of the
bridge.
Section
365.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
365.110
AO:377

ARTICLE I
Light Regulations
Section 370.010. When Lights Required.
Section 370.015. Light-Emitting Diodes Deemed Operating
Properly, When.
For purposes of this Article, a lamp, light, or other piece of lighting
equipment consisting of multiple light-emitting diodes shall be deemed to
be operating properly so long as not less than seventy-five percent (75%) of
the light-emitting diodes are operating properly.
Section 370.020. Headlamp on Motor Vehicles.
Except as in this Article provided, every motor vehicle other than a motordrawn
vehicle and other than a motorcycle shall be equipped with at least
two (2) approved headlamps mounted at the same level with at least one (1)
on each side of the front of the vehicle. Every motorcycle shall be equipped
with at least one (1) and not more than two (2) approved headlamps. Every
motorcycle equipped with a sidecar or other attachment shall be equipped
A. "When lighted lamps are required" means at any time from a half (½)
hour after sunset to a half (½) hour before sunrise and at any other time
when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons
and vehicles on the highway at a distance of five hundred (500) feet
ahead. Lighted lamps shall also be required any time the weather
conditions require usage of the motor vehicle's windshield wipers to
operate the vehicle in a careful and prudent manner as defined in
Section 304.012, RSMo. The provisions of this Section shall be
interpreted to require lighted lamps during periods of fog even if usage
of the windshield wipers is not necessary to operate the vehicle in a
careful and prudent manner.
B. When Lights Required — Violation — Penalty.
1. No person shall drive, move, park or be in custody of any vehicle or
combination of vehicles on any street or highway during the times
when lighted lamps are required unless such vehicle or
combination of vehicles displays lighted lamps and illuminating
devices as hereinafter in this Article required. No person shall use
on any vehicle any approved electric lamp or similar device unless
the light source of such lamp or device complies with the conditions
of approval as to focus and rated candlepower.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 307.120, RSMo., or any
other provision of law, violation of this Section shall be deemed an
ordinance violation and any person who violates this Section as it
relates to violations of the usage of lighted lamps required due to
weather conditions or fog shall only be fined ten dollars ($10.00)
and no court costs shall be assessed.
Section
370.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.020
AO:379
with a lamp on the outside limit of such attachment capable of displaying a
white light to the front.
Section 370.030. Multiple-Beam Headlamps — Arrangement.
Section 370.040. Dimming of Lights — When.
Every person driving a motor vehicle equipped with multiple-beam road
lighting equipment, during the times when lighted lamps are required, shall
use a distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and
of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a safe distance
in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements and
limitations: Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming
vehicle within five hundred (500) feet or is within three hundred (300) feet
to the rear of another vehicle traveling in the same direction, the driver
shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that the
glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the other driver, and in no
case shall the high-intensity portion which is projected to the left of the
prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle be aimed higher than the
center of the lamp from which it comes at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet
ahead, and in no case higher than a level of forty-two (42) inches above the
level upon which the vehicle stands at a distance of seventy-five (75) feet
ahead.
Section 370.050. Taillamps — Reflectors.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, the headlamps or the auxiliary driving
lamp or the auxiliary passing lamp or combination thereof on motor
vehicles other than motorcycles or motor-driven cycles shall be so
arranged that the driver may select at will between distributions of
light projected to different elevations and such lamps may, in addition,
be so arranged that such selection can be made automatically, subject
to the following limitations:
1. There shall be an uppermost distribution of light, or composite
beam, so aimed and of such intensity as to reveal persons and
vehicles at a distance of at least three hundred fifty (350) feet
ahead for all conditions of loading.
2. There shall be a lowermost distribution of light, or composite beam,
so aimed and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles
at a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet ahead; and on a
straight level road under any condition of loading none of the highintensity
portion of the beam shall be directed to strike the eyes of
an approaching driver.
A. Every motor vehicle and every motor-drawn vehicle shall be equipped
with at least two (2) rear lamps, not less than fifteen (15) inches or more
than seventy-two (72) inches above the ground upon which the vehicle
stands, which when lighted will exhibit a red light plainly visible from a
distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear. Either such rear lamp or
Section
370.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
370.050
AO:380
Section 370.060. Auxiliary Lamps — Number — Location.
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed three (3) auxiliary
lamps mounted on the front at a height not less than twelve (12) inches
nor more than forty-two (42) inches above the level surface upon which the
vehicle stands.
Section 370.070. Cowl, Fender, Running Board and Backup Lamps.
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two (2) side cowl
or fender lamps which shall emit a white or yellow light without glare.
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one (1) running
board courtesy lamp on each side thereof which shall emit a white or yellow
light without glare. Any motor vehicle may be equipped with a backup lamp
either separately or in combination with another lamp, except that no such
a separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with
a white light the rear registration marker and render it clearly legible
from a distance of fifty (50) feet to the rear. When the rear registration
marker is illuminated by an electric lamp other than the required rear
lamps, all such lamps shall be turned on or off only by the same control
switch at all times.
B. Every motorcycle registered in this State, when operated on a highway,
shall also carry at the rear, either as part of the rear lamp or separately,
at least one (1) approved red reflector which shall be of such size and
characteristics and so maintained as to be visible during the times
when lighted lamps are required from all distances within three
hundred (300) feet to fifty (50) feet from such vehicle when directly in
front of a motor vehicle displaying lawful undimmed headlamps. A
motorcycle may be equipped with a means of varying the brightness of
the vehicle's brake light for a duration of not more than five (5) seconds
upon application of the vehicle's brakes.
C. Every new passenger car, new commercial motor vehicle, motor-drawn
vehicle and omnibus with a capacity of more than six (6) passengers
registered in this State after January 1, 1966, when operated on a
highway shall also carry at the rear at least two (2) approved red
reflectors, at least one (1) at each side, so designed, mounted on the
vehicle and maintained as to be visible during the times when lighted
lamps are required from all distances within five hundred (500) to fifty
(50) feet from such vehicle when directly in front of a motor vehicle
displaying lawful undimmed headlamps. Every such reflector shall meet
the requirements of this Article and shall be mounted upon the vehicle
at a height not to exceed sixty (60) inches nor less than fifteen (15)
inches above the surface upon which the vehicle stands.
D. Any person who knowingly operates a motor vehicle without the lamps
required in this Section in operable condition is guilty of an ordinance
violation.
Section
370.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.070
AO:381
backup lamp shall be continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in
forward motion.
Section 370.080. Spotlamps.
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed one (1) spotlamp but
every lighted spotlamp shall be so aimed and used so as not to be dazzling
or glaring to any person.
Section 370.090. Colors of Various Lamps — Restriction of Red
Lights.
Headlamps, when lighted, shall exhibit lights substantially white in color;
auxiliary lamps, cowllamps and spotlamps, when lighted, shall exhibit lights
substantially white, yellow or amber in color. No person shall drive or
move any vehicle or equipment, except a school bus when used for school
purposes or an emergency vehicle, upon any street or highway with any
lamp or device thereon displaying a red light visible from directly in front
thereof.
Section 370.100. Limitations on Lamps Other Than Headlamps —
Flashing Signals Prohibited Except on Specified Vehicles.
Any lighted lamp or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle other than
headlamps, spotlamps, front direction signals or auxiliary lamps which
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than three hundred (300)
candlepower shall be so directed that no part of the beam will strike the
level of the roadway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more
than seventy-five (75) feet from the vehicle. Alternately flashing warning
signals may be used on school buses when used for school purposes and on
motor vehicles when used to transport United States mail from post offices
to boxes of addressees thereof and on emergency vehicles as defined in
Section 300.010 of this Title and on buses owned or operated by churches,
mosques, synagogues, temples or other houses of worship and on
commercial passenger transport vehicles or railroad passenger cars that
are stopped to load or unload passengers, but are prohibited on other
motor vehicles, motorcycles and motor-drawn vehicles except as a means
for indicating a right or left turn.
Section 370.110. Limitation on Total of Lamps Lighted at One Time.
At the times when lighted lamps are required, at least two (2) lighted
lamps shall be displayed, one (1) on each side of the front of every motor
vehicle except a motorcycle and except a motor-drawn vehicle except when
such vehicle is parked subject to the provisions governing lights on parked
vehicles. Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlamps as in this
Article required is also equipped with any auxiliary lamps or a spotlamp
or any other lamp on the front thereof projecting a beam of an intensity
greater than three hundred (300) candlepower, not more than a total of four
Section
370.070
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
370.110
AO:382
(4) of any such lamps on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at any one
time when upon a highway.
Section 370.120. Other Vehicles — How Lighted.
All vehicles, including agricultural machinery or implements, road
machinery, road rollers, traction engines and farm tractors not in this
Article specifically required to be equipped with lamps, shall be equipped
during the times when lighted lamps are required with at least one (1)
lighted lamp or lantern exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of five
hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle and with a lamp or lantern
exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to
the rear, and such lamps and lanterns shall exhibit lights to the sides of such
vehicle.
Section 370.130. Animal-Driven Vehicles — Lighting Requirements
— Penalty.
A. Any person who shall place or drive or cause to be placed or driven
upon or along any State highway of this City any animal-driven vehicle
whatsoever, whether in motion or at rest, shall after sunset to one-half
(½) hour before sunrise have attached to every such vehicle at the rear
thereof a red taillight or a red reflecting device of not less than three (3)
inches in diameter of effective area or its equivalent in area. When such
device shall consist of reflecting buttons, there shall be no less than
seven (7) of such buttons covering an area equal to a circle with a three
(3) inch diameter. The total subtended effective angle of reflection of
every such device shall be no less than sixty degrees (60°) and the
spread and efficiency of the reflected light shall be sufficient for the
reflected light to be visible to the driver of any motor vehicle
approaching such animal-drawn vehicle from the rear of a distance of
not less than five hundred (500) feet.
B. In addition, any person who operates any such animal-driven vehicle
during the hours between sunset and one-half (½) hour before sunrise
shall have at least one (1) light flashing at all times the vehicle is on any
highway of this City. Such light or lights shall be amber in the front and
red in the back and shall be placed on the left side of the vehicle at a
height of no more than six (6) feet from the ground and shall be visible
from the front and the back of the vehicle at a distance of at least five
hundred (500) feet.
C. Any person operating an animal-driven vehicle during the hours
between sunset and one-half (½) hour before sunrise may, in lieu of the
requirements of Subsection (B) of this Section, use lamps or lanterns
complying with the rules promulgated by the Director of the
Department of Public Safety.
D. Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation.
Section
370.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.130
AO:383

ARTICLE II
Other Vehicle Equipment
Section 370.140. Other Equipment of Motor Vehicles.
A. Signaling Devices. Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a horn,
directed forward, or whistle in good working order capable of emitting
a sound adequate in quantity and volume to give warning of the
approach of such vehicle to other users of the highway and to
pedestrians. Such signaling device shall be used for warning purposes
only and shall not be used for making any unnecessary noise, and no
other sound-producing signaling device shall be used at any time.
B. Muffler Cutouts. Muffler cutouts shall not be used and no vehicle shall
be driven in such manner or condition that excessive and unnecessary
noises shall be made by its machinery, motor, signaling device, or other
parts, or by any improperly loaded cargo. The motors of all motor
vehicles shall be fitted with properly attached mufflers of such capacity
or construction as to quiet the maximum possible exhaust noise as
completely as is done in modern gas engine passenger motor vehicles.
Any cutout or opening in the exhaust pipe between the motor and the
muffler on any motor vehicle shall be completely closed and
disconnected from its operating lever and shall be so arranged that it
cannot automatically open, or be opened or operated, while such
vehicle is in motion.
C. Brakes. All motor vehicles, except motorcycles, shall be provided at all
times with two (2) sets of adequate brakes kept in good working order,
and motorcycles shall be provided with one (1) set of adequate brakes
kept in good working order.
D. Mirrors. All motor vehicles which are so constructed or loaded that the
operator cannot see the road behind such vehicle by looking back or
around the side of such vehicle shall be equipped with a mirror so
adjusted as to reveal the road behind and be visible from the operator's
seat.
E. Projections On Vehicles. All vehicles carrying poles or other objects,
which project more than five (5) feet from the rear of such vehicle,
shall, during the period when lights are required by this Chapter, carry
a red light at or near the rear end of the pole or other object so
projecting. At other times a red flag or cloth, not less than sixteen (16)
inches square, shall be displayed at the end of such projection.
F. Towlines. When one vehicle is towing another, the connecting device
shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. During the time that lights are
required by Sections 307.020 to 307.120, RSMo., the required lights
shall be displayed by both vehicles. Every towed vehicle shall be
coupled to the towing vehicle by means of a safety chain, cable or
equivalent device in addition to the primary coupling device, except
that such secondary coupling device shall not be necessary if the
Section
370.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.140
AO:385
Section 370.150. Loads Which Might Become Dislodged to Be
Secured — Failure — Penalty.
Section 370.160. Seat Belts.
connecting device is connected to the towing vehicle by a centerlocking
ball located over or nearly over the rear axle and not supported
by the rear bumper of the towing vehicle. Such secondary safety
connecting devices shall be of sufficient strength to control the towed
vehicle in the event of failure of the primary coupling device. The
provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to wreckers towing
vehicles or to vehicles secured to the towing vehicle by a fifth-wheel
type connection. The provisions of this Subsection shall also not apply
to farm implements or to any vehicle which is not required to be
registered.
G. Commercial Motor Vehicles And Trailers. When being operated on any
highway, street or road of this City, commercial motor vehicles and
trailers shall be equipped with adequate and proper brakes, lighting
equipment, signaling devices, steering mechanisms, horns, mirrors,
windshield wipers, tires, wheels, exhaust system, glazing, air pollution
control devices, fuel tank and any other safety equipment required by
the State in such condition so as to obtain a certificate of inspection and
approval as required by the provisions of Section 307.360, RSMo.
H. Devices attached to or towed by motor vehicles for the purpose of
transporting hay shall have the protruding parts raised or retracted
when not in use to a position which will not cause injury or damage to
persons or property in the vicinity of such device when on the highways,
streets or roads of this City.
A. All motor vehicles and every trailer and semi-trailer operating upon the
public highways, streets or roads of this City and carrying goods or
material or farm products which may reasonably be expected to
become dislodged and fall from the vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer as a
result of wind pressure or air pressure and/or by the movement of the
vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer shall have a protective cover or be
sufficiently secured so that no portion of such goods or material can
become dislodged and fall from the vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer while
being transported or carried.
B. Operation of a motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer in violation of this
Section shall be an ordinance violation, and any person convicted
thereof shall be punished as provided by law.
A. As used in this Section, the term "truck" means a motor vehicle
designed, used or maintained for the transportation of property.
B. As used in this Section, the term "passenger car" means every motor
vehicle designed for carrying ten (10) persons or less and used for the
transportation of persons; except that the term "passenger car" shall
Section
370.140
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
370.160
AO:386
Section 370.170. Transporting Children Under Sixteen Years of Age
— Restraint Systems.
not include motorcycles, motorized bicycles, motortricycles and trucks
with a licensed gross weight of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or
more.
C. Each driver, except persons employed by the United States Postal
Service while performing duties for that Federal agency which require
the operator to service postal boxes from their vehicles or which
require frequent entry into and exit from their vehicles, and front seat
passengers of a passenger car manufactured after January 1, 1968,
operated on a street or highway in the City, and persons less than
eighteen (18) years of age operating or riding in a truck, as defined in
Subsection (A) of this Section, on a street or highway of this City shall
wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt that meets Federal
National Highway, Transportation and Safety Act requirements. No
person shall be stopped, inspected or detained solely to determine
compliance with this Subsection. The provisions of this Section and
Section 370.170 of this Chapter, shall not be applicable to persons who
have a medical reason for failing to have a seat belt fastened about their
body, nor shall the provisions of this Section be applicable to persons
while operating or riding a motor vehicle being used in agricultural
work-related activities. Non-compliance with this Subsection shall not
constitute probable cause for violation of any other provision of law. The
provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to the transporting of
children under sixteen (16) years of age, as provided in Section 370.170
of this Chapter.
D. Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child less than sixteen
(16) years of age shall secure the child in a properly adjusted and
fastened restraint under Section 370.170 of this Chapter.
E. Except as otherwise provided for in Section 370.170 of this Chapter,
each person found guilty of violating the provisions of Subsection (B) of
this Section is guilty of an ordinance violation for which a fine not to
exceed ten dollars ($10.00) may be imposed. All other provisions of law
and court rules to the contrary notwithstanding, no court costs shall be
imposed on any person due to a violation of this Section.
F. If there are more persons than there are seat belts in the enclosed area
of a motor vehicle, then the passengers who are unable to wear seat
belts shall sit in the area behind the front seat of the motor vehicle
unless the motor vehicle is designed only for a front-seated area. The
passenger or passengers occupying a seat location referred to in this
Subsection is not in violation of this Section. This Subsection shall not
apply to passengers who are accompanying a driver of a motor vehicle
who is licensed under Section 302.178, RSMo.
A. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
Section
370.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.170
AO:387
CHILD BOOSTER SEAT — A seating system which meets the Federal
Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in 49 C.F.R 571.213, as
amended, that is designed to elevate a child to properly sit in a
Federally approved safety belt system.
CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINT SYSTEM — A seating system which
meets the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in 49 C.F.R.
571.213, as amended, and which is either permanently affixed to a
motor vehicle or is affixed to such vehicle by a safety belt or a universal
attachment system.
DRIVER — A person who is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle.
B. Every driver transporting a child under the age of sixteen (16) years
shall be responsible, when transporting such child in a motor vehicle
operated by that driver on the streets or highways of this City, for
providing for the protection of such child as follows:
1. Children less than four (4) years of age, regardless of weight, shall
be secured in a child passenger restraint system appropriate for
that child.
2. Children weighing less than forty (40) pounds, regardless of age,
shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system appropriate
for that child.
3. Children at least four (4) years of age but less than eight (8) years
of age, who also weigh at least forty (40) pounds but less than
eighty (80) pounds, and who are also less than four (4) feet nine (9)
inches tall, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system or
booster seat appropriate for that child.
4. Children at least eighty (80) pounds or children more than four (4)
feet, nine (9) inches in height shall be secured by a vehicle safety
belt or booster seat appropriate for that child.
5. A child who otherwise would be required to be secured in a booster
seat may be transported in the back seat of a motor vehicle while
wearing only a lap belt if the back seat of the motor vehicle is not
equipped with a combination lap and shoulder belt for booster seat
installation.
6. When transporting children in the immediate family when there are
more children than there are seating positions in the enclosed area
of a motor vehicle, the children who are not able to be restrained by
a child safety restraint device appropriate for the child shall sit in
the area behind the front seat of the motor vehicle unless the motor
vehicle is designed only for a front seat area. The driver
transporting children referred to in this Subsection is not in
violation of this Section.
Section
370.170
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
370.170
AO:388
Section 370.180. Vision-Reducing Material Applied to Windshield
or Windows Without Permit Prohibited — Penalty — Rules —
Procedure.
This Subsection shall only apply to the use of a child passenger
restraint system or vehicle safety belt for children less than
sixteen (16) years of age being transported in a motor vehicle.
C. Any driver who violates Subdivision (1), (2), or (3) of Subsection (B)
herein, is guilty of an ordinance violation and upon conviction may be
punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) and court
costs. Any driver who violates Subdivision (4) of Subsection (B) herein,
shall be subject to the penalty in Subsection (E) of Section 370.160 of
this Chapter. If a driver receives a citation for violating Subdivision (1),
(2) or (3) of Subsection (B) herein, the charges shall be dismissed or
withdrawn if the driver prior to or at his/her hearing provides evidence
of acquisition of a child passenger restraint system or child booster seat
which is satisfactory to the Court or the party responsible for
prosecuting the driver's citation.
D. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any public carrier for
hire. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to students four (4)
years of age or older who are passengers on a school bus designed for
carrying eleven (11) passengers or more and which is manufactured or
equipped pursuant to Missouri Minimum Standards for School Buses as
school buses are defined in Section 301.010, RSMo.
A. Any person may operate a motor vehicle with front sidewing vents or
windows located immediately to the left and right of the driver that
have a sun-screening device, in conjunction with safety glazing
material, that has a light transmission of thirty-five percent (35%) or
more plus or minus three percent (±3%) and a luminous reflectance of
thirty-five percent (35%) or less plus or minus three percent (±3%).
Except as provided in Subsection (C) of this Section, any sun-screening
device applied to front sidewing vents or windows located immediately
to the left and right of the driver in excess of the requirements of this
Section shall be prohibited without a permit pursuant to a physician's
prescription as described below. A permit to operate a motor vehicle
with front sidewing vents or windows located immediately to the left
and right of the driver that have a sun-screening device, in conjunction
with safety glazing material, which permits less light transmission and
luminous reflectance than allowed under the requirements of this
Subsection may be issued by the Department of Public Safety to a
person having a serious medical condition which requires the use of a
sun-screening device if the permittee's physician prescribes its use. The
Director of the Department of Public Safety shall promulgate rules and
regulations for the issuance of the permit. The permit shall allow
operation of the vehicle by any titleholder or relative within the second
degree of consanguinity or affinity, which shall mean a spouse, each
grandparent, parent, brother, sister, niece, nephew, aunt, uncle, child
Section
370.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.180
AO:389
Section 370.190. Headgear Required — Motorcycles or
Motortricycles.108
Section 370.200. Studded Tires — Prohibited When.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon any road or highway of this
City between the first (1st) day of April and the first (1st) day of November
while the motor vehicle is equipped with tires containing metal or carbide
studs.
Section 370.210. Restriction on Use of Metal-Tired Vehicles.
and grandchild of a person who resides in the household. Except as
provided in Subsection (B) of this Section, all sun-screening devices
applied to the windshield of a motor vehicle are prohibited.
B. This Section shall not prohibit labels, stickers, decalcomania or
informational signs on motor vehicles or the application of tinted or
solar-screening material to recreational vehicles as defined in Section
700.010, RSMo., provided that such material does not interfere with the
driver's normal view of the road. This Section shall not prohibit factoryinstalled
tinted glass, the equivalent replacement thereof or tinting
material applied to the upper portion of the motor vehicle's windshield
which is normally tinted by the manufacturer of motor vehicle safety
glass.
C. Any vehicle licensed with a historical license plate shall be exempt from
the requirements of this Section.
D. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section is guilty of an
ordinance violation.
A. Every person operating or riding as a passenger on any motorcycle or
motortricycle, as defined in this Title, upon any highway of this City
shall wear protective headgear at all times the vehicle is in motion. The
protective headgear shall meet reasonable standards and specifications
established by the Director of Revenue.
B. The penalty for failure to wear protective headgear as required by
Subsection (A) of this Section shall be deemed an ordinance violation
for which a fine not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) may be
imposed. Notwithstanding all other provisions of law and court rules to
the contrary, no court costs shall be imposed upon any person due to
such violation. No points shall be assessed pursuant to Section 302.302,
RSMo., for a failure to wear such protective headgear.
C. A person operating or riding in an autocycle may not be required to
wear protective headgear.
108. State Law Reference — Similar provisions, §300.020, RSMo.
Section
370.180
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
370.210
AO:390
Section 370.220. Passengers in Trucks.
A. No metal-tired vehicle shall be operated over any of the improved
highways of this City, except over highways constructed of gravel or
claybound gravel, if such vehicle has on the periphery of any of the road
wheels any lug, flange, cleat, ridge, bolt or any projection of metal or
wood which projects radially beyond the tread or traffic surface of the
tire unless the highway is protected by putting down solid planks or
other suitable material or by attachments to the wheels so as to prevent
such vehicles from damaging the highway, except that this prohibition
shall not apply to tractors or traction engines equipped with what is
known as caterpillar treads when such caterpillar does not contain any
projection of any kind likely to injure the surface of the road. Tractors,
traction engines and similar vehicles may be operated which have upon
their road wheels "V" shaped, diagonal or other cleats arranged in such
manner as to be continuously in contact with the road surface if the
gross weight on the wheels per inch of width of such cleats or road
surface, when measured in the direction of the axle of the vehicle, does
not exceed eight hundred (800) pounds.
B. No tractor, tractor engine or other metal-tired vehicle weighing more
than four (4) tons, including the weight of the vehicle and its load, shall
drive onto, upon or over the edge of any improved highway without
protecting such edge by putting down solid planks or other suitable
material to prevent such vehicle from breaking off the edges of the
pavement.
C. Any person violating this Section, whether operating pursuant to a
permit or not, or who shall willfully or negligently damage a highway,
shall be liable for the amount of such damage caused to any highway,
bridge, culvert or sewer, and any vehicle causing such damage shall be
subject to a lien for the full amount of such damage, which lien shall not
be superior to any duly recorded or filed chattel mortgage or other lien
previously attached to such vehicle; the amount of such damage may be
recovered in any action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. As used in this Section, the term "truck" means a motor vehicle
designed, used or maintained for the transportation of property.
B. No person shall operate any truck, as defined in Subsection (A) of this
Section, with a licensed gross weight of less than twelve thousand
(12,000) pounds on any highway which is part of the State or Federal
highway system or when such truck is operated within the corporate
limits of the City when any person under eighteen (18) years of age is
riding in the unenclosed bed of such truck. No person under eighteen
(18) years of age shall ride in the unenclosed bed of such truck when
the truck is in operation.
C. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to:
Section
370.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.220
AO:391
Section 370.230. Altering Passenger Motor Vehicle by Raising
Front or Rear of Vehicle Prohibited, When — Bumpers Front and
Rear Required, When Certain Vehicles Exempt.
1. Any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of the
employee's duties where it is necessary to ride in the unenclosed
bed of the truck;
2. Any person while engaged in agricultural activities where it is
necessary to ride in the unenclosed bed of the truck;
3. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck while such truck
is being operated in a parade, caravan or exhibition which is
authorized by law;
4. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck has
installed a means of preventing such person from being discharged
or such person is secured to the truck in a manner which will
prevent the person from being thrown, falling or jumping from the
truck;
5. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is
being operated solely for the purpose of participating in a special
event and it is necessary that the person ride in such unenclosed
bed due to a lack of available seating. "Special event", for the
purposes of this Section, is a specific social activity of a definable
duration which is participated in by the person riding in the
unenclosed bed;
6. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is
being operated solely for the purposes of providing assistance to,
or ensuring the safety of, other persons engaged in a recreational
activity; or
7. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is
the only legally titled, licensed and insured vehicle owned by the
family of the person riding in the unenclosed bed and there is
insufficient room in the passenger cab of the truck to accommodate
all passengers in the truck. For the purposes of this Section, the
term "family" shall mean any persons related within the first
degree of consanguinity.
A. No person shall operate any passenger motor vehicle upon the public
streets or highways of this City, the body of which has been altered in
such a manner that the front or rear of the vehicle is raised at such an
angle as to obstruct the vision of the operator of the street or highway
in front or to the rear of the vehicle.
B. Every motor vehicle which is licensed in this State and operated upon
the public streets or highways of this City shall be equipped with front
and rear bumpers if such vehicle was equipped with bumpers as
standard equipment. This Subsection shall not apply to motor vehicles
Section
370.220
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
370.230
AO:392
designed or modified primarily for off-highway purposes, while such
vehicles are in tow, or to motorcycles or motor-driven cycles, or to
motor vehicles registered as historic motor vehicles when the original
design of such vehicles did not include bumpers nor shall the provisions
of this Subsection prohibit the use of drop bumpers. Maximum bumper
heights of both the front and rear bumpers of motor vehicles shall be
determined by weight category of gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)
measured from a level surface to the highest point of the bottom of the
bumper when the vehicle is unloaded and the tires are inflated to the
manufacturer's recommended pressure. Maximum bumper heights are
as follows:
Maximum
front bumper
height
Maximum
rear bumper
height
Motor vehicles except commercial
motor vehicles
22 inches 22 inches
Commercial motor vehicles (GVWR)
4,500 lbs. and under
24 inches 26 inches
4,501 lbs. through 7,500 lbs. 27 inches 29 inches
7,501 lbs. through 9,000 lbs. 28 inches 30 inches
9,001 lbs. through 11,500 lbs. 29 inches 31 inches
C. Any person knowingly violating the provisions of this Section is guilty of
an ordinance violation.
Section
370.230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.230
AO:393
Chapter 375
BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED BICYCLES
Section 375.010. Bicycle and Motorized Bicycle — Defined.
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall mean:
BICYCLE — Every vehicle propelled solely by human power upon which any
person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, or two (2) parallel wheels
and one (1) or two (2) forward or rear wheels, all of which are more than
fourteen (14) inches in diameter, except scooters and similar devices.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — Any two- or three-wheeled device having an
automatic transmission and a motor with a cylinder capacity of not more
than fifty (50) cubic centimeters, which produces less than three (3) gross
brake horsepower and is capable of propelling the device at a maximum
speed of not more than thirty (30) miles per hour on level ground. A
motorized bicycle shall be considered a motor vehicle for purposes of any
homeowners' or renters' insurance policy.
Section 375.020. Brakes Required.
Every bicycle and motorized bicycle shall be equipped with a brake or
brakes which will enable its driver to stop the bicycle or motorized bicycle
within twenty-five (25) feet from a speed of ten (10) miles per hour on dry,
level, clean pavement.
Section 375.030. Lights and Reflectors — When Required —
Standards to Be Met.
A. Every bicycle and motorized bicycle when in use on a street or highway
during the period from one-half (½) hour after sunset to one-half (½)
hour before sunrise shall be equipped with the following:
1. A front-facing lamp on the front or carried by the rider which shall
emit a white light visible at night under normal atmospheric
conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway at five hundred
(500) feet;
2. A rear-facing red reflector, at least two (2) square inches in
reflective surface area, or a rear-facing red lamp on the rear which
shall be visible at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a
straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver
under the lower beams of vehicle headlights at six hundred (600)
feet;
3. Reflective material and/or lights on any part of the bicyclist's
pedals, crank arms, shoes or lower leg visible from the front and
the rear at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a
straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver
Section
370.230
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
375.030
AO:394
Section 375.040. Rights and Duties of Bicycle and Motorized
Bicycle Riders.
Every person riding a bicycle or motorized bicycle upon a street or highway
shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to the driver of a vehicle as provided by Chapter 304, RSMo.,
and this Title, except as to special regulations in this Chapter, and except
as to those provisions of Chapter 304, RSMo., and this Title, which by their
nature can have no application.
Section 375.050. Riding to Right — Required for Bicycles and
Motorized Bicycles — Mandatory Use of Bicycle Path by Bicycles.
Every person operating a bicycle or motorized bicycle at less than the
posted speed or slower than the flow of traffic upon a street or highway shall
ride as near to the right side of the roadway as safe, exercising due care
when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction,
except when making a left turn, when avoiding hazardous conditions, when
the lane is too narrow to share with another vehicle, or when on a one-way
street. Bicyclists may ride abreast when not impeding other vehicles.
Section 375.060. Bicycle to Operate on the Shoulder Adjacent to
Roadway, When — Roadway Defined.
under the lawful lower beams of vehicle headlights at two hundred
(200) feet; and
4. Reflective material and/or lights visible on each side of the bicycle
or bicyclist and visible at night under normal atmospheric
conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a
vehicle driver under the lawful lower beams of vehicle headlights at
three hundred (300) feet. The provisions of this Subsection shall
not apply to motorized bicycles which comply with National
Highway Traffic and Safety Administration regulations relating to
reflectors on motorized bicycles.
A. A person operating a bicycle at less than the posted speed or slower
than the flow of traffic upon a street or highway may operate as
described in Section 375.050 of this Chapter or may operate on the
shoulder adjacent to the roadway.
B. A bicycle operated on a roadway, or the shoulder adjacent to a roadway,
shall be operated in the same direction as vehicles are required to be
driven upon the roadway.
C. For purposes of this Section and Section 375.050, "roadway" means
that portion of a street or highway ordinarily used for vehicular travel,
exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
Section
375.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
375.070
AO:395
Section 375.070. Bicycle Required to Give Hand or Mechanical
Signals.
The operator of a bicycle shall signal as required in Section 340.190 of
this Title, except that a signal by the hand and arm need not be given
continuously if the hand is needed to control or operate the bicycle. An
operator of a bicycle intending to turn the bicycle to the right shall signal
as indicated in Section 340.190 of this Title or by extending such operator's
right arm in a horizontal position so that the same may be seen in front and
in rear of the vehicle.
Section 375.080. Penalty for Violation.
Any person seventeen (17) years of age or older who violates any provision
of this Chapter is guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor
more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). If any person under seventeen (17)
years of age violates any provision of this Chapter in the presence of a Police
Officer, said officer may impound the bicycle or motorized bicycle involved
for a period not to exceed five (5) days upon issuance of a receipt to the
child riding it or to its owner.
Section 375.090. Motorized Bicycles — License Required.
Section 375.100. Equipment Required.
No person shall operate a motorized bicycle on any highways, streets or
roads in this City unless it is equipped in accordance with the minimum
requirements for construction and equipment of MOPEDS, Regulation
VESC-17, approved July, 1977, as promulgated by the Vehicle Equipment
Safety Commission.
Chapter 380
LICENSING REQUIREMENTS
A. No person shall operate a motorized bicycle on any highways, streets or
roads in this City unless the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle.
B. No motorized bicycle may be operated on any public thoroughfare
located within this City which has been designated as part of the
Federal interstate highway system.
C. Violation of this Section shall be deemed an ordinance violation.
Section
375.070
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
375.100
AO:396
ARTICLE I
Operator's Licenses
Section 380.010. Driving While License Suspended or Revoked.109
A person commits the offense of driving while revoked if such person
operates a motor vehicle on a highway when such person's license or
driving privilege has been canceled, suspended or revoked under the laws
of this State or any other State and acts with criminal negligence with
respect to knowledge of the fact that such person's driving privilege has
been canceled, suspended or revoked.
Section 380.020. Operation of Motor Vehicle Without Proper
License Prohibited — Motorcycles — Special License.110
A. Unless otherwise provided for by law, it shall be unlawful for any
person, except those expressly exempted by Section 380.040, to:
1. Operate any vehicle upon any highway in this City unless the
person has a valid license as required by Chapter 302, RSMo., or a
temporary instruction permit issued in compliance with Section
302.130, RSMo., or an intermediate driver's license issued in
compliance with Section 302.178, RSMo., in his/her possession;
2. Operate a motorcycle or motortricycle upon any highway of this
City unless such person has a valid license that shows the person
has successfully passed an examination for the operation of a
motorcycle or motortricycle as prescribed by the Director of
Revenue. The Director of Revenue may indicate such upon a valid
license issued to such person or shall issue a license restricting the
applicant to the operation of a motorcycle or motortricycle if the
actual demonstration, required by Section 302.173, RSMo., is
conducted on such vehicle;
3. Authorize or knowingly permit a motorcycle or motortricycle
owned by such person or under such person's control to be driven
upon any highway by any person whose license does not indicate
that the person has passed the examination for the operation of a
motorcycle or motortricycle or has been issued an instruction
permit therefor;
4. Operate a motor vehicle with an instruction permit, intermediate
driver's license or license issued to another person;
5. Operate a motor vehicle in violation of the provisions of Sections
302.130 and 302.178, RSMo., regarding accompaniment by a
qualified driver or stated hours of operation; or
109. Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
110. Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
380.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
380.020
AO:397
Section 380.025. Effect of Revocation — Penalty.
Any resident or non-resident whose license, right or privilege to operate
a motor vehicle in this State has been suspended or revoked as provided
in Sections 302.010 — 302.540, RSMo., shall not operate a motor vehicle
in this State under a license, permit or registration certificate issued by
any other jurisdiction or otherwise during such suspension or after such
revocation until a new license is obtained when and as permitted under
Sections 302.010 — 302.540, RSMo. Violation of any provision of this
Section is an ordinance violation and on conviction therefor a person shall
be punished as prescribed by Section 302.321, RSMo.
Section 380.030. Prohibited Uses of License.
6. Drive a commercial motor vehicle, unless fully licensed in
compliance with Chapter 302, RSMo., except when operating
under an instruction permit as provided for in Section 302.720,
RSMo.
7. No person shall operate an autocycle on any highway or street in
this City unless the person has a valid driver’s license. The operator
of an autocycle, however, shall not be required to obtain a
motorcycle or motortricycle license or endorsement pursuant to
Sections 302.010 to 302.340, RSMo.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Display or to permit to be displayed, or to have in his/her
possession, any license knowing the same to be fictitious or to have
been canceled, suspended, revoked, disqualified or altered;
2. Lend to or knowingly permit the use of by another any license
issued to the person so lending or permitting the use thereof;
3. Display or to represent as one's own any license not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
4. Fail or refuse to surrender to the Clerk of any Division of the Circuit
Court or the Director any license which has been suspended,
canceled, disqualified or revoked as provided by law;
5. Use a false or fictitious name or give a false or fictitious address on
any application for a license, or any renewal or duplicate thereof, or
knowingly to make a false statement;
6. Knowingly conceal a material fact or otherwise commit a fraud in
any such application;
7. Authorize or consent to any motor vehicle owned by him/her or
under his/her control to be driven by any person, when he/she has
knowledge that such person has no legal right to do so, or for any
Section
380.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
380.030
AO:398
Section 380.040. Exemptions From License Law.
person to drive any motor vehicle in violation of any of the
provisions of Sections 302.010 to 302.780, RSMo.;
8. Employ a person to operate a motor vehicle in the transportation of
persons or property with knowledge that such person has not
complied with the provisions of Sections 302.010 to 302.780,
RSMo., or whose license has been revoked, suspended, canceled or
disqualified or who fails to produce his/her license upon demand of
any person or persons authorized to make such demand;
9. Operate a motor vehicle in any manner in violation of the
restrictions imposed in a restricted license; or
10. Fail to carry his/her instruction permit, valid operator's license
while operating a vehicle and to display instruction permit or said
license upon demand of any Police Officer, court official or any
other duly authorized person for inspection when demand is made
therefor. Failure to exhibit his/her instruction permit or license as
aforesaid shall be presumptive evidence that said person is not a
duly licensed operator.
A. The following persons are exempt from license hereunder:
1. Any person while operating any farm tractor or implement of
husbandry temporarily operated or moved on a highway;
2. A non-resident who is at least sixteen (16) years of age and who has
in his/her immediate possession a valid license issued to him/her in
his/her home State or country;
3. A non-resident who is at least eighteen (18) years of age and who
has in his/her immediate possession a valid license issued to him/
her in his/her home State or country which allows such person to
operate a motor vehicle in the transportation of persons or
property as classified in Section 302.015, RSMo.;
4. Convicted offenders of the Department of Corrections who have not
been convicted of a motor vehicle felony as follows — driving while
intoxicated, failing to stop after an accident and disclosing his/her
identity, or driving a motor vehicle without the owner's consent —
may operate State-owned trucks for the benefit of the correctional
facilities, provided that such offender shall be accompanied by a
Correctional Officer or other staff person in such truck.
Section
380.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
380.040
AO:399

ARTICLE II
Vehicle Licensing
Section 380.050. State Vehicle License Plates Required.
No person shall operate or park any motor vehicle or trailer upon any street
or highway of this City unless such motor vehicle or trailer has properly
displayed a valid license plate or plates or temporary permit issued to the
lawful owner of the vehicle by the Department of Revenue of the State
of Missouri, except that any person who is a non-resident of the State of
Missouri may operate or park any motor vehicle or trailer upon any street
or highway of this City, provided the motor vehicle or trailer has been duly
registered for the current year in the State, country or other place of which
the owner is a resident, provided that at all times such motor vehicle or
trailer is being operated or parked upon the streets or highways of this City,
the valid license plate or plates or temporary permit is properly displayed
on such vehicle or trailer.
Section 380.055. Registration of Motor Vehicles Operated for First
Time in State.
Application for registration of a motor vehicle not previously registered in
Missouri, operated for the first time on the public highways of this State,
and previously registered in another State shall be made within thirty (30)
days after the owner of such motor vehicle has become a resident of this
State.
Section 380.060. Method of Displaying License Plates.
No motor vehicle or trailer shall be operated on any highway of this City
unless it shall have displayed thereon the license plate or set of license
plates issued by the Director of Revenue or the State Highways and
Transportation Commission and authorized by Section 301.140, RSMo.
Each such plate shall be securely fastened to the motor vehicle or trailer
in a manner so that all parts thereof shall be plainly visible and reasonably
clean so that the reflective qualities thereof are not impaired. License plates
shall be fastened to all motor vehicles except trucks, tractors, truck tractors
or truck-tractors licensed in excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds
on the front and rear of such vehicles not less than eight (8) inches nor
more than forty-eight (48) inches above the ground, with the letters and
numbers thereon right side up. The license plates on trailers, motorcycles,
motortricycles, autocycles, and motorscooters shall be displayed on the
rear of such vehicles either horizontally or vertically, with the letters and
numbers plainly visible. The license plate on buses, other than school buses,
and on trucks, tractors, truck tractors or truck-tractors licensed in excess
of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds shall be displayed on the front of such
vehicles not less than eight (8) inches nor more than forty-eight (48) inches
above the ground, with the letters and numbers thereon right side up, or
if two (2) plates are issued for the vehicle pursuant to Subsection (3) of
Section 301.130, RSMo., displayed in the same manner on the front and
Section
380.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
380.060
AO:401
rear of such vehicles. The license plate or plates authorized by Section
301.140, RSMo., when properly attached, shall be prima facie evidence that
the required fees have been paid.
Section 380.065. Certificate of Inspection.111 [R.O. 2009 §14-401;
Code 1969 §§22-126A, 22-126B]
Section 380.070. Unauthorized Plates, Tags, Stickers, Signs.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or trailer on which there is
displayed on the front or rear thereof any other plate, tag or placard bearing
any number except the plate furnished by the Director of Revenue or the
placard herein authorized and the official license tag of any municipality
of this State, nor shall there be displayed on any motor vehicle or trailer a
placard, sign or tag bearing the words "license lost", "license applied for"
or words of similar import as a substitute for such number plates or such
placard.
Section 380.080. License Plates on Vehicles Displayed for Sale.
No person shall show, exhibit, display or have in possession for the purpose
of sale any motor vehicle bearing or displaying thereon any number or
license plates except those of the dealer or owner so displaying said motor
vehicle; provided however, that where the motor vehicle is placed on
consignment with a dealer by the owner thereof, there may be displayed a
number or license plate issued to the owner thereof.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or park upon the streets of
this City any motor vehicle or trailer unless the motor vehicle or trailer
shall have the current official certificate of inspection and approval
required of such motor vehicle by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol displayed upon such motor vehicle or trailer in the
manner prescribed by regulations established by the Superintendent of
the State Highway Patrol.
B. No person shall make, issue or knowingly use any imitation or
counterfeit of the official certificate of inspection and approval referred
to in Subsection (A).
C. No person shall display or cause or permit to be displayed upon any
vehicle any certificate of inspection and approval knowing the same to
be fictitious or issued for another vehicle or issued without an
inspection having been made as required by law.
111. State Law References — Vehicle inspection, §§307.350 et seq., RSMo.
Section
380.060
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
380.090
AO:402
Section 380.090. Certificate of Ownership Required for Registered
Vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate in this City a motor vehicle or
trailer required to be registered as provided by law unless a certificate of
ownership has been applied for as provided in Section 301.190, RSMo.
Section 380.100. Transfer of Certificate of Ownership Upon Sale of
Vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to buy or sell in this City any motor
vehicle or trailer registered under the laws of this State unless at the
time of delivery thereof there shall pass between the parties a certificate
of ownership with an assignment thereof as provided in Section 301.210,
RSMo., as amended, and the sale of any motor vehicle or trailer registered
under the laws of this State, without the assignment of such certificate of
ownership, shall be fraudulent and void.
Section 380.110. Removal of Plates on Transfer of Vehicle — Use by
Purchaser.
Upon the transfer of ownership of any motor vehicle or trailer, the
certificate of registration and the right to use the number plates shall expire
and the number plates shall be removed by the owner at the time of the
transfer of possession, and it shall be unlawful for any person other than the
person to whom such number plates were originally issued to have the same
in his/her possession whether in use or not, unless such possession is solely
for charitable purposes; except that the buyer of a motor vehicle or trailer
who trades in a motor vehicle or trailer may attach the license plates from
the trade-in motor vehicle or trailer to the newly purchased motor vehicle or
trailer. The operation of a motor vehicle with such transferred plates shall
be lawful for no more than thirty (30) days, or no more than ninety (90)
days if the dealer is selling the motor vehicle under the provisions of Section
301.213, RSMo. As used in this Section, the term "trade-in motor vehicle or
trailer" shall include any single motor vehicle or trailer sold by the buyer of
the newly purchased vehicle or trailer, as long as the license plates for the
trade-in motor vehicle or trailer are still valid.
Section 380.120. Sale by Dealer.
Upon the sale of a motor vehicle or trailer by a dealer, a buyer who has
made application for registration, by mail or otherwise, may operate the
same for a period of thirty (30) days, or no more than ninety (90) days if
issued by a dealer selling the motor vehicle under the provisions of Section
301.213, RSMo., after taking possession thereof if during such period the
motor vehicle or trailer shall have attached thereto, in the manner required
by Section 301.130, RSMo., number plates issued to the dealer. Upon
application and presentation of proof of financial responsibility as required
under Subsection (5) of Section 301.140, RSMo., and satisfactory evidence
that the buyer has applied for registration, a dealer may furnish such
Section
380.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
380.120
AO:403
number plates to the buyer for such temporary use. In such event, the
dealer shall require the buyer to deposit the sum of ten dollars and fifty
cents ($10.50), to be returned to the buyer upon return of the number
plates, as a guarantee that said buyer will return to the dealer such number
plates within thirty (30) days, or no more than ninety (90) days if issued by
a dealer selling the motor vehicle under the provisions of Section 301.213,
RSMo.
Section 380.130. False Information by Dealer.
No dealer shall advise any purchaser of a motor vehicle or trailer that such
purchaser may drive such a motor vehicle or trailer without compliance
with the foregoing license requirements.
Section
380.120
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
380.130
AO:404
ARTICLE III
Financial Responsibility
Section 380.140. Financial Responsibility Required.
A. No owner of a motor vehicle registered in this State, or required to be
registered in this State, shall operate, register or maintain registration
of a motor vehicle, or permit another person to operate such vehicle,
unless the owner maintains the financial responsibility which conforms
to the requirements of the laws of this State. No non-resident shall
operate or permit another person to operate in this {MuniType} a
motor vehicle registered to such non-resident unless the non-resident
maintains the financial responsibility which conforms to the
requirements of the laws of the non-resident's state of residence.
Furthermore, no person shall operate a motor vehicle owned by another
with the knowledge that the owner has not maintained financial
responsibility unless such person has financial responsibility which
covers the person's operation of the other's vehicle. However, no owner
or non-resident shall be in violation of this Subsection if he/she fails to
maintain financial responsibility on a motor vehicle which is inoperable
or being stored and not in operation.
B. For purposes of this Section, the term "financial responsibility" shall
mean the ability to respond in damages for liability on account of
accidents occurring after the effective date of proof of said financial
responsibility, arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of a
motor vehicle, in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) because of bodily injury to or death of one (1) person in
any one (1) accident and, subject to said limit for one (1) person, in the
amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) because of bodily injury
to or death of two (2) or more persons in any one (1) accident and in the
amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) because of injury to or
destruction of property of others in any one (1) accident.
C. Proof of financial responsibility may be shown by any of the following:
1. A current insurance identification card issued by a motor vehicle
insurer or by the Director of Revenue of the State of Missouri for
self-insurance. A motor vehicle liability insurance policy, a motor
vehicle liability insurance binder, or receipt which contains the
name and address of the insurer, the name and address of the
named insured, the policy number, the effective dates of the policy
and a description by year and make of the vehicle, or at least five
(5) digits of the vehicle identification number or the word "Fleet" if
the insurance policy covers five (5) or more motor vehicles shall be
satisfactory evidence of insurance in lieu of an insurance
identification card; or
2. A certificate of the State Treasurer of a cash or security deposit
according to Section 303.240, RSMo.; or
Section
380.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
380.140
AO:405
Section 380.150. Display of False Evidence of Insurance — Penalty
— Confiscation of False Evidence.
No person shall display evidence of insurance to a Law Enforcement Officer
knowing there is no valid liability insurance in effect on the motor vehicle
as required pursuant to this Article or knowing the evidence of insurance is
illegally altered, counterfeit or otherwise invalid as evidence of insurance.
If the Law Enforcement Officer issues a citation to a motor vehicle operator
for displaying invalid evidence of insurance, the officer shall confiscate the
evidence for presentation in court. Any person convicted of violating this
Section is guilty of an ordinance violation.
Section 380.160. Alteration, Production or Sale of Invalid
Insurance Card.
No person shall alter an invalid insurance card to make it appear valid. No
person knowingly shall make, sell or otherwise make available an invalid or
counterfeit insurance card. Any person who violates this Section is guilty of
an ordinance violation.
3. A surety bond according to Section 303.230, RSMo.; or
4. A photocopy or an image displayed on a mobile electronic device as
authorized by and subject to the restrictions of Section 303.024,
RSMo.
D. Proof of financial responsibility shall be carried at all times in the
insured motor vehicle or by the operator of the motor vehicle if the
proof of financial responsibility is effective as to the operator rather
than to the vehicle. The operator of an insured motor vehicle shall
exhibit the insurance identification card on the demand of any Peace
Officer, commercial vehicle enforcement officer or commercial vehicle
inspector who lawfully stops such operator or investigates an accident
while that officer or inspector is engaged in the performance of the
officer's or inspector's duties.
E. However, no person shall be found guilty of violating this Section if the
operator demonstrates to the court that he/she met the financial
responsibility requirements of Section 303.025, RSMo., at the time the
Peace Officer wrote the citation.
F. Any person who violates any provisions of this Section shall be guilty of
an ordinance violation.
Section
380.140
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
380.160
AO:406
Chapter 385
ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section 385.010. Abandoned Vehicles or Trailers Prohibited.112
No person shall abandon any motor vehicle or trailer on the right-of-way of
any public road or State highway as set out in Section 217.020 of this Code.
Section 385.020. Obstructing the Flow of Traffic Prohibited.113
Except in the case of an accident resulting in the injury or death of any
person, the driver of a vehicle which for any reason obstructs the regular
flow of traffic on the roadway of any public road or State highway shall
make every reasonable effort to move the vehicle or have it moved so as not
to block the regular flow of traffic. Any person who fails to comply with the
requirements of this Section is guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00).
Section 385.030. Towing of Abandoned Property on Public Real
Property.114
A. Any Law Enforcement Officer, or an official of the City where the City's
real property is concerned, may authorize a towing company to remove
to a place of safety:
1. Any abandoned property on the right-of-way of:
a. Any interstate highway or freeway in an urbanized area of the
City left unattended for ten (10) hours, or immediately if a Law
Enforcement Officer determines that the abandoned property
is a serious hazard to other motorists;
b. Any interstate highway or freeway outside of an urbanized
area of the City left unattended for twenty-four (24) hours, or
after four (4) hours if a Law Enforcement Officer determines
that the abandoned property is a serious hazard to other
motorists;
c. Any State highway, other than an interstate highway or
freeway outside of an urbanized area, left unattended for more
than twenty-four (24) hours;
112. State Law Reference — For similar provisions, §577.080, RSMo.
113. State Law Reference — For similar provisions, §304.151, RSMo.
114. State Law References — For similar provisions, §§304.155.1(2009), 304.155.3, RSMo.
Section
380.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
385.030
AO:407
provided that commercial motor vehicles referred to in
Subparagraphs (a — c) not hauling waste designated
as hazardous under 49 U.S.C. 5103(a) may only be
removed under this Section to a place of safety until
the owner or owner's representative has had a
reasonable opportunity to contact a towing company of
choice; or
d. Any State highway, other than an interstate highway or
freeway in an urbanized area, left unattended for more than
ten (10) hours.
2. Any unattended abandoned property illegally left standing upon
any highway or bridge if the abandoned property is left in a position
or under such circumstances as to obstruct the normal movement
of traffic where there is no reasonable indication that the person in
control of the property is arranging for its immediate control or
removal.
3. Any abandoned property which has been abandoned under Section
385.010 herein or Section 577.080, RSMo.
4. Any abandoned property which has been reported as stolen or
taken without consent of the owner.
5. Any abandoned property for which the person operating such
property is arrested for an alleged offense for which the officer
takes the person into custody and where such person is unable to
arrange for the property's timely removal.
6. Any abandoned property which due to any other State law or City
ordinance is subject to towing because of the owner's outstanding
traffic or parking violations.
7. Any abandoned property left unattended in violation of a State law
or City ordinance where signs have been posted giving notice of the
law or where the violation causes a safety hazard.
8. Any abandoned property illegally left standing on the waters of this
State as defined in Section 306.010, RSMo., where the abandoned
property is obstructing the normal movement of traffic, or where
the abandoned property has been unattended for more than ten
(10) hours or is floating loose on the water.
9. Any abandoned property for which the person operating such
property or vehicle eludes arrest for an alleged offense for which
the officer would have taken the offender into custody.
B. When the City Police Department authorizes a tow pursuant to this
Section in which the abandoned property is moved from the immediate
vicinity, it shall complete a crime inquiry and inspection report.
Section
385.030
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
385.030
AO:408
Section 385.040. General Provisions and Procedures.115
C. Any City agency other than the City Police Department authorizing a
tow under this Section where property is towed away from the
immediate vicinity shall report the tow to the City Police Department
within two (2) hours of the tow, along with a crime inquiry and
inspection report.
A. Payment Of Charges. The owner of abandoned property removed as
provided in this Chapter shall be responsible for payment of all
reasonable charges for towing and storage of such abandoned property
as provided in Section 385.050.
B. Crime Inquiry And Inspection Report. Upon the towing of any
abandoned property pursuant to Section 385.030 or under authority of
a Law Enforcement Officer or local governmental agency pursuant to
Section 217.040, the City Police Department, where it authorized such
towing or was properly notified by another governmental agency of
such towing, shall promptly make an inquiry with the National Crime
Information Center (NCIC) and any statewide Missouri law
enforcement computer system to determine if the abandoned property
has been reported as stolen and shall enter the information pertaining
to the towed property into the statewide law enforcement computer
system. If the abandoned property is not claimed within ten (10)
working days of the towing, the tower who has online access to the
Department of Revenue's records shall make an inquiry to determine
the abandoned property owner and lienholder, if any, of record. In the
event that the records of the Department of Revenue fail to disclose the
name of the owner or any lienholder of record, the tower shall comply
with the requirements of Subsection (3) of Section 304.156, RSMo. If
the tower does not have online access, the City Police Department shall
submit a crime inquiry and inspection report to the Missouri Director of
Revenue. The City Police Department shall also provide one (1) copy of
the report to the storage facility and one (1) copy to the towing
company. A towing company that does not have online access to the
department's records and that is in possession of abandoned property
after ten (10) working days shall report such fact to the City Police
Department. The crime inquiry and inspection report shall be designed
by the Director of Revenue and shall include the following:
1. The year, model, make and property identification number of the
property and the owner and any lienholders, if known;
2. A description of any damage to the property noted by the Law
Enforcement Officer authorizing the tow;
3. The license plate or registration number and the State of issuance,
if available;
115. State Law References — For similar provisions, §§304.155.5 — 6, 304.155.11 — 12,
304.158.1, 304.158.5, 304.158.7, RSMo.
Section
385.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
385.040
AO:409
4. The storage location of the towed property;
5. The name, telephone number and address of the towing company;
6. The date, place and reason for the towing of the abandoned
property;
7. The date of the inquiry of the National Crime Information Center,
any statewide Missouri law enforcement computer system, and any
other similar system which has titling and registration information
to determine if the abandoned property had been stolen. This
information shall be entered only by the City Police Department;
8. The signature and printed name of the Law Enforcement Officer
authorizing the tow;
9. The name of the towing company, the signature and printed name
of the towing operator, and an indicator disclosing whether the
tower has online access to the department's records; and
10. Any additional information the Missouri Director of Revenue deems
appropriate.
C. Reclaiming Property. The owner of such abandoned property, or the
holder of a valid security interest of record, may reclaim it from the
towing company upon proof of ownership or valid security interest of
record and payment of all reasonable charges for the towing and
storage of the abandoned property.
D. Lienholder Repossession. If a lienholder repossesses any motor vehicle,
trailer, all-terrain vehicle, outboard motor or vessel without the
knowledge or cooperation of the owner, then the repossessor shall
notify the City Police Department within two (2) hours of the
repossession and shall further provide the Police Department with any
additional information the Police Department deems appropriate. The
City Police Department shall make an inquiry with the National Crime
Information Center and the Missouri statewide law enforcement
computer system and shall enter the repossessed vehicle into the
statewide law enforcement computer system.
E. Notice To Owner/Tow Lien Claim. Any towing company which comes
into possession of abandoned property pursuant to this Chapter and
who claims a lien for recovering, towing or storing abandoned property
shall give notice to the title owner and to all persons claiming a lien
thereon, as disclosed by the records of the Missouri Department of
Revenue or of a corresponding agency in any other State. The towing
company shall notify the owner and any lienholder within ten (10)
business days of the date of mailing indicated on the notice sent by the
Missouri Department of Revenue pursuant to Section 304.156, RSMo.,
by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall contain the
following:
Section
385.040
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
385.040
AO:410
1. The name, address and telephone number of the storage facility;
2. The date, reason and place from which the abandoned property
was removed;
3. A statement that the amount of the accrued towing, storage and
administrative costs are the responsibility of the owner, and that
storage and/or administrative costs will continue to accrue as a
legal liability of the owner until the abandoned property is
redeemed;
4. A statement that the storage firm claims a possessory lien for all
such charges;
5. A statement that the owner or holder of a valid security interest of
record may retake possession of the abandoned property at any
time during business hours by proving ownership or rights to a
secured interest and paying all towing and storage charges;
6. A statement that, should the owner consider that the towing or
removal was improper or not legally justified, the owner has a right
to request a hearing as provided in this Section to contest the
propriety of such towing or removal;
7. A statement that if the abandoned property remains unclaimed for
thirty (30) days from the date of mailing the notice, title to the
abandoned property will be transferred to the person or firm in
possession of the abandoned property, free of all prior liens; and
8. A statement that any charges in excess of the value of the
abandoned property at the time of such transfer shall remain a
liability of the owner.
F. Physical Search Of Property. In the event that the Missouri Department
of Revenue notifies the towing company that the records of the
Department of Revenue fail to disclose the name of the owner or any
lienholder of record, the towing company shall attempt to locate
documents or other evidence of ownership on or within the abandoned
property itself. The towing company must certify that a physical search
of the abandoned property disclosed no ownership documents were
found and a good faith effort has been made. For purposes of this
Section, "good faith effort" means that the following checks have been
performed by the company to establish the prior State of registration
and title:
1. Check of the abandoned property for any type of license plates,
license plate record, temporary permit, inspection sticker, decal or
other evidence which may indicate a State of possible registration
and title;
Section
385.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
385.040
AO:411
2. Check the law enforcement report for a license plate number or
registration number if the abandoned property was towed at the
request of a law enforcement agency;
3. Check the tow ticket/report of the tow truck operator to see if a
license plate was on the abandoned property at the beginning of
the tow, if a private tow; and
4. If there is no address of the owner on the impound report, check
the law enforcement report to see if an out-of-state address is
indicated on the driver license information.
G. Petition In Circuit Court. The owner of the abandoned property
removed pursuant to this Chapter or any person claiming a lien, other
than the towing company, within ten (10) days after the receipt of
notification from the towing company pursuant to Subsection (E) of this
Section may file a petition in the Associate Circuit Court in the County
where the abandoned property is stored to determine if the abandoned
property was wrongfully taken or withheld from the owner. The petition
shall name the towing company among the defendants. The petition
may also name the agency ordering the tow or the owner, lessee or
agent of the real property from which the abandoned property was
removed. The Missouri Director of Revenue shall not be a party to such
petition but a copy of the petition shall be served on the Director of
Revenue, who shall not issue title to such abandoned property pursuant
to this Section until the petition is finally decided.
H. Notice To Owner. Notice as to the removal of any abandoned property
pursuant to this Chapter shall be made in writing within five (5)
working days to the registered owner and any lienholder of the fact of
the removal, the grounds for the removal, and the place to which the
property has been removed by either:
1. The public agency authorizing the removal; or
2. The towing company, where authorization was made by an owner
or lessee of real property.
If the abandoned property is stored in any storage facility, a
copy of the notice shall be given to the operator of the facility.
The notice provided for in this Section shall include the amount
of mileage if available shown on the abandoned property at the
time of removal.
I. Tow Truck Requirements. Any towing company which tows abandoned
property for hire shall have the towing company's name, City and State
clearly printed in letters at least three (3) inches in height on the sides
of the truck, wrecker or other vehicle used in the towing.
J. Storage Facilities. Persons operating or in charge of any storage facility
where the abandoned property is stored pursuant to this Chapter shall
Section
385.040
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
385.040
AO:412
Section 385.050. Maximum Charges.116
accept cash for payment of towing and storage by a registered owner
or the owner's agent claiming the abandoned property.
K. Disposition Of Towed Property. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Section 301.227, RSMo., any towing company who has complied with
the notification provisions in Section 304.156, RSMo., including notice
that any property remaining unredeemed after thirty (30) days may be
sold as scrap property, may then dispose of such property as provided in
this Subsection. Such sale shall only occur if at least thirty (30) days
have passed since the date of such notification, the abandoned property
remains unredeemed with no satisfactory arrangements made with the
towing company for continued storage, and the owner or holder of a
security agreement has not requested a hearing as provided in Section
304.156, RSMo. The towing company may dispose of such abandoned
property by selling the property on a bill of sale as prescribed by the
Director of Revenue to a scrap metal operator or licensed salvage
dealer for destruction purposes only. The towing company shall forward
a copy of the bill of sale provided by the scrap metal operator or
licensed salvage dealer to the Director of Revenue within two (2) weeks
of the date of such sale. The towing company shall keep a record of
each such vehicle sold for destruction for three (3) years that shall be
available for inspection by law enforcement and authorized Department
of Revenue officials. The record shall contain the year, make,
identification number of the property, date of sale, and name of the
purchasing scrap metal operator or licensed salvage dealer and copies
of all notifications issued by the towing company as required in this
Chapter. Scrap metal operators or licensed salvage dealers shall keep a
record of the purchase of such property as provided in Section 301.227,
RSMo. Scrap metal operators and licensed salvage dealers may obtain a
junk certificate as provided in Section 301.227, RSMo., on vehicles
purchased on a bill of sale pursuant to the Section.
A. A towing company may only assess reasonable storage charges for
abandoned property towed without the consent of the owner.
Reasonable storage charges shall not exceed the charges for vehicles
which have been towed with the consent of the owner on a negotiated
basis. Storage charges may be assessed only for the time in which the
towing company complies with the procedural requirements of this
Chapter.
B. The Board of Aldermen may from time to time establish maximum
reasonable towing, storage and other charges which can be imposed by
towing and storage companies operating within the City, and which are
consistent with this Chapter and with Sections 304.155 to 304.158,
RSMo. Any violation of said established maximum charges shall be
116. State Law References — For similar provisions, §§304.156.2, 304.158.6, 304.158.10, RSMo.
Section
385.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
385.050
AO:413
Section 385.060. Sale of Abandoned Property by City.117
When the City has physical possession of the abandoned property, it may
sell the abandoned property in accordance with its established provisions
and regulations and may transfer ownership by means of a bill of sale signed
by the City Clerk and sealed with the official City Seal. Such bill of sale
shall contain the make and model of the abandoned property, the complete
abandoned property identification number, and the odometer reading of the
abandoned property, if available, and shall be lawful proof of ownership for
any dealer registered under the provisions of Section 301.218, RSMo., or
Section 301.560, RSMo., or for any other person.
Schedule I
SPEED LIMITS
In accordance with Chapter 320 of this Title, the maximum speed limits on
the streets in the City listed in this Schedule are as follows:
Table I-A. 10 Miles Per Hour. [R.O. 2009 §14-1008; Code 1969
§22-44; Ord. No. 2951 §1, 10-3-1988]
The rate of speed on the following street shall not exceed ten (10) miles per
hour:
(Reserved)
Table I-B. 15 Miles Per Hour. [R.O. 2009 §14-1008.1; Ord. No. 2852
§1, 1-19-1987]
The rate of speed of motor vehicles on the following streets shall not exceed
fifteen (15) miles per hour:
Breckenridge Industrial Court Bridge: North end to center of creek and
south end to center of creek.
deemed a violation of this Section of the Code and shall be punishable
pursuant to Section 100.080.
C. A towing company may impose a charge of not more than one-half (½)
of the regular towing charge for the towing of abandoned property at
the request of the owner of private real property or that owner's agent
pursuant to this Chapter if the owner of the abandoned property or the
owner's agent returns to the abandoned property before it is removed
from the private real property. The regular towing charge may only be
imposed after the abandoned property has been removed from the
property and is in transit.
117. State Law Reference — For similar provisions, §304.156, RSMo.
Section
385.050
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table I-C
AO:414
Table I-C. 25 Miles Per Hour. [R.O. 2009 §14-1009; Code 1969
§22-46; Ord. No. 2951 §1, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 3361 §1, 10-17-1994;
Ord. No. 4134 §1, 7-21-2008]
The speed of vehicles on the following streets shall not exceed twenty-five
(25) miles per hour:
Bremerton Avenue, within the City limits between Manchester Road and
Litzsinger Avenue.
Hanley Industrial Court.
Litzsinger Road, from Hanley Road to Rosalie Avenue.
Litzsinger Road, within the City limits between Brentwood Boulevard and
McKnight Road, except that portion of Litzsinger Road which may be
legally designated as a school zone.
Strassner Drive.
Table I-D. 30 Miles Per Hour. [R.O. 2009 §14-1010; Code 1969
§22-47]
The rate of speed on the following streets shall not be in excess of thirty
(30) miles per hour:
Brentwood Boulevard.
Eager Road, from Brentwood Boulevard to Hanley Road.
Manchester Road.
McKnight Road.
Table I-E. 35 Miles Per Hour. [R.O. 2009 §14-1011; Code 1969
§22-47A]
The rate of speed on the following streets shall not exceed thirty-five (35)
miles per hour:
Hanley Road.
Table I-F. 60 Miles Per Hour. [R.O. 2009 §14-1011.1; Ord. No. 2900
§1, 12-21-1987; Ord. No. 4164 §1, 2-2-2009]
The rate of speed on the following streets shall not exceed sixty (60) miles
per hour:
I-64/U.S. 40: From western City limits to eastern City limits.
Table I-C ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table I-F
AO:415
Schedule II
THROUGH STREETS
In accordance with Section 335.010 and 335.020 of this Title, and when
signs are erected giving notice thereof, the following streets shall be known
as "through streets".
Table II-A. Through Streets Generally. [R.O. 2009 §14-1030; Code
1969 §22-85; Ord. No. 2805 §1, 5-5-1986; Ord. No. 2838 §1,
11-3-1986; Ord. No. 2863 §1, 3-16-1987; Ord. No. 2901 §1,
12-21-1987; Ord. No. 2911 §1, 2-15-1988; Ord. No. 2937 §1,
6-20-1988; Ord. No. 2947 §1, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 2954 §1,
10-3-1988; Ord. No. 2965 §1, 11-7-1988; Ord. No. 2966 §1,
11-7-1988; Ord. No. 3014 §1, 6-19-1989; Ord. No. 3023 §1,
8-21-1989; Ord. No. 3124 §1, 3-18-1991; Ord. No. 3149 §1, 7-1-1991;
Ord. No. 3182 §1, 12-16-1991; Ord. No. 3245 §1, 10-5-1992; Ord. No.
3369 §1, 12-5-1994; Ord. No. 3508 §1, 11-18-1996; Ord. No. 3531 §5,
3-7-1997; Ord. No. 3575 §1, 11-17-1997; Ord. No. 3614 §1,
9-14-1998; Ord. No. 3642 §1, 4-5-1999; Ord. No. 3668 §1,
10-18-1999; Ord. No. 3677 §1, 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 3701 §1,
5-15-2000; Ord. No. 3801 §1, 11-19-2001; Ord. No. 3909 §§6 — 7,
10-20-2003; Ord. No. 3933 §1, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 3938 §§1 — 2,
6-21-2004; Ord. No. 4029 §§3 — 4, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 4032 §1,
7-17-2006; Ord. No. 4118 §1, 3-17-2008; Ord. No. 4130 §1,
6-16-2008; Ord. No. 4272 §1, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 4314 §1,
11-21-2011]
The following streets within the City are hereby designated as and declared
to be through or major streets:
Addie Road, southwest corner, at its intersection with Hanley Road.
Annalee Avenue, northwest corner, at its intersection with Harrison Avenue.
Annalee Avenue, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with
Madge Avenue.
Annalee Avenue, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with
Powell Avenue.
Annalee Avenue, southeast corner, at its intersection with White Avenue.
Bluebird Terrace, northeast corner, at its intersection with East Swan
Circle.
Bluebird Terrace, southeast corner, at its intersection with Eager Road.
Bluejay Cove, northwest corner, at its intersection with West Swan Circle.
Bobolink at its intersection with south line of Eager Road.
Table I-F BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table II-A
AO:416
Brazeau Avenue, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with
Pendleton Avenue.
Bremerton Road, northbound, at its intersection with Litzsinger Road.
Brentwood Boulevard over and along its entire course and length through
the City, from the place or point where the same touches the southern
boundary line of the City to the point or place where the same touches the
northern boundary line of the City.
Brentwood Industrial Court at its intersection with Breckenridge Industrial
Drive on the southwest corner.
Bridgeport Avenue, northeastern corner, at its intersection with High
School Drive.
Canary Cove, northwest corner, at its intersection with West Swan Circle.
Cardinal Terrace, northeast, southwest, southeast corners, at its
intersection with High School Drive.
Cardinal Terrace, southwest corner, at its intersection with East Swan
Circle.
Cecelia Avenue, northwest corner, at its intersection with Florence Avenue.
Cecelia Avenue, southeast side, in line with the southwest corner of
Florence Avenue.
Cecelia Avenue, southeast corner, at its intersection with Litzsinger Road.
Collier Avenue at its intersection with north line with Pendleton, for
southbound traffic.
Collier Avenue at its intersection with the west exit, northwest corner of
Schnucks Market parking lot, two hundred seventy-five (275) feet south
from Manchester Road.
Collier Avenue, northwest corner, at its intersection with Russell Avenue.
Collier Avenue, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with
Pendleton Avenue.
Covington, northeast corner, at its intersection with Kentland.
Cricket Lane, northeast corner, at its intersection with McKnight Road.
Cricket Lane, southeast corner, at its intersection with York Drive.
Dale Avenue at its intersection with Hanley Road.
Dorothy Avenue at its intersection with Eulalie Avenue.
Dorothy Avenue, northwest corner, at its intersection with Florence Avenue.
Table II-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table II-A
AO:417
Dorothy Avenue, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with
Litzsinger Road.
Dorothy Avenue, southeast corner, at its intersection with Florence Avenue.
Dorothy Avenue, southeast corner, at its intersection with Joseph Avenue.
Dorothy Avenue, southeast corner, at its intersection with Henrietta Avenue.
Douglas Court, northeast corner, at its intersection with Helen Avenue.
Eager Road at its intersection with Brentwood Promenade Court.
Eager Road at its intersection with Hanley Road.
Eager Road at its intersection with the east line of Brentwood Boulevard.
Eager Road at its intersection with the west line of Bluebird Terrace.
Eager Road at its intersection with the west line of Brentwood Boulevard at
all times except between the hours of 4:00 P.M. to 7:00 P.M. on Mondays,
Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays.
Eager Road at its intersection with west line of Bobolink, eastbound traffic.
Eager Road at its intersections with Oriole Place and Thrush Place.
Eager Road, southeast corner, at its intersection with Hathaway.
East Swan Circle at its intersection with Thrush Place.
East Swan Circle, northeast corner, at its intersection with High School
Drive.
Eulalie Avenue at its intersection with Dorothy Avenue.
Eulalie Avenue, southeast corner, at its intersection with Rosalie Avenue.
Eulalie Avenue, southwest and northeast corners, at its intersection with
Mary Avenue.
Eulalie Avenue, southwest and northeast corners, at its intersection with
Helen Avenue.
Eulalie Avenue, southwest corner, at its intersection with Mari-Kay Court.
Fawn Avenue, northeast corner, at its intersection with Melvin Avenue.
Fawn Avenue, northwest corner, where it dead-ends at Melvin Avenue.
Fawn Avenue, southeast corner, at its intersection with Porter Avenue.
Florence Avenue at its intersection with Melvin Avenue.
Florence Avenue, northeast corner, at its intersection with Louis Avenue.
Table II-A BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table II-A
AO:418
Florence Avenue, northeast corner, at its intersection with Porter Avenue
(Oak Tree Park).
Florence Avenue, northwest corner, at its intersection with Helen Avenue.
Florence Avenue, southeast corner, at its intersection with Helen Avenue.
Florence Avenue, southwest corner, at its intersection with Cecelia Avenue.
Florence Avenue, southwest corner, at its intersection with Porter Avenue
(Oak Tree Park).
Garden Court at its intersection with Brentwood Boulevard, on the
northeast corner.
Genevieve Avenue, southwest corner, at its intersection with Helen Avenue.
Hanley Industrial Court, 100 block, at intersection with the 200 and 300
blocks of Hanley Industrial Court, northwest, southwest and southeast
corners.
Hanley Industrial Court, 100 block, at its intersections with the 200 block
and the 300 block of Hanley Industrial Court.
Hanley Industrial Court, 200 block, (north), at intersection of 290 Hanley
Industrial Court, northeast corner.
Hanley Industrial Court, 200 Hanley Industrial Court, northbound, at its
intersection with driveway entrance, north curb, at 290 Hanley Industrial
Court northeast corner.
Hanley Industrial Court, 700 block, at its intersection with Strassner Drive,
1300 —
1400 block.
Hanley Industrial Court, 700 block, at its intersection with 1300 —
1400 blocks of Strassner Drive, north, east and south corners.
Hanley Industrial Court, 1200 block, at its intersection with 1300 Strassner
Drive, northwest, southwest and southeast corners.
Hanley Industrial Court, 1200 Hanley Industrial Court, southbound, at its
intersection with Strassner Drive eastbound 1300 block.
Hanley Industrial Court, 1300 Hanley Industrial Court, eastbound, at its
intersection with Hanley Industrial Court southbound 1200 block.
Hanley Industrial Court at Hanley Court entrance of 500 block of Hanley
Industrial Court, northwest corner.
Hanley Industrial Court at Hanley Court entrance of 600 block of Hanley
Industrial Court, northwest corner.
Table II-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table II-A
AO:419
Hanley Industrial Court, at Hope Press, 141 Hanley Industrial Court,
southeast corner.
Hanley Industrial Court at its intersection with Hanley Industrial Court at
the southeast corner at Crown Packaging, Brentwood-Clayton Trade Center
at 8514 Eager Road.
Hanley Industrial Court at its intersection with Hanley Road.
Hanley Industrial Court at its intersection with Withrow Avenue.
Hanley Industrial Court, east intersections north at 100 block of Hanley
Industrial Court, northwest, southwest and southeast corners.
Hanley Industrial Court entrance, off of Hanley Road, at its intersection
with Hanley Industrial Court on the south side, west of the Landmark Bank.
Hanley Industrial Court entrance, off of Hanley Road, at its intersection
with West Hanley Industrial Court on the north side, west of the Landmark
Bank.
Hanley Industrial Court, northbound, at its intersection with Hanley
Industrial Court eastbound, across from Quality Child Care-Indeeco #2 at
288 Hanley Industrial Court.
Hanley Industrial Court, northbound, at its intersection with the 700 block
of Hanley Industrial Court westbound.
Hanley Industrial Court, northeast corner, at 155 Hanley Industrial Court.
Hanley Industrial Court, northwest corner, at 100 Hanley Industrial Court.
Hanley Industrial Court, northwest corner of 200 block Hanley Industrial
Court.
Hanley Industrial Court, southbound, at its intersection with Hanley
Industrial Court eastbound, across from Hope Press, Inc. at 141 Hanley
Industrial Court.
Hanley Industrial Court, southbound, at its intersection with the 100 block
of Hanley Industrial Court westbound.
Hanley Industrial Court, southeast corner, at 150 Hanley Industrial Court.
Hanley Industrial Court, southeast corner of 200 block Hanley Industrial
Court.
Hanley Industrial Court, southwest corner, at its intersection with Strassner
Drive.
Hanley Industrial Drive at its intersection with that portion of Hanley
Industrial Court which runs in a southeastwardly direction.
Hanley Road at its intersection with Dale Avenue.
Table II-A BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table II-A
AO:420
Hanley Road at its intersection with Eager Road.
Hanley Road at its intersection with Litzsinger Road.
Hanley Road at its intersection with Rosalie Avenue.
Harrison Avenue, northeast corner, at its intersection with High School
Drive.
Hatton Lane at its intersection with Sonora Avenue.
Hatton Lane, northwest corner, at its intersection with White Avenue.
Hatton Lane, southeast corner, at its intersection with Pine Avenue.
Helen Avenue, northeast corner, at its intersection with Litzsinger Road.
Helen Avenue, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with
Rosalie Avenue.
Helen Avenue, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with
Eulalie Avenue.
Henrietta Avenue, northeast corner, at its intersection with Dorothy Avenue.
Henrietta Avenue, northwest corner, at its intersection with Helen Avenue.
Henrietta Avenue, southeast corner, at its intersection with Dorothy Avenue.
Henrietta Avenue, southeast corner, at its intersection with Helen Avenue.
Henrietta Avenue, southwest corner, at its intersection with Helen Avenue.
Hermelin Drive, southeast corner, at its intersection with Litzsinger Road.
High School Drive at its intersection with Bridgeport Avenue.
High School Drive at its intersection with Eager Road.
High School Drive at its intersection with Harrison Avenue.
High School Drive at its intersection with Powell Avenue.
High School Drive, northbound and southbound, at its intersection with
West and South Swan Circle.
High School Drive, northwest corner, at its intersection with West Swan
Circle.
High School Drive, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with
Wrenwood Lane.
High School Drive, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with
White Avenue.
High School Drive, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with
North Swan Circle.
Table II-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table II-A
AO:421
High School Drive, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with
Litzsinger Road.
High School Drive, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with
Pine Avenue.
High School Drive, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with
Madge Avenue.
High School Drive, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with
Lawn Avenue.
High School Drive, southeast corner, at its intersection with South Swan
Circle.
High School Drive, southwest corner, at its intersection with Moritz Avenue.
Hill Avenue, northwest corner, at its intersection with Harrison Avenue.
Hill Avenue, southeast corner, at its intersection with White Avenue.
Hilldale Drive, northwest corner, at its intersection with Russell Avenue.
Hilton Avenue, northwest corner, at its intersection with Harrison Avenue.
Hilton Avenue, southeast corner, at its intersection with White Drive.
Joseph Avenue, northwest corner, at its intersection with Dorothy Avenue.
Joseph Avenue, southeast corner, at its intersection with Dorothy Avenue.
Joseph Avenue, southwest corner, at its intersection with Helen Avenue.
Kempton Lane, northwest corner, at its intersection with White Avenue.
Kempton Lane, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with
Sonora Avenue.
Kempton Lane, southeast corner, at its intersection with Pine Avenue.
Kenilworth, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with Eager
Road.
Kentland, at the southeast and northwest corner of its intersection with
Covington Court.
Keystone, northeast corner, at its intersection with Kentland.
Keystone, northwest corner, at its intersection with Florence Avenue.
Lawn Avenue at its intersection with Urban Drive.
Lawn Avenue, northeast corner, at its intersection with St. Clair Avenue.
Lawn Avenue, southwest and northeast corners, at its intersection with
High School Drive.
Table II-A BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table II-A
AO:422
Lawndell Drive, northwest corner, at its intersection with Russell Avenue.
Litzsinger Road at its intersection with Brentwood Boulevard.
Litzsinger Road at its intersection with Hanley Road.
Litzsinger Road at its intersection with St. Clair Avenue.
Litzsinger Road at the northeast, southeast and southwest corner of its
intersection with Kentland.
Litzsinger Road, northeast and southwest corners, at its intersection with
Annalee Avenue.
Litzsinger Road, northeast corner, at its intersection with Dorothy Avenue.
Litzsinger Road, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with
Bremerton Road.
Litzsinger Road, southwest and northeast corners, at its intersection with
High School Drive.
Litzsinger Road, southwest and northwest corners, at its intersection with
Helen Avenue.
Madge Avenue at its intersection with Bremerton Road.
Madge Avenue, northeast and southwest corners, at its intersection with
High School Drive.
Madge Avenue, southwest and northeast corners, at its intersection with
Annalee Avenue.
Manchester Road over and along its entire length and course through the
City, from the place where the same touches the eastern boundary of the
City to the place where the same touches the western boundary of the City.
Manderly Drive, northwest corner, at its intersection with Russell Avenue.
Mary Avenue at its intersection with Florence Avenue.
Mary Avenue at its intersection with Rosalie Avenue.
Mary Avenue, northwest corner, at its intersection with Florence Avenue.
Mary Avenue, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with
Eulalie Avenue.
McKnight Road at its intersection with Litzsinger Road.
McKnight Road, southeast corner, at its intersection with York Drive.
Melvin Avenue, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with
Fawn Avenue.
Table II-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table II-A
AO:423
Middlesex Drive (North), southeast and northwest corners, at its
intersection with York Drive (North).
Middlesex Drive (south terminus), northeast corner, at its intersection with
Southcote Drive.
Middlesex Drive (South), southeast and northwest corners, at its
intersection with York Drive (South).
Moritz Avenue, northeast corner, at its intersection with St. Clair Avenue.
Moritz Avenue, southwest and northeast corners, at its intersection with
High School Drive.
Northcote Road, northeast corner, at Sussex Drive.
Northcote Road, northwest corner, at its intersection with York Drive.
Northcote Road, southeast corner, at its intersection with Middlesex Drive.
North Swan Circle at its intersection with High School Drive.
North Swan Circle at its intersection with Oriole Lane.
North Swan Circle, northeast corner, at its intersection with Wrenwood
Lane.
Oriole Lane, northwest corner, at its intersection with Wrenwood Lane.
Oriole Lane, southeast corner, at its intersection with Eager Road.
Parkridge Avenue at its intersection with Pine Avenue.
Parkridge Avenue, northwest and southeast corners, at its intersection with
White Avenue.
Parkridge Avenue, northwest corner, at its intersection with Litzsinger
Road.
Parkridge, on the east side, north property line at 1920 Parkridge,
northbound traffic.
Parkridge, on the west side, north property line at 1923 Parkridge,
southbound traffic.
Parkside, northwest corner, at its intersection with Litzsinger Road.
Parkside, northeast corner, at its intersection with McKnight Road.
Patton, northwest corner, at its intersection with Harrison Avenue.
Patton, southeast corner, at its intersection with White Avenue.
Peacock Lane, southeast corner, at its intersection with Eager Road.
Peacock Lane, northwest corner, at its intersection with North Swan Circle.
Table II-A BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table II-A
AO:424
Pendleton Avenue, northeast and southwest corners, at its intersection with
Collier Avenue.
Pendleton Avenue, northwest corner, at its intersection with Collier Avenue.
Pendleton Avenue, southwest and northeast corners, at its intersection with
Brazeau Avenue.
Pine Avenue, northeast corner, at its intersection with McKnight Road.
Pine Avenue, northeast side, in line with the southeast corner of Kempton
Lane.
Pine Avenue, southeast corner, at its intersection with Urban Drive.
Pine Avenue, southwest and northeast corners, at its intersection with High
School Drive.
Pine Avenue, southwest and northeast corners, at its intersection with St.
Clair Avenue.
Pine Avenue, southwest and northeast corners, at its intersection with
Parkridge Avenue.
Pine Avenue, southwest corner, at its intersection with Kempton Lane.
Porter Avenue, northeast corner, at its intersection with Fawn Avenue.
Powell Avenue, southwest and northeast corners, at its intersection with
Annalee Avenue.
Radley Court, northeast corner, at its intersection with Kentland.
Redbird Cove, northwest corner, at its intersection with West Swan Circle.
Robin Court, northwest corner, at its intersection with Wrenwood Lane.
Rosalie Avenue at its intersection with Mary Avenue.
Rosalie Avenue, southwest and northeast corners, at its intersection with
Helen Avenue.
Rosalie Industrial Court at its intersection with Hanley Road, between the
hours of 4:00 P.M. to 6:00 P.M. on all days of the week except Saturday and
Sunday.
Russell Avenue, northeast corner, at its intersection with Hilldale Drive.
Russell Avenue, northeast corner, at its intersection with Lawndell Drive.
Russell Avenue, northeast corner, at its intersection with Manderly Drive.
Russell Avenue, on the south side, eastbound traffic, in line with the
northwest corner of Manderly Drive.
Table II-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table II-A
AO:425
Russell Avenue, on the south side, eastbound traffic, in line with the
northwest corner of Hilldale Drive.
Russell Avenue, on the south side, eastbound traffic, in line with the
northwest corner of Lawndell Drive.
Ruth Avenue, northeast corner, at its intersection with Florence Avenue.
Ruth Avenue, southwest corner, at its intersection with Florence Avenue.
St. Clair Avenue, northeast corner, at its intersection with Litzsinger Road.
St. Clair Avenue, northwest and southeast corners, at its intersection with
West Pine Avenue.
St. Clair Avenue, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with
White Avenue.
St. Clair Avenue, southeast corner, at its intersection with Moritz Avenue.
St. Clair Avenue, southeast corner, at its intersection with Lawn Avenue.
Sonora Avenue, northwest corner, at its intersection with Hatton Lane.
Sonora Avenue, northeast corner, at its intersection with McKnight Road.
Sonora Avenue, southwest and northeast corners, at its intersection with
Kempton Lane.
Southcote Road at its intersection with the south terminus of Middlesex
Drive.
Southcote Road, northwest and southeast corners, at its intersection with
York Drive.
South Swan Circle, northeast corner, at its intersection with High School
Drive.
South Swan Circle, southwest corner, at its intersection with Wrenwood
Lane.
Spanish Drive, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with
Pine Avenue.
Spanish Drive, southeast corner, at its intersection with Lawn Avenue.
Strassner Drive, 1241 Strassner Drive, westbound.
Strassner Drive, 1270 Strassner Drive, eastbound.
Strassner Drive, 1300 Strassner Drive, eastbound, at its intersection with
Hanley Industrial Court southbound 1200 block.
Strassner Drive at all its intersections with Hanley Industrial Court.
Strassner Drive at its intersection with Urban Drive.
Table II-A BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table II-A
AO:426
Strassner Drive, northeast corner, at its intersection with Urban Drive.
Stratford Lane, southeast corner, at its intersection with High School Drive.
Stratford Lane, southeast corner, at its intersection with White Avenue.
Sussex Drive (North), southeast corner, at its intersection with Northcote
Road.
Sussex Drive (North), southeast corner, at its intersection with York Drive
(North).
Sussex Drive (South), northwest corner, at its intersection with York Drive
(South).
Swallow Drive, southeast and northwest corners, at its intersection with
Wrenwood Lane.
Thrush, northwest corner, at its intersection with Wrenwood Lane.
Tilles Drive, northwest corner, at its intersection with Litzsinger Road.
Tilles Drive, northeast corner, at its intersection with McKnight Road.
Urban Drive at its intersection with Lawn Avenue.
Urban Drive from its intersection with Lawn Avenue northwardly to its
intersection with Brentwood Boulevard.
Urban Drive, northwest corner, at its intersection with Pine Avenue.
Urban Drive, southeast corner, at its intersection with Strassner Drive.
West Pendleton Avenue at its intersection with Collier Avenue.
West Swan Circle at its intersection with Swallow Drive.
West Swan Circle, northeast corner, at its intersection with Canary Cove.
West Swan Circle, northwest corner, at its intersection with High School
Drive.
White Avenue at its intersection with Brentwood Boulevard.
White Avenue at its intersection with Hatton Lane.
White Avenue, northeast corner, at its intersection with Kempton Lane.
White Avenue, northeast corner, at its intersection with McKnight Road.
White Avenue, southeast side, in line with the northwest corner of Kempton
Lane.
White Avenue, southwest and northeast corners, at its intersection with St.
Clair Avenue.
Table II-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table II-A
AO:427
White Avenue, southwest and northeast corners, at its intersection with
High School Drive.
White Avenue, southwest and northeast corners, at its intersection with
Parkridge Avenue.
Whitehall Court, northeast corner, at its intersection with McKnight Road.
Wrenwood Lane at its intersection with East Swan Circle.
Wrenwood Lane at its intersection with Swallow Drive.
Wrenwood Lane, eastbound traffic, at the entrance to Brentwood Square
Shopping Center.
Wrenwood Lane, northeast corner, at its intersection with East Swan Circle.
Wrenwood Lane, northwest corner, at its intersection with South Swan
Circle.
Wrenwood Lane, south side going east, directly across from the northwest
corner of East Swan Circle.
Wrenwood Lane, southeast corner, at its intersection with North Swan
Circle.
Wrenwood Lane, southwest and northeast corners, at its intersection with
High School Drive.
York Drive at its east intersections with the terminus of Northcote Road.
York Drive at its intersection with Cricket Lane.
York Drive at its intersection with the south terminus of Sussex Drive.
York Drive at its north intersection with Middlesex Drive.
York Drive at its north intersection with Sussex Drive.
York Drive at its northwestern intersection with Northcote Road.
York Drive at its southeast intersection with York Drive.
York Drive (North), northeast corner, at its intersection with McKnight
Road.
York Drive (South), northeast corner, at its intersection with McKnight
Road.
York Drive (South), southwest and northeast corners, at its intersection with
Middlesex Drive.
York Hills, northeast corner, at its intersection with McKnight Road.
Table II-B. Through Traffic Prohibited. [R.O. 2009 §14-1012; Code
1969 §§22-53(d), 22-83(c); Ord. No. 3009 §1, 5-15-1989; Ord. No.
Table II-A BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table II-B
AO:428
3165 §1, 8-19-1991; Ord. No. 3473 §1, 3-18-1996; Ord. No. 3756 §1,
3-5-2001]
Through traffic is prohibited on the following:
Hilldale Avenue, the north end, from property north of where Hilldale
Avenue terminates.
Kenilworth Lane.
Parkside Drive, from 6:30 A.M. to 8:30 A.M. and from 3:30 P.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Monday through Friday.
Rose Avenue, westbound traffic, at its intersection with Brentwood
Boulevard into the exit of Brentwood Square parking lot.
Tilles Drive, from 6:30 A.M. to 8:30 A.M. and from 3:30 P.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Monday through Friday.
Schedule III
NO PARKING AT ANY TIME
Table III-A. No Parking At Any Time. [R.O. 2009 §14-1015; Code
1969 §22-68; Ord. No. 2750 §1, 10-21-1985; Ord. No. 2772 §1,
1-6-1986; Ord. No. 2902 §1, 12-21-1987; Ord. No. 2918 §1,
3-21-1988; Ord. No. 2927 §1, 4-18-1988; Ord. No. 2953 §1,
10-3-1988; Ord. No. 3025 §1, 9-18-1989; Ord. No. 3038 §1,
11-6-1989; Ord. No. 3127 §1, 3-18-1991; Ord. No. 3166 §1,
8-19-1991; Ord. No. 3173 §1, 10-21-1991; Ord. No. 3176 §1,
11-4-1991; Ord. No. 3267 §1, 2-1-1993; Ord. No. 3305 §1, 10-4-1993;
Ord. No. 3531 §4, 3-7-1997; Ord. No. 3609 §1, 8-17-1998; Ord. No.
3622 §1, 11-16-1998; Ord. No. 3713 §1, 8-21-2000; Ord. No. 3867 §1,
3-3-2003; Ord. No. 3909 §5, 10-20-2003; Ord. No. 3921 §1,
12-1-2003; Ord. No. 4029 §2, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 4093 §1,
11-19-2007]
In accordance with Section 355.010 of this Title, parking shall, on certain
roads or streets or parts thereof, be prohibited as described in this
Schedule:
It shall be unlawful for any operator to stand, park or stop any vehicle at
any time on or along the following described places within the City:
Agnes Avenue, north side, from Brentwood Boulevard to the west side of the
Agnes Avenue pedestrian bridge.
Alley, east ten (10) feet, running north and south and intersecting the
south line of Eulalie Avenue, approximately one hundred fifty-two (152) feet
east of its intersection with Brentwood Boulevard, southwardly from such
intersection with the south line of Eulalie Avenue, a distance of seventy (70)
feet.
Table II-B ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table III-A
AO:429
Anna Avenue, either side from its intersection with the east line of
Brentwood Boulevard, eastwardly to its intersection with the west line of
Brazeau Avenue.
Annalee Avenue, the east side beginning at the intersection of Annalee
Avenue with the south line of Powell Avenue southwardly a distance of one
hundred sixty-seven (167) feet.
Bobolink Place, from the west curb line of Bobolink, west for a distance of
one hundred (100) feet on the south side of Eager Road, bus zone inclusive
in the one hundred (100) feet.
Bobolink Place, including the paved portion of the street and the west side
thereof, a distance of twenty (20) feet north from the southernmost end of
the paved portion of the street.
Bobolink Place, on the west side of Bobolink from the south curb line of
Eager Road south for a distance of twenty-five (25) feet.
Bobolink Place, the east side from the centerline of Eager Road, south five
hundred fifteen (515) feet to the southern terminus thereof.
Brazeau Avenue, the east side from its intersection with the north line of
Pendleton Avenue northwardly to its intersection with the south line of Anna
Avenue.
Brentwood Boulevard, 1600 block, in front of the Centre 40 building
between Agnes and Rose Avenues.
Brentwood Boulevard, from a point one hundred eighty-seven (187) feet
north of the north line of Madge Avenue to a point three hundred fifty-three
(353) feet south of the south line of Litzsinger Avenue.
Brentwood Boulevard, from a point two hundred sixteen (216) feet south of
the south line of Litzsinger Avenue to a point twenty (20) feet north of the
north line of Harrison Avenue.
Brentwood Boulevard, from the south City limits north on the east side to a
point one hundred fifty-four (154) feet south of the south line of Litzsinger
Avenue, and on the west side, to a point one hundred ten (110) feet north of
the north line of Madge Avenue.
Brentwood Boulevard, on the east side from a point seventy-six (76) feet
south of the south line of Litzsinger Avenue to the south line of Rosalie
Avenue.
Brentwood Boulevard, on the west and east sides northwardly to the City
limits and southwardly to the City limits.
Brentwood Boulevard, on the west side from the north line of Lawn Avenue
north to the north City limit.
Brentwood Boulevard, the east side from its intersection with Eager Road,
northwardly to the City limits.
Table III-A BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table III-A
AO:430
Brentwood Boulevard, the west shoulder, for a distance north of twenty (20)
feet from the north side of Moritz Avenue.
Brentwood Boulevard, the west shoulder, for a distance north of thirty (30)
feet from the north side of Harrison Avenue.
Brentwood Boulevard, the west shoulder, for a distance south of twenty (20)
feet from the south side of Moritz Avenue.
Brentwood Boulevard, the west side, for a distance of one hundred thirtyfour
(134) feet south from the centerline of Lawn Avenue.
Brentwood Boulevard, the west side, from the north line of Litzsinger Road
to a point one hundred ten (110) feet north.
Brentwood Place, the south side of the 8700 block.
Brentwood Square Development, north side, westernmost sixty (60) feet of
a portion of east/west Kenilworth Lane, twenty-five (25) feet wide as per plat
of Kenilworth Lane, a subdivision, recorded in Plat Book 40, page 12 of the
St. Louis Records from the west right-of-way line of Brentwood Boulevard
as it now exists to the northward extension of the west line of Lot A of said
Kenilworth Lane Subdivision.
Bridgeport Avenue, the north side of the street from 8909 Bridgeport to
High School Drive.
Bridgeport Avenue, the south side, for a distance of one hundred twenty
(120) feet eastwardly from its intersection with the east line of Brentwood
Boulevard.
Bridgeport Avenue, south side, from a point approximately 135 feet west of
Brentwood Boulevard to a point approximately 170 feet west of Brentwood
Boulevard. [Ord. No. 4803.2, 10-16-2017]
Bridgeport Avenue, south side, for a distance of approximately one hundred
two (102) feet west of Brentwood Boulevard.
Cecelia Avenue, east and west sides, sixty (60) feet north of Manchester
Road.
Collier Avenue, east side, south from Manchester Road to the north side of
the rear entrance of Schnucks loading and delivery area.
Collier Avenue, the west side, between the south line of Manchester Road
and the north line of Pendleton Avenue.
Dorothy Avenue, the east side, from its intersection with Eulalie to a point
fifty (50) feet south of the intersection with Eulalie.
Eager Road, both sides, from its intersection with Brentwood Boulevard
westwardly a distance of fifty (50) feet.
Table III-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table III-A
AO:431
Eager Road, the north side, from a point fifty (50) feet west of Brentwood
Boulevard north and west, four hundred fifty-two (452) feet to the north City
limits boundary.
Eager Road, the north side, for a distance of fifty (50) feet in an eastwardly
direction from its intersection with Brentwood Boulevard.
Eager Road, the south side, eastwardly for a distance of twenty (20) feet
from its intersection with the east line of Bobolink Place.
Eager Road, the south side, westwardly for a distance of twenty (20) feet
from its intersection with the west line of Bobolink Place.
Eager Road, the south side, at its intersection from the east line of
Brentwood Boulevard, eastwardly for a distance of two hundred sixty (260)
feet.
Eager Road, the south side, from the Brentwood Court Apartments driveway
to a point 27 feet east. [Ord. No. 4712 §1, 5-16-2016]
Eager Road, the south side, from the Brentwood Court Apartments driveway
to a point 27 feet west. [Ord. No. 4712 §1, 5-16-2016]
Eager Road, the south side, at its intersection from the west line of Hanley
Boulevard, westwardly for a distance of five hundred fifteen (515) feet.
Eager Road, the south side, from Oriole Lane to a point 27 feet east. [Ord.
No. 4712 §1, 5-16-2016]
East Swan Circle, the westwardly side, from its intersection with the north
line of Wrenwood Lane northwardly for a distance of two hundred fortythree
(243) feet.
Eulalie Avenue, both sides, twenty (20) feet east of the east curb line of
Dorothy Avenue.
Eulalie Avenue, the north side, for a distance of seven hundred fifty-six (756)
feet east of the east line of the first (1st) alley east of Brentwood Boulevard.
Eulalie Avenue, the north side, from the east side of Brentwood Boulevard
to a point one hundred fifty-six (156) feet east thereof.
Eulalie Avenue, the south side, from the east line of Brentwood Boulevard a
distance of one hundred fifteen (115) feet.
Eulalie Avenue, the south side, from the east side of Brentwood Boulevard
to a point one hundred forty (140) feet east thereof.
Eulalie, the southwest corner, eastbound traffic, at its intersection with
Rosalie Avenue.
Evans Avenue, either side, from the east side of Brentwood Boulevard,
eastwardly for a distance of one hundred ninety-two (192) feet.
Table III-A BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table III-A
AO:432
Evans Avenue, the south side, from its intersection with the east line of
Brentwood Boulevard eastwardly to the end of Evans Avenue.
Fawn Avenue, the north side, between its intersection with the east line of
Melvin Avenue and the west line of Porter Avenue.
Florence Avenue, south side, 8400 Block, between Cecelia on the east and
Helen on the west.
Garden Court, the north side, from Brentwood Boulevard east to the Garden
Court cul-de-sac.
Hanley Industrial Court, either side, from its intersection with the west line
of Hanley Road westwardly for a distance of three hundred (300) feet.
Hanley Industrial Court, the 800 block, the east side from the intersection
of Strassner Drive for a distance northerly of one hundred ninety-six (196)
feet.
Hanley Industrial Court, the east side, from its intersection with the 100
block of Hanley Industrial Court, northwardly for eighty (80) feet in front of
the property numbered 155 Hanley Industrial Court.
Hanley Industrial Court, the east side of those portions which run in a
northerly and southerly direction.
Hanley Industrial Court, the north side of those portions which run in an
easterly and westerly direction.
Hanley Industrial Court, the south side of those portions which run in an
easterly and westerly direction.
Hanley Industrial Court, the west side of those portions which run in a
northerly and southerly direction.
Hanley Road, the west side, from its intersection with the northern
boundary line of the City limits, southwardly to its intersection with the
north line of Manchester Road.
Harrison Avenue, south side, from Patton Avenue to Brentwood Boulevard.
[Ord. No. 4625 §1, 4-6-2015]
High School Drive, both sides, from its intersection with Manchester Road
northwardly a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet.
High School Drive, either side of east or west fork, from the north side of
Manchester Road northwardly along each of the forks for a distance of two
hundred seventy-five (275) feet.
High School Drive, the east side, between the south line of Eager Road and
the north line of Lawn Avenue.
Table III-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table III-A
AO:433
High School Drive, the east side, from a point one hundred fifty (150) feet
north of the north side of Manchester Road to a point one hundred fifty
(150) feet north of the north side of Madge Avenue.
High School Drive, the east side of the street between Moritz and Pine.
High School Drive, the west side, between its intersections with the south
line of White Avenue and the north line of Stratford Lane.
High School Drive, the west side of the street between Moritz and Pine.
High School Drive, west side, between the south line of Eager Road and the
north line of Lawn Avenue.
Hilldale Avenue, the east side, for a distance of one hundred (100) feet,
south from its intersection with Pendleton Avenue and one hundred (100)
feet north from its intersection with Russell Avenue.
Hilldale Avenue, the west side, from 2901 Hilldale Avenue to its intersection
with Russell Avenue.
Hilldale Avenue, the west side, a distance of two hundred fifty (250) feet
north from the north line of Russell Avenue.
Kenilworth Avenue, the east side, from its intersection with the south line of
Lot 28 of Forest Park Manor subdivision, northwardly a distance of eight (8)
feet.
Kenilworth Drive, the east side, from its intersection with Eager Road
southwardly a distance of eighty (80) feet.
Lawn Avenue, west, the north side, from its intersection with the west line
of Brentwood Boulevard westwardly for a distance of fifty (50) feet.
Litzsinger Road, either side, or on the shoulders thereof, beginning at a
point on either side five hundred sixty-seven and five-tenths (567.5) feet
from its intersection with the west line of Hanley Road westwardly to the
east side of the bridge across Black Creek.
Litzsinger Road, either side or the shoulders thereof, from its intersection
with the west line of Hanley Road westerly a distance of five hundred sixtyseven
and five-tenths (567.5) feet in any manner other than parallel to
Litzsinger Road.
Litzsinger Road, north side, approximately seventy-nine (79) feet west of
Hanley Road.
Litzsinger Road, the north side, eastwardly a distance of thirty (30) feet
from its intersection with St. Clair Avenue.
Litzsinger Road, the north side, westwardly from the centerline of
Brentwood Boulevard a distance of three hundred (300) feet.
Table III-A BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table III-A
AO:434
Litzsinger Road, the south side, between the east side of driveway of
property of 2428 Brentwood Boulevard and Litzsinger Road for a distance of
one hundred fifty (150) feet eastwardly on Litzsinger Road and southwardly
on Kentland Drive.
Louis Avenue, on the east side of the extreme north dead end, fifty (50) feet
southwardly.
Louis Avenue, on the west side of the extreme north dead end, fifty (50) feet
southwardly.
Louis Avenue, the east side, from the north properly line known and
numbered as 2468 Louis Avenue northwardly to the northern terminus of
Louis Avenue.
Louis Avenue, the east side, one hundred fifty (150) feet north of
Manchester Road.
Louis Avenue, the west side, one hundred fifty (150) feet north of
Manchester Road.
Madge Avenue, the north side, between its intersections with the west line
of Brentwood Boulevard, and the east line of Annalee Avenue from 7:00 P.M.
to 12:00 Midnight.
Magdalen Avenue, the north side, from its intersection with the east line of
Brentwood Boulevard eastwardly for a distance of eighty (80) feet.
Manchester Road, the north and south sides within the City.
Mary Avenue, either side, from the north side of Van Mark Drive, a private
roadway, to a certain barricade located on Mary Avenue, a distance of sixty
(60) feet.
Melvin Avenue, the east side, from its intersection with Manchester Road
northwardly to its intersection with Fawn Avenue.
Melvin Avenue, the east side, from the Charles Aulgur property line at the
northern terminus of Melvin Avenue and Oak Tree Park, southwardly for
fifteen (15) feet.
Melvin Avenue, the west side, from its intersection with Manchester Road
northwardly to its intersection with Fawn Avenue.
Mercantile Drive, both sides, from south side of Manchester Road to north
side of Brentwood Industrial Court.
Moritz Avenue, the north side, for a distance of one hundred (100) feet west
from the west side of Brentwood Boulevard.
Moritz Avenue, the south side, from its intersection with High School Drive
eastwardly to its intersection with Brentwood Boulevard.
Table III-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table III-A
AO:435
Moritz Avenue, the south side, from one hundred (100) feet west of its
intersection with the west line of High School Drive, westwardly to its
intersection with the east line of St. Clair Avenue from 8:00 A.M. to 5:00
P.M. on all days of the week on which Brentwood Public Schools are in
session.
New Eager Road, the north and east sides, beginning at the intersection of
New Eager Road with the west line of Brentwood Boulevard westwardly and
northwestwardly along New Eager Road a distance of three hundred (300)
feet.
New Eager Road, the west side, from its intersection with the west line
of Kenilworth Avenue northwestwardly to a point where New Eager Road
intersects Old Eager Road.
North Swan Circle, the north side, from the east line of High School Drive
to a point thirty (30) feet of the east line.
North Swan Circle, the north side, from the west line of High School Drive
to a point thirty (30) feet west of the west line.
North Swan Circle, the south side, from the east line of High School Drive
to a point thirty (30) feet east of the east line.
North Swan Circle, the south side, from the west line of High School Drive
to a point thirty (30) feet west of the west line.
Patton Avenue, the west side.
Pendleton Avenue, the north side, from its intersection with the west line of
Brentwood Boulevard westwardly for a distance of eighty-five (85) feet.
Pendleton Avenue, the north side, from the alley eastwardly to Brazeau.
Pendleton Avenue, the south side, at its intersection with the west line of
Brentwood Boulevard westwardly for a distance of one hundred (100) feet.
Pine Avenue, both sides, for a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet
westerly from its intersection with Brentwood Boulevard.
Pine Avenue, the north side, from its intersection with the west line of
Brentwood Boulevard westwardly to its intersection with the east line of
High School Drive from 8:30 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. each day of the week except
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
Pine Avenue, the north side, from the east line of Brentwood Boulevard
eastward to its intersection with Woodsey Drive.
Pine Avenue, the south side, from the east line of Brentwood Boulevard,
eastwardly for ninety (90) feet.
Powell, the south side, forty (40) feet west of the intersection with the west
line of Brentwood Boulevard.
Table III-A BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table III-A
AO:436
Rosalie Avenue, the north side, for a distance of nine hundred eight (908)
feet east of the east line of Brentwood Boulevard.
Rose Avenue, either side, from the east side of Brentwood Boulevard,
eastwardly for a distance of one hundred ninety-five (195) feet.
Rose Avenue, the north side, from its intersection with the east line of
Brentwood Boulevard eastwardly to the bridge which crosses Black Creek.
Russell Avenue, either side, from the west line of Brentwood Boulevard to
a point on either side of such street fifty (50) feet west of the west line of
Brentwood Boulevard.
Russell Avenue, the north side, along its entire course.
Russell Avenue, the south side of the centerline for a distance of one
hundred fifty (150) feet, west of Brentwood Boulevard.
Ruth Avenue, the east side, from its intersection with the north line of
Manchester Road northwardly to its intersection with the south line of
Florence Avenue.
St. Clair Avenue, the east side, northwardly a distance of one hundred (100)
feet from its intersection with Litzsinger Road.
Salem Drive, either side for a distance of fifty (50) feet from the north side
of Manchester Road.
South Swan Circle, east of High School Drive.
South Swan Circle, the south side, at its intersection with the west line of
High School Drive westwardly for a distance of one thousand sixty (1,060)
feet.
Stratford Lane, where designated by yellow striping.
Strassner Drive, the north side of those portions which run in an easterly
and westerly direction.
Swim Club Lane (also known as South Central Ave.), east side, seven
hundred seventy-two (772) feet north from Rosalie Avenue. [Ord. No. 4779
§ 1, 6-5-2017]
Swim Club Lane (also known as South Central Ave.), west side, one hundred
three (103) feet north from Rosalie Avenue. [Ord. No. 4779 § 1, 6-5-2017]
West Lawn Avenue, the south side, westwardly from its intersection with
Brentwood Boulevard to its intersection with High School Drive.
West Swan Circle, the north side, for a distance of fifty (50) feet west from
the west side of High School Drive.
West Swan Circle, the westerly side, from its intersection with the north line
of Canary Cove to its intersection with the south line of Wrenwood Lane.
Table III-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table III-A
AO:437
White Avenue, both sides, from its intersection with Brentwood Boulevard
westwardly a distance of two hundred twenty-nine (229) feet.
White Avenue, the south side of the street from Patton Avenue to High
School Drive.
Wrenwood Lane, the north side, for a distance of forty-five (45) feet east
from a designated crosswalk located on Wrenwood Lane between High
School Drive and the 1600 block of Oriole.
Schedule IV
PARKING RESTRICTED AT CERTAIN TIMES
In accordance with Section 355.010 of this Title, parking shall, on certain
roads or streets or parts thereof, be prohibited or restricted as described in
this Schedule:
Table IV-A. No Parking Between 8:00 A.M. And 5:00 P.M. Except
Saturdays, Sundays And Holidays. [R.O. 2009 §14-1016; Code 1969
§22-70; Ord. No. 2952 §1, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 3279 §1, 5-17-1993]
No parking shall be permitted between 8:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M., except
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays at the following location:
Harrison Avenue, north side, from Brentwood Boulevard west to High
School Drive.
Table IV-B. No Parking Between 4:00 P.M. And 6:00 P.M. Except
Saturdays, Sundays And Legal Holidays. [R.O. 2009 §14-1017; Code
1969 §22-71; Ord. No. 2952 §1, 10-3-1988]
No parking shall be permitted between 4:00 P.M. and 6:00 P.M., except on
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays in the following location:
(Reserved)
Table IV-C. No Parking Between 7:00 P.M. And 10:00 P.M. Every Day
Except Sunday. [R.O. 2009 §14-1018; Code 1969 §22-72]
No vehicle shall be parked between the hours of 7:00 P.M. and 10:00 P.M.
on all days except Sunday in the following location:
Madge Avenue, the north side, from its intersection with the east line
of Annalee Avenue eastwardly to its intersection with the west line of
Brentwood Boulevard.
Table IV-D. No Parking Sundays From 8:00 A.M. To 12:00 P.M. [R.O.
2009 §14-1019; Code 1969 §22-69]
The following are the streets on which parking, standing or stopping is
prohibited from 8:00 A.M. to 12:30 P.M. on Sundays:
Table III-A BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table IV-D
AO:438
Madge Avenue, the north side, from its intersection with Brentwood
Boulevard westwardly to its intersection with Annalee Avenue.
Magdalen Avenue, both sides, and the shoulders thereof, from its
intersection with Brentwood Boulevard a distance of five hundred seventy
(570) feet eastwardly on each side of Magdalen Avenue.
Powell Avenue, the north side, from its intersection with Brentwood
Boulevard westwardly to its intersection with Annalee Avenue.
Table IV-E. No Parking Between 7:00 A.M. And 9:00 A.M. [R.O. 2009
§14-1020; Code 1969 §22-73; Ord. No. 2952 §1, 10-3-1988]
No vehicle shall be parked between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 9:00 A.M. in
the following locations:
(Reserved)
Table IV-F. No Parking Between 8:00 A.M. And 4:00 P.M., Except
Saturday And Sunday. [R.O. 2009 §14-1021; Code 1969 §22-74; Ord.
No. 2938 §1, 6-20-1988]
No parking shall be permitted between 8:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M., except
Saturday and Sunday, at the following locations:
Evans Avenue, the north side, two hundred fifty (250) feet east of the
driveway of the White Building.
Litzsinger Road, the north side, beginning at a point four hundred thirtyeight
(438) feet east of its intersection with Dorothy Avenue, eastwardly a
distance of one hundred (100) feet.
Litzsinger Road, the south side, from its intersection with Dorothy Avenue
eastwardly to its intersection with Helen Avenue.
Table IV-G. No Parking Between 8:00 A.M. And 4:00 P.M., Except
Saturday, Sunday And Holidays. [R.O. 2009 §14-1021.1; Ord. No.
2876 §1, 7-20-1987]
No parking shall be permitted between 8:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M., except
Saturday, Sunday and holidays, at the following location:
Rankin Avenue, the north side.
Table IV-H. No Parking Between 9:00 A.M. And 5:00 P.M. Except
Saturday And Sunday. [R.O. 2009 §14-1022; Code 1969 §22-75]
No parking shall be permitted between 9:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M., except
Saturdays and Sundays, at the following location:
Bobolink Place, the east side.
Table IV-D ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table IV-I
AO:439
Table IV-I. No Court Parking Allowed. [R.O. 2009 §14-1022.1; Ord.
No. 3946 §1, 7-19-2004]
No court parking allowed on the nights Brentwood Municipal Court is in
session in the following location:
City Hall, four (4) spaces east parking lot.
Table IV-J. 15 Minute Parking Limits. [R.O. 2009 §14-1023; Code
1969 §22-76; Ord. No. 2952 §1, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 3173 §2,
10-21-1991; Ord. No. 3240 §1, 9-21-1992]
No parking shall be permitted for a period greater than fifteen (15) minutes,
except Sundays at the following location:
(Reserved)
Table IV-K. One-Hour Parking Limit. [R.O. 2009 §14-1024; Code
1969 §22-77; Ord. No. 2952 §1, 10-3-1988]
It shall be unlawful for any operator to stand, park or stop any vehicle on or
along the following described places within the City for a longer period of
time than one (1) hour:
Annalee Avenue, west side, beginning at its intersection with the south line
of Powell Avenue southwardly at a distance of ninety-three (93) feet.
Manchester Road, either side or shoulder, from its intersection with
Brentwood Boulevard westwardly to the western boundary of the City, at
any place where parking is now permitted.
Manchester Road, the north side, from the west line of the property now or
formerly owned by one John Bender and wife, westwardly one hundred fifty
(150) feet.
Manchester Road, the south side, where the same intersects with the
east line of Collier Avenue, for a distance east along the south side of
Manchester Road of two hundred fifty (250) feet.
Stratford Lane, both sides of the north-south portion, from its intersection
with High School Drive to its intersection with the east-west portion of
Stratford Lane, between 8:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M. Monday through Friday.
Table IV-L. One-Hour Parking Limit From 8:00 A.M. To 6:00 P.M.,
Except Saturdays, Sundays And Holidays. [R.O. 2009 §14-1025; Code
1969 §22-78; Ord. No. 2806 §1, 5-19-1986]
No parking shall be permitted for a period greater than one (1) hour
between 8:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays,
at the following location:
White Avenue, the south side, from High School Drive westwardly to St.
Clair Avenue.
Table IV-I BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table IV-M
AO:440
Table IV-M. Two-Hour Parking Limit. [R.O. 2009 §14-1026; Code
1969 §22-79; Ord. No. 2952 §1, 10-3-1988]
No parking shall be permitted for a longer period than two (2) hours, except
as otherwise provided in this Article, at the following location:
(Reserved)
Table IV-N. Two-Hour Parking Limit Between 8:00 A.M. And 6:00
P.M. Except Saturdays And Sundays. [R.O. 2009 §14-1027; Code
1969 §22-81; Ord. No. 3004 §1, 4-3-1989; Ord. No. 3100 §1,
11-19-1990]
(Reserved)
Table IV-O. Parking Commercial Vehicles On Certain Streets
Prohibited. [R.O. 2009 §14-1028; Code 1969 §22-64; Ord. No. 2952
§1, 10-3-1988]
It shall be unlawful to park any commercial vehicle, except for pickup or
delivery, on the following street:
Wrenwood Lane from Brentwood Boulevard to Swallow.
Table IV-P. No Parking On Weekdays From 8:00 A.M. Until 5:00 P.M.
Except By Resident Permit. [R.O. 2009 §14-1037; Ord. No. 3509 §1,
11-18-1996; Ord. No. 3530 §1, 3-3-1997; Ord. No. 3608 §1,
8-17-1998; Ord. No. 3613 §1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 3705 §1,
7-17-2000; Ord. No. 3830 §1, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 4004 §1,
2-6-2006]
Pursuant to Chapter 365, Section 365.010 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances of the City of Brentwood, the following streets or parts of
streets are designated as zones where parking is prohibited on weekdays
from 8:00 A.M. until 5:00 P.M. except by resident permit:
Eulalie from Rosalie to 8506 Eulalie.
High School Drive, on the east side from White to Moritz.
Mary Kay Court from Eulalie to 2408 Mary Kay Court.
Moritz from 8916 Moritz to St. Clair.
Rosalie from Litzsinger to 8418 Rosalie.
St. Clair, on the west side, from Pine to 2237 St. Clair.
White Avenue, on the south side, from High School Drive to St. Clair.
Only owners and lessees of residences directly adjacent to the restricted
parking zones above are eligible to receive permits for themselves and their
visitors.
Table IV-M ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table IV-P
AO:441
Fines shall be imposed for violations of this Section in accordance with
Chapter 100, Section 100.080 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City
of Brentwood.
Table IV-Q. No Parking Except By Permit. [R.O. 2009 §14-1038; Ord.
No. 3510 §1, 11-18-1996; Ord. No. 3704 §1, 6-19-2000; Ord. No.
3714 §1, 8-21-2000; Ord. No. 3715 §1, 8-21-2000; Ord. No. 3854 §1,
12-16-2002; Ord. No. 3965 §1, 2-7-2005; Ord. No. 3967 §1, 3-7-2005;
Ord. No. 4004 §2, 2-6-2006; Ord. No. 4091 §1, 11-5-2007]
Pursuant to Chapter 365, Section 365.010 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances of the City of Brentwood, the following streets or parts of
streets are designated as zones where parking is prohibited except by
resident permit:
Brentwood Place, the north side of the block from 8783 through 8777,
Monday through Sunday. [Ord. No. 4694 §1, 1-19-2016; Ord. No. 4696
§§1 — 2, 2-1-2016]
Bridgeport [Repealed Ord. No. 4735 § 1, 9-19-2016]
Bridgeport, the north side from Brentwood Boulevard to 8767 Bridgeport,
and the south side from Brentwood Boulevard to 8766 Bridgeport, Thursday
through Sunday, 4:00 P.M. until 6:00 A.M.
Genevieve, the south side of, Monday through Friday, 7:00 A.M. until 4:00
P.M.
Lawn, the north and south sides of, from Brentwood Boulevard to High
School, Monday through Saturday, 9:00 A.M. until 1:00 A.M. and Sunday,
12:00 Noon until 11:00 P.M.
Moritz, the north and south sides of the 8800 block of, Thursday through
Sunday, 4:00 P.M. until 6:00 A.M.
Only owners and lessees of residences directly adjacent to the restricted
parking zones above are eligible to receive permits for themselves and their
visitors. To the extent that a restricted parking zone is limited to one (1) side
of the street, only residents on that same side of the street shall be eligible
to receive permits for themselves and their visitors.
Fines shall be imposed for violations of this Section in accordance with
Chapter 100, Section 100.080 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City
of Brentwood.
Table IV-R. Parking During Certain Hours Prohibited. [R.O. 2009
§14-1039; Ord. No. 3696 §1, 5-15-2000]
Parking during hours specified shall be prohibited at the location specified:
On the east side of Bremerton Road between Manchester Road and Madge
Avenue on Tuesdays between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 12:00 P.M.
Table IV-P BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table IV-R
AO:442
Schedule V
FIRE LANES AND EMERGENCY VEHICLE LANES
In accordance with Section 360.010 of this Title, parking shall, on certain
roads or streets or parts thereof, be prohibited or restricted at the Fire
Lanes or Emergency Vehicle Lanes as described in this Schedule:
Table V-A. Fire Lanes. [R.O. 2009 §14-1002; Code 1969 §22-10; Ord.
No. 2747 §1, 8-5-1985; Ord. No. 2851 §1, 1-19-1987; Ord. No. 2875
§1, 7-6-1987; Ord. No. 3060 §2, 4-2-1990; Ord. No. 3126 §1,
3-18-1991; Ord. No. 3137 §1, 5-6-1991; Ord. No. 3526 §1, 2-3-1997;
Ord. No. 3531 §1, 3-7-1997; Ord. No. 3627 §1, 2-1-1999; Ord. No.
3790 §§1 — 2, 9-17-2001; Ord. No. 3797 §§1 — 2, 11-5-2001; Ord.
No. 3894 §1, 7-21-2003; Ord. No. 3909 §2, 10-20-2003; Ord. No.
4105 §1, 1-7-2008]
The following are fire lanes:
Agnes Avenue, south side, from Brentwood Boulevard one hundred (100)
feet east to the loading dock for the Centre 40 building.
Bluebird Terrace, east side, between 1430 and 1434 Bluebird Terrace,
sixteen (16) feet north side of the barrier.
Bluebird Terrace, west side, between 1433 and 1441 Bluebird Terrace,
sixteen (16) feet south side of barrier.
Bompart Plaza, extending east to west one hundred seventy (170) feet the
entire length of the complex and the width indicated by signs or markings
at such location, entrances and exits off M-100.
Brentshire Walk, south side of parking lot five hundred ten (510) feet east
to west and nineteen (19) feet wide.
Brentwood Boulevard:
Building numbers 2534 through 2584, both front entrances, north and
south, twenty-five (25) feet in width for each entrance.
The west center drive in front of the building between parking areas;
twenty-two (22) feet in width east to west and three hundred sixty-six
(366) feet in length north to south.
The full length of the north and south driveways that lead to the (east)
rear of the building twenty-three (23) feet wide both driveways.
The rear east driveway fifteen (15) feet in width, east to west, and
three hundred sixty-seven (367) feet in length, north to south.
2510, Kimberly Building, front entrance and exits, extending north to
south two hundred ten (210) feet, the entire length of the building and
fifteen (15) feet wide.
From the west entrance east one hundred seventy-eight (178) feet;
then north one hundred five (105) feet to Manchester Road entrance.
The driveway fire lane is twenty-five (25) feet in width.
Table IV-R ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table V-A
AO:443
Bi-State property located at 3000 Brentwood Boulevard. The fire lane
will begin at the south entrance to the property and continue east,
then north, and then west to the north exit of the Bi-State property
onto Brentwood Boulevard. The entire perimeter of the structure and
of the parking lot will be included. All of the above mentioned driveway
is to be designated a fire lane.
The entire perimeter of the buildings numbered 1507 through 1811
Brentwood Boulevard, said area not including any loading dock areas
along the western rear driveway, as well as the driveway along the
western frontage of the building numbered 1901 Brentwood
Boulevard.
Brentwood Community Center, from the sidewalk curb in front of the
Brentwood Community Center extending south to north two hundred
seventy-four (274) feet and twenty-four (24) feet in width; south
entrance east to west one hundred ninety (190) feet and twenty-five
(25) feet wide; north entrance east to west two hundred fifty-eight
(258) feet and twenty-five (25) feet wide. All vehicles must be parked
in compliance with the painted individual spaces on the Community
Center parking area.
Brentwood High School service road, from the north end south fortyone
(41) feet in width; to include the entire length and width of the
service road which is two hundred six (206) feet long and forty-one
(41) feet wide.
Brentwood Industrial Drive, on the south side, prohibiting parking from
8100 east to 8274 west.
Cecelia Avenue, from the north end of Dayton's driveway, 2438 Cecelia,
fifty-nine (59) feet in length, south to north to the street sign marked
Litzsinger and Cecelia. This portion of the fire lane will be twenty-three
(23) feet in width east to west. The designated fire lane would also include
a portion of Litzsinger. This would include an area one hundred fiftyeight
(158) feet in length from the intersection of Litzsinger and Cecelia
traveling east to west. This portion would be nineteen (19) feet six (6)
inches in width north to south. The above applies to both sides of the abovediscussed
street.
Eager Road:
The north and south elevations of 8404 Eager Road and the entire
perimeter of the buildings numbered 8420 through 8482 Eager Road,
said area not including any loading dock areas along said buildings.
8310, the entire length of the drive on the east side of the building
extending four hundred (400) feet north to south and fourteen (14)
feet wide.
Hanley Industrial Court, 810, the south drive of the building east to west
seventy-four (74) feet and twenty-four (24) feet wide.
Table V-A BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table V-A
AO:444
Hanley Road — Home Depot Building. The southernmost one hundred
eighty-five (185) feet of the building frontage on the east side of the
building, said area not to include the front of the garden storage area of the
premises; and the southernmost one hundred fifty (150) feet of the most
western portion of the building, said area not including the loading dock
area.
South Hanley, the main entrance on the east side of the building north to
south twenty (20) feet and twenty (20) feet wide.
South Hanley, 1401, the entire length of building on the south side east to
west one hundred eleven (111) feet and twenty-three (23) feet wide. The
entire length of the building on the west side two hundred thirty-four (234)
feet north to south twenty-three (23) feet wide.
Hathaway Avenue, on the west side, from Agnes Avenue to the south line
of Eager Road.
Helen Avenue, on the west side, from Rosalie Avenue to White Avenue.
Madge Avenue, on the north side, from the west line of Brentwood
Boulevard to the east line of High School Drive.
Magdalen Avenue, two hundred forty (240) feet to the east line of
Brentwood Boulevard.
Mary Avenue, south side from 2761 Mary Avenue through 2767 Mary
Avenue, eighteen (18) feet wide by one hundred fifty-two (152) feet long.
Runs east to west.
McGrath School driveway, on the north side of the ingress lane and the
north side of the egress lane. The drive extends eastwardly from the east
curb line of St. Clair Avenue for a distance of approximately one hundred
fifty (150) feet and the driveway then extends westwardly for a distance of
approximately one hundred fifty (150) feet to the east curb line of St. Clair
Avenue.
East Pine Avenue, on the north side, from the east line of Brentwood
Boulevard eastward to its intersection with Woodsey Drive.
Rock Hill Baptist Church, the drive on the north side of the entire length
of the building east to west two hundred twelve (212) feet in length and
nineteen (19) feet wide. The drive on the south side of the entire length
of the building east to west two hundred forty-two (242) feet and nineteen
(19) feet wide.
St. Mary Magdalen:
First (1st) drive north to south three hundred (300) feet and ten (10)
feet wide.
Second (2nd) drive north to south one hundred sixty-two (162) feet and
twenty (20) feet wide.
Third (3rd) drive north to south two hundred sixty-eight (268) feet and
seventeen (17) feet wide.
Salem Drive, on the west side, from Manchester to Marblehead Drive.
Table V-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table V-A
AO:445
Schnucks Market, the entire north side and driveway entrance off M-100
extending east to west two hundred thirty-six (236) feet the entire length
of the building and fifteen (15) feet wide and the east side of the building
north to south two hundred thirty-three (233) feet and twenty-two (22) feet
wide.
South Hanley Road, 1819, south and west sides of the building.
Strassner Drive:
1200, east of Hanley Road on both sides of the street.
1201 through 1209, northeast side of the street.
1210, north and south sides of the building.
1221, east side of the street.
1231, north and south sides of the street all the way to 1235 Strassner
Drive (North Parking Garage).
1230 through 1250, north, west and south sides of the building.
1241, west side of the street directly across from 1209 Strassner
Drive, excluding designated parking spaces.
1241 and 1251, north side of the street to the 1300 block of Strassner
Drive.
1260, east and west sides of the building.
1270, east side of the building to parking garage, north side of the
building to the 1300 block of Strassner Drive, except designated
parking spaces.
Stratford Lane, on the north side, from High School Drive west to the
north-south segment of Stratford Lane.
Stratford Lane, on the west side of the north-south segment, from White
Avenue southwardly to the east-west segment of Stratford Lane.
U.S. Post Office, the front driveway east to west forty-one (41) feet and
fifteen (15) feet wide; south driveway east to west one hundred seventy
(170) feet and twenty-three (23) feet wide.
Urban Drive, from a point on the east side eighty-five (85) feet north of
north curb of Memorial Drive to a point thirty-five (35) feet south of the
south curb at Parker Lane.
Van Mark Way Apartments, all drive-through lanes not designated parking
spaces.
The Villas at Brentwood, on the west frontage, the east side of the entire
block of Brentwood Boulevard for a distance of two hundred fifty (250) feet
south of Evans Avenue and the driveways leading to the west parking lot;
on the north, the south side of Evans Avenue except that portion painted
and designated as a loading and unloading zone for vehicles moving
persons in or out of the apartment buildings; and, on the east frontage,
both sides of the driveway connecting the parking garage with Rose
Avenue.
Table V-A BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table V-A
AO:446
White Building, on the west frontage, the east side of the entire block of
Brentwood Boulevard from Evans Avenue to Rose Avenue; on the north
frontage, the south side of that portion of Rose Avenue which extends
from Brentwood Boulevard to the alley abutting the parking structure
of the building; on the east frontage, both sides of the aforementioned
alley between Rose Avenue and Evans Avenue; and on the south frontage,
the north side of that portion of Evans Avenue which extends from the
aforementioned alley in a westerly direction to Brentwood Boulevard.
Table V-B. Emergency Lanes. [R.O. 2009 §14-1002.1; Ord. No. 3060
§2, 4-2-1990; Ord. No. 3061 §1, 4-2-1990; Ord. No. 3095 §1,
10-15-1990]
The following are emergency vehicle lanes:
South Brentwood, 2321 to 2337, from north to south along the front of the
building.
Walgreens parking lot, both sides of the driveway entrance off of
Brentwood Boulevard from the westernmost boundary line of Brentwood
Boulevard to the rear of the building.
Walgreens parking lot, the front of the building from the west curb
(twenty-three (23) feet) to the east boundary line of the driveway that
runs north to south in front of the main entrances to the building.
Walgreens parking lot, from the south boundary of Litzsinger Road then
south (two hundred thirty-eight (238) feet) to the curb at the south end of
the driveway.
Schedule VI
ONE-WAY STREETS
Table VI-A. One-Way Streets. [R.O. 2009 §14-1003; Code 1969
§§22-14 — 22-15; Ord. No. 2816 §1, 6-2-1986; Ord. No. 2822 §1,
7-21-1986; Ord. No. 2827 §1, 8-18-1986; Ord. No. 2937 §1,
6-20-1988; Ord. No. 3193 §1, 2-3-1992]
In accordance with Chapter 330 of this Title, vehicular traffic within the
limits of the roads, streets or alleys herein described shall move only in the
indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected
and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
The following streets within the City are hereby designated as and declared
to be one-way streets:
Alley running north and south and beginning at its intersection with the
north side of Eulalie Avenue at a point approximately one hundred fifty
(150) feet east of Brentwood Boulevard and running along City Hall building
Table V-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table VI-A
AO:447
northwardly to Rosalie Avenue, the same to be used for southbound traffic
only.
Hanley Road, that portion of which is divided lying within the City limits
between its intersection with Hanley Industrial Court northwardly to a point
approximately one hundred sixty-five (165) feet south of its intersection
with Alabama Avenue, and the same shall be used for southbound traffic
exclusively.
High School Drive, the east fork, from the point where the same intersects
with the north line of Manchester Road to the point where such east fork
meets the west fork of High School Drive, and the same shall be used for
northbound traffic exclusively.
High School Drive, the west fork, from the point where the same intersects
with the north line of Manchester Road to the point where the west fork
meets the east fork of High School Drive, and the same shall be used for
southbound traffic exclusively.
Parkside Drive, that portion lying to the north and east of the parkway
island situated in Parkside Drive, and the same shall be used for northbound
and westbound traffic exclusively; that portion of Parkside Drive situated
to the southwest of the parkway island, situated in Parkside Drive and the
same shall be used for eastbound, southeastbound and southbound traffic
exclusively.
Urban Drive, the west fork, from the point where the same intersects
with the north line of Pine Avenue to the point where the same west fork
meets with the east fork of Urban Drive, and the same shall be used for
southbound traffic exclusively.
Urban Drive, the east fork, from the point where the same intersects with
the north line of Pine Avenue to the point where the east fork meets with
the west fork of Urban Drive, and the same shall be used for northbound
traffic exclusively.
Schedule VII
TURN RESTRICTIONS
In accordance with Chapter 325 of this Title, vehicular traffic shall, at
certain intersections or locations, be prohibited from making a right turn,
left turn, or U turn, or from proceeding straight ahead, as specified in this
Schedule, provided that proper signs have been posted.
Table VII-A. Right Turns On Red Prohibited. [R.O. 2009 §14-1034;
Code 1969 §22-96(3)(d); Ord. No. 2749 §1, 10-21-1985; Ord. No.
2763 §1, 12-2-1985; Ord. No. 3186 §1, 2-3-1992; Ord. No. 3420 §1,
7-17-1995]
Right turns on red are prohibited on the following:
Table VI-A BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table VII-A
AO:448
Eulalie Avenue, westbound, onto Brentwood Boulevard.
Hanley Road, southbound, onto Eager Road.
Highway 40, eastbound off-ramp, onto Eager Road.
Highway 40, eastbound off-ramp, onto Hanley Road.
Litzsinger Road, eastbound, onto Hanley Road.
White Avenue, eastbound, onto Brentwood Boulevard.
Table VII-B. McKnight Road. [R.O. 2009 §14-1034.1; Ord. No. 3761
§1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 3776 §1, 6-18-2001; Ord. No. 3777 §1,
6-18-2001]
Table VII-C. Left Turns Prohibited. [R.O. 2009 §14-1035; Ord. No.
2779 §1, 2-17-1986; Ord. No. 2863 §1, 3-16-1987; Ord. No. 3177 §1,
11-4-1991; Ord. No. 3194 §1, 2-3-1992; Ord. No. 3632 §1, 3-1-1999;
Ord. No. 3741 §1, 12-18-2000]
Left turns are prohibited on the following:
Onto Brentwood Boulevard from the Brentwood Post Office property, which
is approximately three hundred eighty-five (385) feet north of Madge
Avenue between the hours of 4:00 P.M. and 6:00 P.M.
Onto Brentwood Boulevard from TGI Friday's, 2435 South Brentwood
Boulevard and Walgreens Drug Store, 2401 South Brentwood Boulevard.
Onto Collier Avenue from the Schnucks Market back loading dock area exit
on the southwest end of Schnucks property.
Onto Collier Avenue, by commercial vehicles, from the Schnucks parking lot
exit two hundred seventy-five (275) feet south from Manchester on Collier
Avenue.
A. Right turns prohibited from 7:00 A.M. to 9:00 A.M., Monday through
Friday, onto the following:
Cricket Lane.
Pine Avenue.
Sonora Avenue.
White Avenue.
B. The residents of the following addresses shall be exempted:
9432 and 9433 Pine.
9425 and 9429 Sonora.
9425 and 9426 White.
Table VII-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table VII-C
AO:449
Onto northbound Hanley Road from the driveway of 1595 South Hanley
Road.
Onto Manchester Road from the Schnucks parking lot exit at Manchester
Road.
Into Tilles Park from northbound McKnight Road from 7:00 A.M. to 9:00
A.M. Monday through Friday.
Table VII-D. Left Turns Prohibited From 7:00 A.M. To 9:00 A.M.
Monday Through Friday. [R.O. 2009 §14-1035.1; Ord. No. 3183 §1,
12-16-1991; Ord. No. 4278 §1, 4-4-2011]
Left turns are prohibited from 7:00 A.M. to 9:00 A.M., Monday through
Friday, on the following:
(Reserved)
Table VII-E. Left Turns Prohibited From 4:00 P.M. To 6:00 P.M.
Monday Through Friday. [R.O. 2009 §14-1035.2; Ord. No. 3183 §2,
12-16-1991; Ord. No. 4278 §2, 4-4-2011; Ord. No. 4354 §§1, 3,
5-21-2012]
Left turns are prohibited from 4:00 P.M. to 6:00 P.M., Monday through
Friday, on the following:
There shall be no left turn out to Eager Road from the Drury Inn and Suites
site.
Any person in violation of this Schedule shall be subject to a fine of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per occurrence, plus court costs.
Schedule VIII
CONGESTED DISTRICTS
Table VIII-A. Congested Districts. [R.O. 2009 §14-1005; Code 1969
§§22-22, 22-55; Ord. No. 2951 §1, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 3203 §2,
5-4-1992]
The following streets are hereby designated as congested districts within
the meaning of this Chapter:
Brentwood Boulevard.
Eager Road, at the east and west end of the median at I-170.
Hanley Road.
Manchester Road.
Schedule IX
Table VII-C BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table VIII-A
AO:450
BRIDGES
Table IX-A. Bridges. [R.O. 2009 § 14-1006; Code 1969 § 22-43]
The following bridges are closed to truck traffic:
A certain bridge located on what is shown on the City plats as the extension
of Central Avenue and the now abandoned St. Louis Public Service
Company right-of-way which bridge is approximately three hundred
seventy-five (375) feet north of the intersection of Rosalie Avenue and
Central Avenue.
Schedule X
YIELD STREETS
Table X-A. Yield Streets. [R.O. 2009 §14-1029; Code 1969 §22-84]
In accordance with Section 335.030 of this Title and when signs are erected
giving notice thereof, traffic at the intersections listed in this Schedule shall
be required to yield the right-of-way as specified in this Schedule.
The operator of any vehicle shall yield right-of-way as described in the
following:
Northbound traffic on Helen Avenue, at its intersection with Litzsinger Road
must yield to oncoming traffic.
Schedule XI
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES, MOTORBUSES AND SCHOOL
BUSES PROHIBITED
Table XI-A. Commercial Vehicles And Motorbuses Prohibited. [R.O.
2009 §14-1007; Ord. No. 2662 §1, 11-21-1983; Ord. No. 2762 §1,
12-2-1985; Ord. No. 2863 §1, 3-16-1987; Ord. No. 2951 §1,
10-3-1988; Ord. No. 3268 §1, 3-1-1993; Ord. No. 3531 §2, 3-7-1997]
Commercial vehicles and motorbuses are prohibited from operating on the
following streets except where necessary for the picking up or delivery of
merchandise or providing service on those streets:
Bremerton.
Collier Avenue.
Collier Avenue, south beyond the point of the farthest south side of
Schnucks parking lot loading dock area.
Eulalie Avenue.
Table VIII-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table XI-A
AO:451
High School Drive.
Kenilworth Drive.
Litzsinger Road, at Brentwood Boulevard, east to Kentland Avenue on
Kentland, south of Florence Avenue and on Florence east to Dorothy
Avenue.
Litzsinger Road, between Brentwood Boulevard and McKnight Road.
McKnight Road, on the east side from Litzsinger Road to U.S. Highway 64
(Highway 40).
Pine Avenue.
Rosalie Avenue.
Russell Avenue.
Urban Avenue, south of Lawn Avenue.
White Avenue.
Table XI-B. School Buses Prohibited. [R.O. 2009 §14-1007.1; Ord.
No. 4012 §1, 3-6-2006]
School buses are prohibited from operating on the following streets, except
for pickup or drop off of students residing within the prohibited area:
Eulalie Avenue from the eastern line of Dorothy Avenue to the western line
of Helen Avenue.
Table XI-C. Trucks, Commercial Vehicles, Etc., Over Twelve
Thousand Pounds Prohibited. [R.O. 2009 §14-1013; Code 1969
§22-43(2); Ord. No. 2818 §1(22-43(A)), 7-7-1986; Ord. No. 2951 §1,
10-3-1988; Ord. No. 3119 §2, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 3909 §§3 — 4,
10-20-2003; Ord. No. 4029 §1, 6-19-2006]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any truck, tractor, trailer,
tractor-trailer combination or commercial vehicle licensed or registered for
or weighing more than twelve thousand (12,000) pounds gross weight at
any time over or upon the following:
Rose Avenue, between Brentwood Boulevard and Black Creek.
Table XI-D. Trucks, Commercial Vehicles, Etc., Over Eighteen
Thousand Pounds Prohibited. [R.O. 2009 §14-1013.1; Ord. No. 2950
§1, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 3119 §3, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 4779 § 2,
6-5-2017]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any truck, tractor, trailer or
tractor-trailer combination or commercial vehicle licensed or registered for
Table XI-A BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table XI-D
AO:452
or weighing more than eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds gross weight at
any time at the locations designated herein.
To provide adequate notice to the public, signs bearing the legend: "No
Commercial Vehicles Over 18,000 lbs." shall be posted at the following
locations:
Bremerton, across from Crawford.
Bremerton, across from Merritt.
Brentwood, north at Deer Creek Bridge.
Eager, westbound at Hanley Industrial Court.
Hanley Industrial, at Hanley.
Litzsinger, across from Frederic.
Litzsinger, across from Pocahontas.
Litzsinger, across from Remington.
Litzsinger, across from Rockford.
Litzsinger, at the Black Creek Bridge.
Litzsinger, east at McKnight (southeast corner).
Manchester, at Hanley.
Manchester, eastbound at Bremerton.
McKnight, at Litzsinger (northeast corner).
Parkside, at McKnight.
Pine, at McKnight.
Sonora, at McKnight.
Swim Club Lane (also known as South Central Ave.) north of Roaslie
Avenue.
Tilles, at McKnight.
White, at McKnight.
Whitehall, at McKnight, or one (1) sign for southbound McKnight.
Table XI-E. Trucks Larger Than Three-Quarter Ton Prohibited. [R.O.
2009 §14-1014; Ord. No. 3119 §4, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 3531 §3,
3-7-1997; Ord. No. 4377 §2, 10-15-2012]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any truck, tractor, trailer,
tractor-trailer combination or commercial vehicle licensed or registered for
Table XI-D ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table XI-E
AO:453
or weighing more than eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds gross weight at
any time at the locations designated herein, except where necessary for
the picking up or delivery of merchandise or for providing services at the
locations:
Bluebird Terrace [Ord. No. 4658 §1, 9-8-2015]
Bobolink Avenue [Ord. No. 4658 §1, 9-8-2015]
East Swan Circle [Ord. No. 4658 §1, 9-8-2015]
High School Drive [Ord. No. 4658 §1, 9-8-2015]
McKnight Road, on the east side from Litzsinger Road to U.S. Highway 40.
North Swan Circle [Ord. No. 4658 §1, 9-8-2015]
Oriole Place [Ord. No. 4658 §1, 9-8-2015]
Peacock Lane [Ord. No. 4658 §1, 9-8-2015]
Swallow Drive [Ord. No. 4658 §1, 9-8-2015]
Thrush Place [Ord. No. 4658 §1, 9-8-2015]
West Swan Circle [Ord. No. 4658 §1, 9-8-2015]
Wrenwood Lane (west of Brentwood Square driveway to Eager Road)
[Ord. No. 4658 §1, 9-8-2015]
Schedule XII
REGULATIONS AROUND SCHOOLS
Table XII-A. School Stops.118 [R.O. 2009 §14-1031; Code 1969
§22-87(a); Ord. No. 2838 §1, 11-3-1986; Ord. No. 2955 §1,
10-3-1988; Ord. No. 4272 §2, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 4314 §2,
11-21-2011]
The following streets are school stops:
(Reserved)
Table XII-B. School Crossings. [R.O. 2009 §14-1032; Code 1969
§22-87(b)]
The following streets are school crossings:
Eager Road at its intersection with private way Bluebird, being two hundred
ninety-five (295) feet, more or less, east of the east line of Thrush.
Table XII-C. "Slow-Children" Street. [R.O. 2009 §14-1033; Code
1969 §22-87(2); Ord. No. 4547 §1, 6-16-2014]
The following streets within the City are "Slow-Children" streets:
118. Editor’s Note — Ord. No. 2955 §1, adopted October 3, 1988, amended §14-1031 by deleting
therefrom the streets designated as school stops.
Table XI-E BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table XII-C
AO:454
Annalee Avenue, 2400 Block from Litzsinger Road to Madge Avenue [Ord.
No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
Brazeau Avenue [Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
Bremerton Road, 2600 Block from Madge Avenue to Manchester Road
[Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
Bridgeport Avenue 8700 Block [Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
Cecelia Avenue [Ord. No. 4624 §1, 4-6-2015]
Dorothy Avenue, 2600 Block [Ord. No. 4624 §1, 4-6-2015]
Douglas Court [Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
Eager Road, 9100 Block from Oriole Place to Wrenwood Lane [Ord. No.
4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
Eulalie Avenue [Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
Florence Avenue, from Dorothy Avenue to Helen Avenue [Ord. No. 4660
§1, 9-24-2015]
Hatton Lane
Helen Avenue, 2600 Block [Ord. No. 4624 §1, 4-6-2015]
Henrietta Avenue, 8500 Block from Helen Avenue to Dorothy Avenue
[Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
High School Drive, 2400 Block from Litzsinger Road to Madge Avenue
[Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
Joseph Avenue [Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
Kempton Lane [Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
Kentland Drive [Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
Lawn Avenue
Lawndell Avenue [Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
Litzsinger Road, 9300 Block [Ord. No. 4624 §1, 4-6-2015]
Louis Avenue [Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
Manderly Avenue [Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
Mary Avenue [Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
Melvin Avenue [Ord. No. 4624 §1, 4-6-2015]
Parkridge Avenue [Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
Pine Avenue [Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
Rosalie Avenue [Ord. No. 4624 §1, 4-6-2015]
Ruth Avenue [Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
St. Clair Avenue [Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
Sonora Avenue [Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
Strassner Drive, from Brentwood Boulevard to Hanley Industrial Court
[Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
Table XII-C ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table XII-C
AO:455
Urban Drive, 1900 Block [Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
White Avenue [Ord. No. 4660 §1, 9-24-2015]
White Avenue, 8600 Block [Ord. No. 4624 §1, 4-6-2015]
White Avenue, 8900 Block from Annalee Avenue to High School Drive
Schedule XIII
BLOCKING DRIVEWAYS PROHIBITED
Table XIII-A. Blocking Driveways Prohibited. [R.O. 2009 §14-1036;
Ord. No. 2918 §1, 3-21-1988]
Blocking of driveways is prohibited at the following intersections:
The Landmark Bank driveway (entrance), on the south side of Hanley
Industrial Court, off of Hanley Road.
Schedule XIV
PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE
Table XIV-A. Passenger Curb Loading Zone. [Ord. No. 4650 §1,
8-17-2015]
In accordance with Municipal Code Chapter 360, Section 360.030, no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time
other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers and/or
materials in the following described places:
Woodsey Drive, east side, from Pine Avenue to Lawn Avenue
Chapter 400
ZONING
Cross References — As to buildings and building regulations, ch. 500; as to
signs, ch. 410; as to subdivisions, ch. 405; as to swimming pools, ch. 510.
State Law Reference — Zoning and planning, ch. 89, RSMo.
Table XII-C BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Table XIV-A
AO:456
ARTICLE I
In General
Section 400.010. Short Title. [R.O. 2009 §25-1; Ord. No. 2739 §43-1,
5-20-1985]
This Chapter and any amendments thereto shall be known, cited and
referred to as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Brentwood".
Section 400.020. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §25-2; Ord. No. 2739
§§43-120.1 — 43-120.2, 43-121, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 2776 §1,
2-17-1986; Ord. No. 3455 §1, 12-4-1995; Ord. No. 3543 §1,
6-16-1997; Ord. No. 3895 §1, 7-21-2003; Ord. No. 3942 §1,
6-21-2004; Ord. No. 4119 §1, 3-17-2008; Ord. No. 4175 §1, 4-6-2009;
Ord. No. 4218 §1, 12-21-2009; Ord. No. 4265 §1, 12-6-2010; Ord. No.
4359 §1, 7-16-2012; Ord. No. 4447 §1, 7-15-2013; Ord. No. 4448 §1,
7-15-2013]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACCESSORY — A building, structure or use which:
ACRE — A unit of land measure, forty-three thousand five hundred sixty
(43,560) square feet. As a square, an acre measures two hundred eight and
seventy-one hundredths (208.71) feet on each side.
AGGRIEVED PARTY — For the purpose of standing to file permitted appeals
from decisions made by the Architectural Review Board, an aggrieved party
is one who is an applicant, owner or occupant of the subject property or
an owner or occupant of property which is adjacent to the subject property
within the City of Brentwood. For this purpose, property which would be
adjacent to the subject property but for an intervening street or alley shall
be deemed to be "adjacent".
ALLEY — A public thoroughfare which affords only secondary means of
access to abutting property.
ALTERATION — A physical change in a structure or in an addition to
a structure. The term "alteration" includes renovation, modification,
rehabilitation and restoration.
1. Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use;
Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or
principal use served;
2.
Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessities of the users or
occupants of the principal building or principal use; and
3.
Is located on the same lot as the principal building or principal use (see
Article V, Division 3 of this Chapter).
4.
Section
400.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.020
AO:457
APARTMENT — A room or suite of rooms within a building, provided with
separate cooking facilities and intended as a single dwelling unit.
APARTMENT DWELLING — A building or portion thereof, designed for
occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of each other,
exclusive of attached single-family dwellings, town houses or patio houses
on individually subdivided lots.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated area on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map with base flood depths from one (1) to three
(3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may
be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the flood plain within a
community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in
any given year.
ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — One (1) of a series of attached
dwellings designed for single-family occupancy and located on individually
subdivided lots of record or on land owned in common.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — A floored and walled substructure of a building at least fifty
percent (50%) below the average finished grade of the building. A basement
is counted as a story for the purpose of height, parking or building bulk
regulations if subdivided by walls or partitions and used for business or
dwelling purposes by other than a janitor employed on the premises.
BUFFER ZONE — An area separating two (2) or more types of land use from
one another, but located on the lot or property occupied by one (1) or both
such abutting uses.
BUILDING — Any structure for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattels or property of any kind. When separated by division walls
without openings, each portion of such building, so separated, shall be
deemed a separate building.
BUILDING BULK — The height, depth, width, density and volume of a
building.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The area of the site which is covered by the
buildings, measured both in square feet and as a percentage of the total
site.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the curb grade
or its equivalent established grade at a point midway between the two (2)
side lot lines to the highest point of the roof in the case of a flat roof, to the
deck line of a mansard roof, and to the mean height level between eaves and
ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof, provided that where buildings are set
back from street line, the height of the building may be measured from the
average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building.
Section
400.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.020
AO:458
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to and equidistant from the street
between which line and the street right-of-way no building or structures
other than normal projections of the usual steps, landings for entry ways,
unenclosed balconies or open porches may be erected as prescribed in this
Chapter.
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued by the Department of Planning and
Development prior to the initiation of construction, certifying that the plans
for the building, structure or site improvements for which the building
permit is requested satisfy all applicable City regulations and ordinances.
CARRY-OUT RESTAURANT — An establishment where food including
frozen desserts and/or beverages are primarily sold in a packaged, readyto-
consume state, intended for immediate consumption by the customer off
the premises.
CELLAR — A story having more than one-half (½) of its height below grade.
A cellar is not included in computing the number of stories for the purpose
of height measurement.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — Official certification that a structure
conforms to all applicable City ordinances and requirements and may be
used or occupied, as proposed and approved (see Article II, Division 10).
CHECK-CASHING BUSINESS — An establishment classified under
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code number 6099, which is
primarily engaged in providing currency and coinage for a fee to individuals
presenting checks drawn from a bank or other source. This shall not include
banks or savings and loan institutions, nor other businesses wherein the
cashing of checks is merely incidental to other primary business activities
being conducted on the premises.
CLINIC — An institution providing diverse health care or medical treatment
for outpatient or ambulatory sick or injured persons, including medical
personnel and ancillary facilities such as laboratories, but not including
inpatient care or operating room for major surgery.
COMMISSION — The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A plan of the future land use and circulation
patterns of an entire City including plans for housing, commercial,
industrial and public facilities. The plan is usually based on a set of goals or
policies adopted by the City and is established as a guide for administrative
and legislative decisions regarding land use and development patterns.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT — A procedure for determining the
appropriateness of a proposed use not authorized as a matter of right by the
regulations of the district in which the use is proposed to be located. The
appropriateness of the use shall be determined based on the requirements
and standard specified in Article II, Division 6 of this Chapter.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
common ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real estate is not
a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are
vested in the unit owners.
Section
400.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.020
AO:459
DEVELOPMENT — See "LAND DEVELOPMENT".
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS — Regulations or standards, including
development standards and use limitations as defined herein, which limit
the size, bulk or siting conditions of discrete types of buildings or land uses
located within any designated use district.
DIFFERENTIAL RUNOFF — The difference in the rate and volume of storm
water runoff from a parcel or project in its undeveloped natural condition
and its developed condition.
DILIGENTLY PURSUE — The act of continuously working until a project is
finished.
DIRECTOR OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT — The Director of
Planning and Development or his/her designee. The Director of Planning
and Development shall serve as the Zoning Administrator.
DISTRICT — A part or parts of the City for which this Chapter establishes
regulations governing the development and use of land therein.
DIVISION FENCE or DIVISION SCREEN — Any partition erected parallel
to and along a property line and setting off the property of one (1) person
from that of another person.
DUPLEX — A building containing two (2) dwelling units separated by a
common or party wall.
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof designed for, or used
exclusively for, residential purposes.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached or semi-detached building
designed for or occupied exclusively by two (2) families living independently
of each other.
DWELLING UNIT — One (1) or more rooms in a building designed for
occupancy by one (1) family for living purposes and having its own
permanently installed cooking and sanitary facilities.
ELEVATOR APARTMENTS — An apartment building of more than three (3)
stories in height with primary access to units above the third (3rd) floor
level typically provided by means of an elevator.
EMERGENCY — A sudden or unexpected happening demanding prompt
action with regard to the health and safety of the general public.
ENCROACHMENT — An unauthorized extension of a structure or portion
thereof upon land owned by a person other than the owner of the structure.
ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A criterion established
to control various environmental factors such as noise, odor, dust, smoke,
toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards and glare and
heat generated by or inherent in the use of land or buildings (see Article V,
Division 6).
ERECT — To build, construct, install, attach, hang, place, inscribe, suspend,
affix, paint or repaint.
Section
400.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.020
AO:460
FAIR MARKET VALUE — For purposes of Article VI of this Chapter, fair
market value shall be determined by an appraisal submitted to the City by
the owner of a non-conforming use or structure, which has been prepared
by a member of the Society of Real Estate Appraisers (SREA) or the
American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers (AIREA). The City reserves
the right to order its own appraisal of the non-conforming use or structure
and if the discrepancy between the two (2) appraisals exceeds ten percent
(10%), then a third (3rd) appraiser agreed to by the City and the owner shall
be selected. If both parties fail to reach agreement, the third (3rd) appraiser
shall be appointed by the Circuit Court for the County and the appraisal
shall determine the fair market value of the non-conformity.
FAMILY — An individual or married couple and the children thereof and no
more than two (2) other persons related directly to the individual or married
couple by blood or marriage, or a group of not more than three (3) persons,
excluding servants, not related by blood or marriage, living together as a
single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
FLOOD, FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland
or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) AND FLOOD INSURANCE
RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community on which the Flood
Insurance Study has delineated the flood hazard boundaries and the zones
establishing insurance rates applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided by the Federal
Insurance Administration entitled "Flood Insurance Study, City of
Brentwood, Missouri, St. Louis County, May 16, 1977". The report contains
flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water
surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD PLAIN — A geographic area susceptible to periodic inundation from
overflow of natural waterways.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
(1) foot.
FLOOR AREA — The gross floor area (GFA) or the sum of the gross
horizontal areas of the several stories of the building, including accessory
buildings, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from
the centerline of party walls and including garages, porches, utility rooms,
stairways, recreation rooms and storage rooms, but excluding the open
areas of multi-story atriums, unenclosed balconies and patios.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — Total floor area of a building on any lot divided by
the area of such lot.
Section
400.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.020
AO:461
GARAGE (PARKING) — Any building or premises of one (1) or more levels
used for parking of motor-driven vehicles of the general public for short
periods of time, generally less than twenty-four (24) hours.
GARAGE (PRIVATE) — A detached accessory building or portion of a
principal building, designed, arranged, used or intended to be used for the
storage of motor vehicles of the occupants of the premises or their clients or
customers without charge to visitors, clients or customers during the period
they are visiting or conducting business with an occupant on the premises.
GARAGE (PUBLIC) — Any building or premises, except those used as a
private or storage garage, used for equipping, repairing, hiring, selling or
storing motor-driven vehicles.
GARAGE (STORAGE) — Any building or premises used only for housing of
motor-driven vehicles, other than trucks and commercial vehicles, pursuant
to previous arrangements and not to transients and at which motor vehicle
fuels and oils are not sold and motor-driven vehicles are not equipped,
repaired, hired or sold.
GARDEN APARTMENT (WALK-UP APARTMENT) — A two- or three-story
apartment building with common access to individual dwelling units by
means of interior or exterior stairs or corridors.
GROSS LEASABLE FLOOR AREA — The total interior floor area of a
building or structure measured at the inside face of the exterior walls
but excluding stairwells, lobbies, common corridors and other non-leasable
circulation areas, elevator shafts and space occupied by mechanical
equipment or space related to the operation and maintenance of the
building as well as that floor surface covered by walls or partitions
enclosing these common areas or elements of a building.
GROUP HOME — Any home in which eight (8) or fewer unrelated mentally
or physically handicapped persons reside, other than a family as such is
defined in this Code, and may include two (2) additional persons acting as
houseparents or guardians who need not be related to each other or to any
of the mentally or physically handicapped residing in the home.[Ord. No.
4639 §1, 7-20-2015]
HEIGHT — See "BUILDING HEIGHT".
HIGHER EDUCATION FACILITY — A public or private non-profit institution
primarily providing continuing educational opportunities for students
beyond the academic level of high school.
HOME OCCUPATION — A business, profession, occupation or trade
conducted for the personal gain or support of the residential occupant and
conducted entirely within a residential building or accessory structure (see
Article V, Division 2).
HOSPITAL — An institution providing medical and surgical care for humans
only, for both inpatients and outpatients, including medical service, training
and research facilities.
Section
400.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.020
AO:462
HOTEL (MOTEL) — An establishment consisting of a group of attached or
detached living or sleeping accommodations, each with a bathroom, located
on a single lot and designed for use by the traveling public and tourists and
furnishing customary hotel services.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any manmade change to improved or unimproved
real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures,
site improvements, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operation.
LOT FRONTAGE — The length of the property line of any lot along any
street it borders.
LOT (PARCEL) OF RECORD — A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of
which has been legally approved and recorded in the office of the Recorder
of Deeds of the County or a parcel of land which was legally approved and
the deed recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds.
LOT (SITE, PREMISES, PARCEL, TRACT, DEVELOPMENT AREA) — A
parcel of land which has been or which is proposed to be used, developed
or built upon as a unit under single ownership. Such lot may consist of a
single lot of record or a part or combination of one (1) or more lots of record
and may be subject to subdivision regulations if intended to be subdivided
further into one (1) or more lots.
MAJOR REHABILITATION — Any repair, reconstruction or improvement
of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds one hundred percent
(100%) of the assessed value of the structure either before the improvement
or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being
restored, before the damage occurred. The term does not, however, include
either any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to ensure safe living conditions or any alteration of a structure
listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of
Historic Places.
MASSAGE PARLORS AND SIMILAR TYPES — Massage parlors, bathhouses,
health clubs, health studios and other similar types of businesses that
provide massages of any kind to be prohibited in all zoning districts in the
City. This definition is not intended to prohibit, nor shall it be interpreted
in such a manner that prohibits, legitimate full- or partial-body massage
ancillary to the provision of other services such as a beauty salon, medical
rehabilitation facility or, any other facility, which provide massage therapy
ancillary to other services provided, so long as such facilities employ a
licensed massage therapist. A massage therapist is a health care
practitioner who provides or offers to provide massage therapy in
accordance with Sections 324.240 to 324.275, RSMo., and is trained,
experienced and licensed in massage therapy and who holds a current, valid
license to practice massage therapy. The license for all therapists employed
on the premises shall be visible in a common area inside the establishment.
In the "PD" District, any massage therapy business utilizing a massage
therapist as defined in this Section shall be considered a medical use, may
Section
400.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.020
AO:463
operate as the primary business and does not need to be ancillary to the
provision of other services.
Any massage therapy businesses shall only take place in the "GC", "RSC",
"PD", "UD" or light industrial (LID) zoning districts. Massage therapy
businesses are prohibited in any other districts.
MOTEL — See "HOTEL".
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — A use primarily for supplying
gasoline, oil, air and water, tires, accessories and services for motor
vehicles at direct retail to the consumer including the incidental washing
of motor vehicles and the making of minor repairs, but not including such
major repairs as: spray painting, body, fender, clutch, transmission,
differential, axle, spring and frame repairs; major overhauling of engines or
radiators, requiring removal thereof; or recapping or retreading of tires.
MULTI-FAMILY — A building or portion thereof containing more than two
(2) dwelling units and not classified as a one- or two-family dwelling.
NET ACRE — That remaining area of a parcel of ground after deduction for
streets, alleys, utility easements, both overhead and underground, public
improvements and any other area designated for use by the general public.
NON-CONFORMING LAND USE OR STRUCTURE — A land use or structure
which existed lawfully prior to the date this Chapter or any amendment
thereto became effective and which fails to conform to one (1) or more of
the applicable regulations in the Chapter or amendments thereto.
NON-CONFORMING LOT OF RECORD — An unimproved lot which does not
comply with the lot size requirements for any permitted use in the district
in which it is located.
NON-CONFORMITIES — Some thing, activity or use prohibited under the
terms of this Chapter but previously lawful and lawful when begun. As
used in this Chapter, this definition includes non-conforming signs, nonconforming
structures and non-conforming uses. An extension of a nonconformity
may involve the use of new space for a non-conforming use or an
addition to an existing non-conforming structure.
NOTICE (PUBLIC NOTICE) — A statement concerning a pending matter
before an official body of the City and, where applicable, proposed action to
be taken in regard to the matter. The terms "notice" and "public notice" are
used interchangeably in this Chapter.
OFF-STREET PARKING — A permanently surfaced parking area, enclosed
or unenclosed, connected by a permanently surfaced driveway to a street or
alley to permit ingress or egress.
OPEN SPACE — Space on a lot unoccupied by a principal or accessory
buildings, which is unobstructed to the sky and which is not devoted to
service driveways or off-street parking or loading. Such space shall be
devoted to landscaping, paved patios or plaza areas, pedestrian circulation
or open recreation facilities.
Section
400.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.020
AO:464
OPEN STORAGE — The keeping of material or goods in any yard or on
any open area outside of a building, but not including vehicular parking
which complies with this Chapter, or the temporary storage of construction
material on a construction site.
PARCEL — See "LOT".
PARK — An area open to the general public and reserved for recreational,
educational or scenic purposes.
PARKING SPACE — A surfaced area, exclusive of driveways, permanently
reserved for the temporary storage of one (1) motor vehicle and connected
with a street or alley by a driveway. The layout, arrangement and
dimensions of drives and parking spaces shall be in accordance with Article
IV.
PAWNBROKER — Any person engaged in the business of lending money
on the security of pledged goods or engaged in the business of purchasing
tangible personal property on condition that it may be redeemed or
repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time.
PERMITTED USE — A use by right which is specifically authorized in a
particular zoning district.
PERSON — As used in any Section of this Chapter prescribing a penalty or
fine as to partnership or association, the word shall include the partners or
members thereof and, as to corporation, it shall include the officers, agents
or members thereof who are responsible for any violation of such Section.
PET BOARDING FACILITY — A business providing day care or overnight
boarding services for domesticated dogs and cats. If the pet boarding
facility has an outdoor area intended for use by pets, the property on which
a pet boarding facility is located shall be at least two hundred (200) feet
from any single-family or multi-family residential building.
PLAT — A map, plan or layout to scale, of a tract of land to be subdivided
showing such information as required in Chapter 405 of this Code.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The structure in which the principal use on the lot
or site are located.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main use of land, structures or improvements as
distinguished from a secondary or accessory use.
PRIVATE GARAGE — See "GARAGE".
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any outdoor or partially enclosed artificially
constructed pool used or capable of being used for swimming or bathing,
including drained pools, per twenty-four (24) inches in depth or, with a
surface area exceeding two hundred fifty (250) square feet, which is used
or intended to be used in connection with a single-family residence and
available only to the family of the householder and his/her guests; or any
outdoor or partially enclosed artificially constructed pool, used or capable of
being used for swimming or bathing, including drained pools, over twentyfour
(24) inches in depth or, with a surface area exceeding two hundred fifty
(250) square feet, which is used or intended to be used in connection with
Section
400.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.020
AO:465
multi-family residences or by cooperative, fraternal or commercial groups
and available only to members of families occupying such residences,
members of such groups and guests of the members.
PROJECT — A land development which includes one (1) or more buildings
on a single lot or, a group of buildings to be constructed by a single
developer which may be later sold individually on separate subdivided
lots of record in accordance with Chapter 405 of this Code and site plan
approval pursuant to Article II, Division 9 of this Chapter.
PROPERTY LINE — The line bordering parts of or a combination of lots
when adjacent to one another under single, joint or corporation ownership.
PUBLIC NOTICE — See "NOTICE".
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT — MAJOR — Any equipment such as travel
trailers, pickup campers or coaches, motorized campers, tent trailers, boats
and boat trailers and the like or trailers for transporting recreational
equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not.
RESTAURANT — A business establishment providing for the preparation of
or sale of prepared food or drink for consumption by customers on or off
the premises, but excluding facilities for non-commercial and incidental or
occasional food service for the employees, patrons or members of an office
or institution such as churches, schools and hospitals, excluding private
clubs and also excluding food service within grocery stores, delicatessens
and ice cream parlors having a seating capacity for not more than eight
(8) persons and theaters and other institutions or establishments otherwise
requiring a conditional use permit.
RIGHT-OF-WAY SETBACK — See "YARD, FRONT".
ROOF LINE — The highest point on any building where an exterior wall
encloses usable floor area including floor area provided for housing
mechanical equipment.
SETBACK — The distance between the front lot line and the major building
surface of the principal building on the lot within which may be located
ordinary projections or uses of required yards as specified in Section
400.1840.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of retail commercial establishments
planned, developed, owned and managed as a unit, ranging from
neighborhood centers of ten thousand (10,000) to seventy-five thousand
(75,000) square feet, which specialize in convenience goods and personal
services, to regional centers of five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet
and up, which emphasize general merchandise, apparel, furniture and home
furnishings.
SIGN — Any display, name, identification, description, illustration, device,
building or building treatment which is visible from any public place or is
located on private property and exposed to public view and which directs
attention to a product, place, activity, person, service, institution,
profession, business or solicitation.
Section
400.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.020
AO:466
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — An individual dwelling unit located on the
ground, either detached and occupying a subdivided lot or attached by
means of a party wall to another single-family dwelling unit and occupying
a subdivided lot or in condominium ownership.
SITE COVERAGE — The area of the site which is covered by buildings,
driveways, parking lots, loading areas and excluding landscaped and open
spaces.
SITE IMPROVEMENTS — Grading, drainage, utilities, landscaping,
lighting, parking, driveways and similar non-building improvements.
SITE PLAN REVIEW — A procedure whereby the Planning and Zoning
Commission reviews and considers the nature of the development upon the
site and the potential impacts of that specific proposed development upon
surrounding uses and property. Such review is intended to encourage a high
standard of site and building design and development, but does not regulate
the permissibility of the proposed use (see Article II, Division 9).
SPECIAL USE — A use of property on a temporary basis, which the current
zoning of the property does not allow. Special uses include, but are not
limited to, outdoor sales or grand opening events, temporary off-street
parking for special events, seasonal or holiday events, carnivals or picnics
with more than fifty people, the use of temporary structures for special
events, and the use of temporary storage containers and trailers for shortterm
storage of materials or merchandise in commercial and industrial
zoning districts. Applications for special use permits shall be reviewed and
approved by the Director of Planning and Development, Building Official
and Police Chief, except all special use applications for temporary storage
containers and trailers shall be reviewed and approved by the Board of
Alderman pursuant to Section 400.195 0. If staff deems further review
for applications within the administrative approval authority of staff is
warranted staff may decline to act and forward the application to the Board
of Aldermen for final review and approval.[Ord. No. 4792 § 1, 8-2-2017]
STORY — That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between
the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there
is not a floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next
above it.
STORY, HALF — A space under a sloping roof which has the line of
intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three (3) feet above
the top floor level and in which space not more than sixty percent (60%) of
the floor area is finished off for use. A half story may be used for occupancy
only in conjunction with any use by the occupants of the floor immediately
below.
STREET — A paved public or private right-of-way which provides access
to abutting properties from the front and complies with the provisions of
Chapter 405. This term includes all facilities which normally occur within
the right-of-way, including such other designations as highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, expressway, road, pike, avenue, boulevard, lane,
place, court, but shall not include an alley or pedestrian way.
Section
400.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.020
AO:467
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or
any structural change in the roof.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials, which in the reasonable opinion
of the Director of Planning and Development are intended to be used
for some purpose other than recreational uses and which are assembled,
constructed or erected at a fixed location, including a building, the use of
which requires location on the ground or attachment to something located
on the ground.
SUBDIVISION — See Chapter 405.
TATTOO, BODY PIERCING OR BRANDING ESTABLISHMENT — An
establishment that is licensed by the State pursuant to Sections 324.520 —
324.524, RSMo., to be operated as an establishment in which tattoos, body
piercing or brandings are applied. The terms, "tattoo", "body piercing" and
"branding" shall have the meanings defined for them in Section 324.520,
RSMo. This definition is not intended to prohibit, nor shall it be interpreted
in such a manner that prohibits salon or cosmetic tattoo services which
consist of the application of permanent makeup and coloring for eyes,
eyebrows and lips, so long as the person administering said services is
licensed by the State of Missouri.
THIS CHAPTER — This zoning ordinance.
TOWN HOUSE — A two-story dwelling that is one of a planned complex of
such contiguous or, zero (0) side yard setback, dwellings.
TRAILER — Any structure used for living, sleeping, business or storage
purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks,
horses or skirtings and which is, has been or reasonably may be, equipped
with wheels or other device for transporting the structure from place to
place, whether by motive power or other means. The term "trailer" shall
include camp car and house car. For the purposes of this Chapter, a trailer
is a single-family dwelling and shall conform to all regulations therefor.
TRUST INDENTURE — A deed involving two (2) or more principals which
stipulates that each has certain rights, responsibilities and obligations to
the other.
USE — The purpose or activity for which land or a building thereon is
designed, arranged or intended or, for which it is maintained and shall
include any manner or performance of such activity with respect to the
performance requirements of this Chapter.
USE LIMITATIONS — Regulations intended to delimit or emphasize the
desired nature and quality of uses permitted within a zoning district.
USE REGULATIONS — Regulations which relate to a specific quantifiable
use condition such as density or intensity or to building size, bulk or, siting
conditions occurring anywhere and for any type of building located within a
given zoning district.
Section
400.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.020
AO:468
USED or OCCUPIED — Includes, as applied to any land or building, the
words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied".
VARIATION — A grant or relief to a person from the requirements of
this Chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited
by this Chapter where specific enforcement would result in an extreme
hardship or severe practical difficulty to such person (see Article II, Division
7).
WALK-UP APARTMENT — See "GARDEN APARTMENT".
WHOLESALE SALE — The sale of goods, merchandise and commodities for
resale.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a principal building or group
of buildings which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level
upward except as otherwise permitted in this Chapter and which extends
along a lot line and at right angles thereto to a depth or width specified in
the yard regulations for the district in which the lot is located.
YARD, FRONT or RIGHT-OF-WAY SETBACK — A yard extending along the
full width of the lot and lying between the front property line of the lot and
the building setback line.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the rear property line of the lot and the building setback line.
YARD, SIDE — That part of the yard lying between the side property line
and the side building setback line.
YARD, TRANSITIONAL — A yard that must be provided with special
buffering including landscaping and screening located on a lot in a business
district which adjoins a lot in a residential district. A transitional yard shall
include any required yard or right-of-way setback.
ZONING CODE — This Chapter.
Section 400.030. Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §25-3; Ord. No. 2739 §43-2,
5-20-1985]
A. This Chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
1. To protect, provide for and promote the public safety, health,
convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare of
the residents of the City;
2. To encourage the most appropriate use of land, to conserve and
stabilize the value of property, to provide adequate open spaces for
light and air, to prevent undue concentration of population, to avoid
excessive congestion of streets, to secure safety from fire, flood and
other dangers and to assist in the provision of adequate community
utilities and facilities such as transportation, water, sewage,
schools, parks and other amenities in the City;
Section
400.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.030
AO:469
Section 400.040. Interpretation. [R.O. 2009 §25-4; Ord. No. 2739
§43-3, 5-20-1985]
The provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements
adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
Whenever the regulations of this Chapter require a higher standard than
that required by other regulations, order of a public official, private deed
restriction or private covenants, this Chapter shall govern. If the
requirements of such other regulation, order, private deed restriction or
private covenant are the more restrictive, then those requirements shall
govern. This provision does not require and shall not be interpreted to
require the City to enforce private deed restrictions.
Section 400.050. Applicability. [R.O. 2009 §25-5; Ord. No. 2739
§43-4, 5-20-1985]
3. To guide the future growth and further development of the City in
accordance with the District Zoning Map and any Comprehensive
Plan which may be adopted for the City or for applicable portions
thereof and, in so doing, to implement the plans;
4. To protect and conserve the value of buildings and improvements
and to minimize the adverse impact of development on adjoining or
nearby properties;
5. To establish a beneficial relationship between the uses of land and
buildings and the public street system; to require the proper
location and design of streets and building lines; and to make
adequate provision for pedestrian traffic circulation;
6. To encourage the wise use and management of natural resources;
to provide adequate and safe recreational areas; to maintain the
natural beauty and topography of the City and to ensure
appropriate development with regard to these natural features; to
minimize the pollution of air, ponds and streams; to ensure the
adequacy of storm water drainage and detention facilities.
A. Except as may otherwise be provided in Article VI of this Chapter, from
and after May 20, 1985, all new structures erected, all uses of land or
structures established, all structural alterations to or the relocation of
existing structures and all enlargements of or additions to existing uses
shall be subject to all regulations of this Chapter that are applicable to
the zoning districts in which such structures, uses or land shall be
located.
B. However, where a building permit for a structure has been legally
issued in accordance with applicable laws and regulations in effect
prior to May 20, 1985 and provided that construction is begun within
six (6) months of the date of the building permit and diligently pursued
to completion, such structure may be completed in accordance with the
approved plans on the basis of which the building permit was issued.
Section
400.030
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.050
AO:470
Section 400.060. Severability. [R.O. 2009 §25-6; Ord. No. 2739
§43-5, 5-20-1985]
If any court of competent jurisdiction should hold any Article, Section,
clause or provisions of this Chapter to be invalid, the same shall not affect
the validity of the Chapter as a whole or any part thereof, other than the
part so declared to be invalid.
Section 400.070. Violations and Penalties. [R.O. 2009 §25-7; Ord.
No. 2739 §43-104.4, 5-20-1985]
Upon completion, the structure may be occupied under a certificate of
occupancy for the use originally designated, subject thereafter to all
provisions of this Chapter.
A. Violations of this Chapter shall include, but are not limited to, the
following:
1. The use, alteration or construction of buildings or the use or
improvement of land or a site not in accordance with the provisions
of this Chapter or with approvals given or permits issued pursuant
to this Chapter;
2. Failure to obtain permits as required by this Chapter;
3. Failure to comply with the terms, conditions or restrictions of a
variation issued pursuant to this Chapter.
B. Those chargeable, singly or jointly, with violations of this Chapter, who
knowingly continue to violate or, after receiving notice of violations, fail
to correct the violations shall include, but are not limited to, the
following:
1. Those who commit, assist in or otherwise participate in violations;
2. The owner or other persons who maintain the building, premises,
property or other place where the violation has been committed or
exists;
3. The owner's agent or person in charge of the building, premises,
property or other place where the violation has been committed or
exists;
4. The lessee or tenant of all or part of the building, premises,
property or other place where the violation has been committed or
exists;
5. The developer, agent, architect, contractor, subcontractor or any
other person who performs work or enters into a contract for work
in violation of this Chapter.
Section
400.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.070
AO:471
Section 400.080. through Section 400.120. (Reserved)
C. The Director of Planning and Development shall enforce this Chapter
and are authorized to institute any appropriate actions or proceedings
to prevent or to halt such unlawful use of such construction.
D. Any act which is determined by the Director of Planning and
Development to be prohibited by or in conflict with the provisions of
this Chapter shall be unlawful. Upon such a finding of violation the
violator shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.00) or by imprisonment in the County Jail not to exceed ninety
(90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day any
violation of this Chapter shall continue shall constitute, except where
otherwise prohibited, a separate offense.
Section
400.070
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.080
AO:472
ARTICLE II
Administration And Enforcement
DIVISION 1
Generally
Section 400.130. Zoning Administrator.119
The Director of Planning and Development shall serve as the Zoning
Administrator.
Section 400.140. Enforcement. [R.O. 2009 §25-22; Ord. No. 2739
§§43-103.1 — 43-103.4, 5-20-1985]
A. This Chapter shall be enforced by the Director of Planning and
Development. The construction, reconstruction and/or alteration of
buildings shall not be undertaken and the development of land shall not
be commenced except in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning
Code. No permit or application for the construction, alteration or
change of use of buildings or land shall be approved if the proposed use
or activity would be in violation of this Chapter.
B. Inspections. The Director of Planning and Development is authorized to
make inspections to determine whether dwellings, dwelling units,
accessory structures and premises located within this City conform to
the requirements of this Chapter. For the purpose of making such
inspections, the Director of Planning and Development is authorized to
enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings,
dwelling units, accessory structures and premises. The owner or
occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, accessory structure and its
premises, shall give the Director of Planning and Development free
access thereto at all reasonable times for the purpose of such
inspection, examination and survey. If the owner or occupant shall
refuse access to any premises, then the Director of Planning and
Development shall have authority to enter any of the such premises
after written notice has been given to the owner or his/her agent.
C. Notice Of Violation And Sanctions. If the Director of Planning and
Development finds that any of the provisions of this Chapter are being
violated, he/she shall notify in writing the person responsible for such
violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action
necessary to correct it. He/she shall take any other action authorized by
law to ensure compliance with or prevent violation of the provisions of
this Zoning Code.
D. Conformance With Approved Plans And Conditions. All permits issued
on the basis of plans and/or applications approved by the Director of
Planning and Development, Architectural Review Board, Planning and
119. Cross Reference — As to officers and employees generally, ch. 115.
Section
400.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.140
AO:473
Section 400.150. Notice and Hearing. [R.O. 2009 §25-23; Ord. No.
2739 §§43-101.1 — 43-101.3, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 3422 §§1 — 2,
8-21-1995; Ord. No. 3861 §1, 1-6-2003; Ord. No. 4308 §1,
9-19-2011]
Zoning Commission and/or Board of Aldermen shall authorize only the
use, arrangement and/or construction set forth in such approved plans
and/or applications and no other use, arrangement or construction.
A. Whenever the provisions of this Chapter require notice and hearing, the
following procedures shall govern:
1. Time of publication, content. It is the responsibility of those
officials conducting the hearing to see that at least fifteen (15)
days' notice of the time and place of the hearing is published in a
newspaper generally available to the citizens of Brentwood which
is other than a newspaper generally used for official notice by the
legal profession. The notice shall state the time and place of the
hearing and the subject matter of the hearing. When applicable, the
notice shall also state where copies of reports, documents,
applications, plans or other relevant material will be accessible for
examination by interested persons prior to the hearing.
2. Record of proceeding. The official or officials holding the hearing
shall provide for maintaining a record of the hearing and for taking
statements, evidence and testimony.
3. Individual citizen notice.
a. All residents and property owners residing within three
hundred (300) feet of property which is the subject of a
rezoning, site development or conditional use permit petition
shall, upon receipt of the petition by the Zoning Administrator,
be notified by mail that said petition was filed. Said notification
shall give the date of the first (1st) discussion of the matter
before the Planning and Zoning Commission.
b. When the date of a public hearing before the Board of
Aldermen has been determined, a notice stating the time and
place of the hearing and the subject matter of the hearing will
be mailed or hand delivered to property owners and residents
who own or reside in property located within three hundred
(300) feet of the property which is the subject of the action
petitioned. When applicable, the notice shall also state where
copies of reports, documents, applications, plans or other
relevant material will be accessible for examination by
interested persons prior to the hearing.
c. The Planning and Zoning Commission, at its sole discretion,
may hold informational meetings intended to inform residents
of the details of proposals involving new construction or uses
Section
400.140
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.150
AO:474
Section 400.160. Fees. [R.O. 2009 §25-24; Ord. No. 2739 §43-102,
5-20-1985]
Upon receipt of the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the Department of Planning and Development, the Board
of Aldermen shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and
a collection procedure for all matters pertaining to this Zoning Code. The
schedule of fees is on file in the office of the City Clerk/Administrator and
in the Department of Planning and Development. Until all applicable fees,
charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any
matter or on any appeal provided by this Chapter.
Section 400.170. through Section 400.210. (Reserved)
within three hundred (300) feet of their homes. This is not to be
construed as fulfilling the requirement for the public hearings
described in Subsection (4)(a) and (b) above. Resident
notification of the informational meeting is to be by post card
or letter mailed or hand delivered to properties within three
hundred (300) feet of the property for which new construction
or a new use is petitioned.
Section
400.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.170
AO:475

DIVISION 2
Planning and Zoning Commission120
Section 400.220. Established — Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §25-34; Ord.
No. 2739 §43-90.1, 5-20-1985]
The Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby established to advise the
Board of Aldermen on how best to preserve and protect the existing
residential and business community and provide for, plan, guide and direct
the development, redevelopment and growth of the City.
Section 400.230. Appointment, Term, Removal of Members. [R.O.
2009 §25-35; Ord. No. 2739 §43-90.2, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 2892 §1,
11-2-1987; Ord. No. 3560 §1, 9-15-1997]
Section 400.240. Officers. [R.O. 2009 §25-36; Ord. No. 2739
§43-90.3, 5-20-1985]
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall elect a Chairman, Vice
Chairman and Secretary from among its citizen members. The Vice
Chairman shall serve as acting Chairman in the Chairman's absence. The
Commission shall make budget recommendations to the Board of Aldermen
for such purposes as it considers necessary to achieve the objectives of the
Commission. The Board of Aldermen, at its discretion, may also provide for
other necessary expenses of the Commission incurred in the performance of
its duties. The Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary shall each serve one
(1) year terms with eligibility for re-election. Nomination of officers shall be
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City shall consist of not
more than fifteen (15) nor less than seven (7) members, including:
1. The Mayor, if the Mayor chooses to be a member;
2. A member of the Board of Aldermen selected by the Board, if the
Board chooses to have a member serve on the Commission; and
3. Not more than fifteen (15) nor less than five (5) citizens appointed
by the Mayor and approved by the Board of Aldermen.
The term of each of the citizen members shall be for four
(4) years, except that the terms of the citizen members first
appointed shall be for varying periods so that succeeding terms
will be staggered. Any vacancy in a membership shall be filled
for the unexpired term by appointment as aforesaid. The Board
of Aldermen may remove any citizen member for cause stated
in writing and after public hearing. All members of the
Planning and Zoning Commission present at the regular
Commission meeting shall receive as compensation, one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per regular Commission meeting.
120. Cross Reference — As to boards, commissions, departments, divisions, etc., ch. 120.
Section
400.220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.240
AO:477
at the May meeting and elections shall be held at the June meeting of the
Commission.
Section 400.250. Meetings — Attendance — Records. [R.O. 2009
§25-37; Ord. No. 2739 §43-90.4, 5-20-1985]
Section 400.260. Powers and Duties. [R.O. 2009 §25-38; Ord. No.
2739 §43-90.5, 5-20-1985]
A. As necessary and as long as not inconsistent with the provisions of the
City Code or other ordinances of the City, the Commission may provide
such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry out the
provisions of this Zoning Code. The Commission may by rule establish a
regular meeting time and procedures for giving notice of its meetings
and shall file these regulations in the office of the City Clerk/
Administrator. The Commission shall have the authority to call special
meetings as it deems necessary. Commission members shall attend at
least seventy-five percent (75%) of scheduled meetings or, shall be
removed from the Commission at the end of the calendar year. For this
purpose, vacations and illnesses shall not be considered absence.
B. The Commission may adopt rules for the transaction of business and
keep a record of its proceedings. These records shall be public records.
C. No member shall hear, discuss with other members of the Commission
or act on any item which would constitute a conflict of interest for that
member as established in Sections 105.450 et seq., RSMo.
A. The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To prepare a Comprehensive Plan for the physical development of
the City or, portions thereof and recommend modifications of the
same from time to time as deemed in the City's best interest. The
plan shall show the Planning and Zoning Commission's
recommendations for the physical development and uses of land
and may include, among other things, the general location,
character and extent of streets and other public ways, grounds,
places and spaces; the general location and extent of public utilities
and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned, and
acceptance, widening, removal, extension, relocation, narrowing,
vacation, abandonment or change of use of any of the foregoing;
and the general character, extent and layout of the replanning of
blighted and slum areas;
2. To prepare and submit to the Board of Aldermen for its approval, a
zoning ordinance and Zoning Map with such regulations as to the
location, height, width, bulk and appearance of buildings and other
structures, the use of land and buildings and the layout,
improvement and landscaping of the site of any proposed
development or redevelopment of property within the City, as it
Section
400.240
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.260
AO:478
Section 400.270. through Section 400.310. (Reserved)
shall determine to be necessary or desirable for the promotion of
the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City;
3. To consider all requests for rezoning, zoning text amendments, site
plan approval and conditional use permits in the manner
prescribed elsewhere in this Chapter;
4. To petition the Board of Aldermen on its own initiative to amend,
supplement, change or repeal this Chapter or any part thereof or,
to amend the Zoning Code or Zoning Map as the Commission
determines to be in the City's best interest;
5. To submit an annual written report to the Board of Aldermen
containing the Commission's recommendations concerning this
Zoning Code, a summary of its activities during the past year and
its recommendations on specific community goals and objectives
for the future and programs for achieving them;
6. To review and update as necessary the City's Comprehensive Plan
or plans for portions of the community to reflect the changing
needs of the community;
7. To recommend to the Board of Aldermen the preparation of such
municipal, State or Federal legislation as may, in the interest of the
City, be necessary in carrying out the recommendations or
suggestions of the Commission;
8. To recommend to the Mayor or Board of Aldermen programs for
public improvements and the financing thereof;
9. To prepare and submit to the Board of Aldermen such other reports
relating to its investigations, transactions and recommendations as
it deems proper or as required by the Mayor or the Board of
Aldermen;
10. To promulgate site development standards, architectural standards
and guidelines for new construction, reconstruction or alterations
for the purpose of ensuring the mutual compatibility of buildings
and their surroundings and the appearance, function and
permanence of the location, form, shape, massing and exterior
materials of building and site improvements;
11. To enter upon any land to make examinations and surveys;
12. To exercise the power necessary to enable it to perform its
functions and promote municipal planning.
Section
400.260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.270
AO:479

DIVISION 3
Board of Adjustment121
Section 400.320. Established — Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §25-46; Ord.
No. 2739 §43-92.1, 5-20-1985]
The Board of Adjustment is hereby established to further the general
purpose and intent of this Chapter by varying its terms in appropriate
circumstances, subject to conditions and safeguards and in accord with the
other provisions in this Chapter.
Section 400.330. Appointment, Term, Removal of Members. [R.O.
2009 §25-47; Ord. No. 2739 §43-92.2, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 3561 §1,
9-15-1997]
The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five (5) regular members and
three (3) alternate members all of whom shall be residents of the City. The
members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent and approval of
the majority of the Board of Aldermen. Nothing in this Code shall preclude
or prohibit a member of the Planning and Zoning Commission from being
appointed as a member of the Board of Adjustment. Appointments of the
regular members in the first (1st) instance shall be for one (1), two (2),
three (3), four (4) and five (5) year terms and thereafter all appointments
shall be for a term of five (5) years. Appointments for the alternate members
shall be for five (5) year terms. The alternate members so appointed,
shall be designated as first (1st), second (2nd) and third (3rd) alternates,
respectively, and shall serve in order of the aforementioned designation
only on those occasions when a regular member or members of the Board
of Adjustment due to absence, conflict or otherwise cannot serve in
considering a matter pending before the Board of Adjustment.
Appointments to fill vacancies shall be made for the unexpired portion of the
term only. All members of the Board of Adjustment present at meetings shall
receive as compensation, fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting. Members of the
Board of Adjustment may be removed for cause by the Mayor and the Board
of Aldermen. A member thus removed may request and receive a written
statement of charges and public hearing before the Board of Aldermen.
Section 400.340. Officers. [R.O. 2009 §25-48; Ord. No. 2739
§43-92.3, 5-20-1985]
The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from
among its members. These officers shall serve for a term of one (1) year and
may be re-elected.
121. Cross Reference — As to boards, commissions, departments, divisions, etc., ch. 120. State
Law References — Board of adjustment, §§89.080 et seq., RSMo.
Section
400.320
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.350
AO:481
Section 400.350. Rules — Meetings — Records. [R.O. 2009 §25-49;
Ord. No. 2739 §43-92.4, 5-20-1985]
The Board of Adjustment may adopt such rules as necessary from time
to time to carry out the provisions of this Division, provided they are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter or other ordinances of
the City. Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of
the Chairman and at such other times as the Board of Adjustment may
determine. The Chairman, or in his/her absence the Vice Chairman, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings
of the Board of Adjustment shall be open to the public. The Board of
Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each
member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
fact. All testimony, objections thereto and rulings thereon shall be taken
down by a reporter employed by the Board of Adjustment. The Board shall
keep records of its examinations and other official actions and all records
shall be filed immediately in the office of the City Clerk/Administrator and
shall be a public record.
Section 400.360. Powers and Duties. [R.O. 2009 §25-50; Ord. No.
2739 §43-92.5, 5-20-1985]
A. The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To hear and decide all matters referred to it and upon which it is
required to act under this Division;
2. To interpret the provisions of this Chapter in such a way as to carry
out its intent and purpose;
3. To hear appeals in the manner prescribed in Division 7 of this
Article where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement,
decision or determination made in the enforcement or
interpretation of this Chapter;
4. To authorize variations upon appeal in accordance with the
provisions of Division 7 of this Article;
5. To permit the construction and/or use of a building or the use of
premises for public utility purposes;
6. To permit the reconstruction of a non-conforming use or building
which has been damaged by explosion, fire, act of God or public
enemy, to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its
replacement value, where the Board of Adjustment finds some
compelling public necessity requiring a continuance of the nonconforming
use;
7. To permit a variation in the yard requirements of any district where
there are severe practical difficulties or extreme hardships in the
carrying out of these provisions due to an irregular shape or size of
the lot, the sites of pre-existing buildings, topographical or other
Section
400.350
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.360
AO:482
Section 400.370. through Section 400.410. (Reserved)
site conditions; provided however, that such variation shall not
have a serious adverse impact on any adjoining property or the
general welfare or establish an unsatisfactory precedent for other
locations and situations;
8. To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a
district divides a lot held in a single ownership on May 20, 1985.
Section
400.360
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.370
AO:483

DIVISION 4
Architectural Review Board122
Section 400.420. Established — Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §25-58; Ord.
No. 3968 §2, 3-7-2005]
The Architectural Review Board is hereby established to review applications
for residential building permits or, those applications directed to it by
the Department of Planning and Development or the Planning and Zoning
Commission, to ensure compliance with architectural standards and
compatibility of design with existing structures in the City.
Section 400.430. Composition, Appointment, Term of Members.
[R.O. 2009 §25-59; Ord. No. 3968 §2, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 4049 §1,
11-20-2006]
A. The Architectural Review Board shall consist of four (4) members who
shall, except for the Building Official, be residents of the City and who
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent and approval of the
majority of the Board of Aldermen. Three (3) regular members of the
Board shall be licensed architects. Two (2) alternate members, who
must also be licensed architects, may be appointed to serve in the
absence of or the disqualification of the regular members. The Building
Official shall be a member for the length of his/her tenure as Building
Official, but shall only be authorized to vote on matters before the
Architectural Review Board to resolve a tie vote. All regular members of
the Architectural Review Board shall be Brentwood citizens who hold
no other elected or appointed office with the City and shall have lived in
the City for at least one (1) year.
B. Each architect member shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years.
The initial terms for the architect members shall be for one (1), two (2)
and three (3) years respectively, with subsequent appointments upon
expiration of the initial term to be for two (2) years. All members of the
Architectural Review Board present at meetings, excluding City
employees, shall receive as compensation, fifty dollars ($50.00) per
meeting.
C. Architect members of the Architectural Review Board may be removed
for cause by the Mayor with the consent of the majority of the Board of
Aldermen. A member so removed may request and receive a written
statement of charges and a public hearing before the Board of
Aldermen.
D. Each member of the City's Board of Aldermen shall receive notice of all
meetings of the Architectural Review Board.
122. Cross Reference — As to boards, commissions, departments, divisions, etc., ch. 120.
Section
400.420
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.440
AO:485
Section 400.440. Officers. [R.O. 2009 §25-60; Ord. No. 3968 §2,
3-7-2005]
The Architectural Review Board shall elect a Chairman, Vice Chairman and
Secretary from among its members. These officers shall each serve one (1)
year terms and shall be eligible for re-election.
Section 400.450. Powers and Duties. [R.O. 2009 §25-61; Ord. No.
3968 §2, 3-7-2005]
Section 400.460. Rules — Schedule of Fees. [R.O. 2009 §25-62; Ord.
No. 3968 §2, 3-7-2005]
The Architectural Review Board may adopt, from time to time, such
reasonable rules and regulations as it may deem necessary and proper to
the conduct of its business and shall recommend a schedule of fees to be
charged an applicant for the purpose of covering the cost of their plan
review.
Section 400.470. Meetings — Quorum. [R.O. 2009 §25-63; Ord. No.
3968 §2, 3-7-2005]
Regular meetings of the Architectural Review Board shall be held at the
call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Architectural Review
Board or the Mayor may determine. Meetings will be posted, open to
the public and at a location determined by the Chairman. No action of
the Architectural Review Board approving or disapproving a building
application shall be taken except at a meeting open to the public. Two (2)
members plus the Building Official shall constitute a quorum and, in the
absence of the Chairman, the Vice Chairman shall be the acting Chairman;
in the absence of the Vice Chairman, the Secretary shall be the acting
Chairman. In the event that the three (3) elected officers are not available,
A. The Architectural Review Board shall have the following powers and
duties:
1. To approve the character and exterior design of buildings or
attached construction projects proposed to be constructed in
established residential neighborhoods.
2. To approve the character and exterior design of buildings or
construction projects proposed to be constructed in other areas,
only as their review may be directed by the Building Official or the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
3. To recommend changes in plans, drawings and specifications which
the Architectural Review Board deems necessary in light of
prevailing architectural standards, the appearance and design of
adjacent development and the stability of values of surrounding
properties, provided the recommended changes will render a
design acceptable for approval.
Section
400.440
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.470
AO:486
then the alternate member next in seniority shall be the acting Chairman.
The Building Official shall only be authorized to vote on matters before the
Architectural Review Board to resolve a tie vote. The Architectural Review
Board shall keep minutes of its meetings showing the vote of each member
upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact.
Section 400.480. through Section 400.530. (Reserved)
Section
400.470
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.480
AO:487

DIVISION 5
Zoning Changes and Amendments
Section 400.540. Requirements. [R.O. 2009 §25-71; Ord. No. 2739
§43-94.1, 5-20-1985]
Section 400.550. Application. [R.O. 2009 §25-72; Ord. No. 2739
§43-94.2, 5-20-1985]
A. Text Amendments. An application for amendment to the written text of
this Zoning Code may be filed in the Department of Planning and
Development for consideration by the Commission and the Board of
Aldermen. Such application may be initiated by any member of the
Board of Aldermen or the Commission or filed with the Zoning
Administrator by any other elected or appointed official of the City.
B. Rezoning. An application for a change in the zoning district designation
as described by the official Zoning Map may be filed in the Department
of Planning and Development, for consideration by the Commission and
the Board of Aldermen. Such application may be filed by any member of
the Board of Aldermen, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the
Board of Adjustment, by any other appointed or elected official of the
City or, by any person with financial, contractual or proprietary interest
in the property to be included in the proposed change of zoning.
C. Simultaneous Filing Requirement. To expedite processing by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Board of Aldermen, a copy of
the application for amendment or rezoning shall be filed with the City
Clerk/Administrator for transmittal to the Board of Aldermen
simultaneously with the filing in the Department of Planning and
Development.
A. The application for a zoning change or amendment shall be made on a
form provided by the Department of Planning and Development. The
application shall be signed by the applicant and shall state his/her name
and address, as well as:
1. Text amendments. An application for an amendment to the text of
this Chapter shall set forth the new text to be added and existing
text to be deleted.
2. Rezoning. An application for a Zoning Map change shall include a
legal description of the property to be changed from one category
to another, as well as a map or overlay on the existing map
graphically describing the change.
B. An application for either a text amendment or rezoning shall comply
with and be in accordance with the format and procedures governing
the same as adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission. In all
cases where an application is initiated by a private party, the
application shall be accompanied by the fee established by the Board of
Section
400.540
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.550
AO:489
Section 400.560. Limitations of Filing. [R.O. 2009 §25-73; Ord. No.
2739 §43-94.3, 5-20-1985]
Section 400.570. Review Procedure. [R.O. 2009 §25-74; Ord. No.
2739 §43-94.4, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 2893 §1, 11-2-1987; Ord. No.
3366 §1, 11-21-1994]
Aldermen and on file in the offices of the City Clerk/Administrator and
the Department of Planning and Development.
A. An application for amendment or rezoning shall not be accepted by the
Zoning Administrator if:
1. The request change does not comply with all the requirements of
this Section and any regulation published pursuant hereto;
2. A previous application for rezoning the same property was
approved or denied within three (3) months of this new application.
The application shall be accepted, however, if the Zoning
Administrator verifies that substantial new facts which warrant
reapplication have been established.
B. An application for amendment or rezoning initiated by a member of the
Board of Aldermen or the Planning and Zoning Commission may be
accepted at any time regardless of the time limitations stated above.
After the Zoning Administrator has accepted and filed an application for
rezoning by a private person, the application may not be modified as to
the area proposed to be rezoned or, as to the class of zone requested.
However, the Zoning Administrator, the Planning and Zoning
Commission or the Board of Aldermen may, at their discretion, allow
such modification.
A. Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall receive the
application and determine that it complies with all applicable
submission requirements prior to forwarding the application to the
Commission. All applications shall be received by the Zoning
Administrator at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Commission to allow submission to the
members of the Commission at least five (5) days prior to the meeting.
Applications received by the Zoning Administrator later than ten (10)
days prior to the meeting shall not be considered by the Commission
until the following regularly scheduled meeting, unless a special
meeting is held at the applicant's request and expense. The cost of a
special meeting shall be established by the Board of Aldermen.
B. The Planning And Zoning Commission. The Commission shall consider
the application and decide whether to recommend approval. Within
seventy (70) days after receipt of the application from the Zoning
Administrator, the Commission shall transmit a report and
recommendations to the Board of Aldermen; provided however, that the
Commission shall transmit its report and recommendation regarding
Section
400.550
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.570
AO:490
Section 400.580. Protest Of A Zoning District Classification Or
Zoning Regulation Amendment. [Ord. No. 4723 § 2, 8-15-2016]
In case a timely protest against a proposed zoning district classification
amendment or zoning regulation amendment is presented, duly signed and
acknowledged by the owners of thirty percent (30%) or more, either of the
areas of the land (exclusive of streets and alleys) included in such change
or within an area determined by lines drawn parallel to and one hundred
eighty-five (185) feet distant from the boundaries of the district proposed
to be changed, said amendment shall not become effective except by the
favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all of the members of the Board of
Aldermen. Protest petitions must be filed with the City Clerk not later than
4:00 P.M. on the seventh day following the date advertised for the start of
the public hearing before the Board of Aldermen.
Section 400.590. through Section 400.620. (Reserved)
streets, public facilities and public utilities within sixty (60) days of
official submission. If the Commission fails to transmit a report and
recommendations to the Board of Aldermen within this time period or
as extended for good cause by the Commission, the Board of Aldermen
shall consider the application recommended for approval by the
Commission.
C. Public Hearing. The Board of Aldermen shall hold a public hearing on
the application and notice of said public hearing shall be given by
appropriate officials of the City as provided in Section 400.150. No
application for amendment or rezoning may be approved until after
such public hearing is held.
D. (Reserved)123
123. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection (D), Board Of Aldermen, was repealed 8-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 4723 § 1.
Section
400.570
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.590
AO:491

DIVISION 6
Conditional Use Permits
Section 400.630. Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §25-81; Ord. No. 2739
§43-95.1, 5-20-1985]
The purpose of the conditional use permit is to provide the City with
a procedure for determining the appropriateness of a proposed use not
authorized as a matter of right by the regulations of the district in which
the use is proposed to be located. The appropriateness of the use shall be
determined in consideration of surrounding uses, activities and conditions
of the site and of surrounding areas. Based upon this determination, the
Board of Aldermen may decide to permit, reject or permit conditionally the
use for which the conditional use permit is sought.
Section 400.640. Authorization. [R.O. 2009 §25-82; Ord. No. 2739
§43-95.2, 5-20-1985]
The Board of Aldermen may authorize by ordinance, under prescribed
conditions, the construction or undertaking of any conditional use that is
expressly permitted as a conditional use in a particular zoning district,
however, the Board of Aldermen reserves full authority to deny any request
for a conditional use, to impose conditions on the use or, to revoke approval
at any time, upon a finding that the permitted conditional use will or
has become unsuitable and incompatible in its location as a result of any
nuisance or activity generated by the use.
Section 400.650. Application. [R.O. 2009 §25-83; Ord. No. 2739
§43-95.3, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 3033 §1, 10-16-1989]
A. An application for a conditional use permit may be filed by the owner or
tenant of the property in question or by a prospective owner or tenant.
B. The application shall be filed in the Department of Planning and
Development who shall forward the application to the Planning and
Zoning Commission. At the same time, a copy of the application shall be
filed with the City Clerk/Administrator who shall forward it to the Board
of Aldermen. The application shall contain such information as the
Planning and Zoning Commission may prescribe by regulations which
shall be filed with the City Clerk/Administrator. Such regulations
regarding submission requirements shall include, but not limited to,
those items specified in Division 9 of this Article.
C. At the time an application for a conditional use permit is filed, the City
Clerk/Administrator shall require the applicant to pay the City a fee
according to a schedule established by the Board of Aldermen and on
file in the office of the City Clerk/Administrator and the Department of
Planning and Development.
D. An application for a conditional use permit or amendment thereof shall
not be accepted if a previous application for such permit or amendment
Section
400.630
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.650
AO:493
Section 400.660. Review Procedure. [R.O. 2009 §25-84; Ord. No.
2739 §43-95.4, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 2893 §1, 11-2-1987; Ord. No.
3033 §2, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 3366 §2, 11-21-1994]
Section 400.670. Standards. [R.O. 2009 §25-85; Ord. No. 2739
§43-95.5, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 2793 §1, 4-7-1986]
has been denied by the Board of Aldermen within three (3) months prior
to the new application.
A. Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall receive the
application and determine that it complies with all applicable
submission requirements prior to forwarding the application to the
Commission. All applications shall be received by the Zoning
Administrator at least ten (10) days prior to the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Commission to allow submissions to the
members of the Commission at least five (5) days prior to the meeting.
Applications received by the Zoning Administrator less than ten (10)
days prior to the meeting shall not be considered by the Commission
until the following regularly scheduled meeting, unless a special
meeting is held at the applicant's request and expense. The cost of a
special meeting of the Commission shall be established by the Board of
Aldermen.
B. Planning And Zoning Commission. The Commission shall consider the
application and decide whether to recommend approval. Within seventy
(70) days after receipt of the application from the Zoning Administrator,
the Commission shall transmit a report and recommendations to the
Board of Aldermen; provided however, that the Commission shall
transmit its report and recommendation regarding streets, public
facilities and public utilities within sixty (60) days of official submission.
If the Commission fails to transmit the report and recommendations to
the Board of Aldermen within this time period or as extended for good
cause by the Commission, the Board of Aldermen shall consider the
application recommended for approval by the Commission.
C. Public Hearing. The Board of Aldermen shall hold a public hearing on
the application and notice of said public hearing shall be given by
appropriate officials of the City as provided in Section 400.150. No
application for a conditional use permit may be approved until after
such public hearing is held.
D. (Reserved)124
A. The Board of Aldermen shall approve a conditional use unless it finds
that the application and evidence presented clearly indicate that the
proposed conditional use:
124. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection (D), regarding voting on conditional use permit
applications, was repealed 8-15-2016 by Ord. No. 4723 § 3.
Section
400.650
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.670
AO:494
Section 400.680. Conditions and Restrictions. [R.O. 2009 §25-86;
Ord. No. 2739 §43-95.6, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 2814 §1, 6-2-1986; Ord.
No. 3033 §3, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 4723 § 4, 8-15-2016]
In approving a conditional use permit application, the Board of Aldermen
may impose conditions and restrictions as necessary to ensure that the
standards of Section 400.670 are complied with and the general intent
of this Zoning Code is carried out. Failure to comply with any of these
conditions or restrictions shall constitute a violation of this Chapter.
Section 400.690. Term. [R.O. 2009 §25-87; Ord. No. 2739 §43-95.7,
5-20-1985]
1. Will increase traffic hazards or congestion;
2. Will increase fire hazards;
3. Will affect the character of the neighborhood;
4. Will affect the general welfare of the community;
5. Will overtax public utilities;
6. Does not comply with all other applicable provisions of this Chapter
including performance standards presented in Article V, Division 6
and the standards of this Chapter in regard to yard and setback,
parking and loading areas, screening and buffering, refuse, storage
and service areas and signs;
7. Will not contribute to and promote the community welfare and
convenience at the specific location;
8. Will cause injury to the value of neighboring property;
9. Does not comply with the City's Comprehensive Plan or plans for
any applicable neighborhood or sector of the City thereof and other
applicable zoning district regulations and provisions of this
Chapter;
10. Will not provide, if applicable, erosion control and on-site storm
water detention in accordance with the standards contained in this
Chapter; or
11. Will not be compatible with the surrounding area and thus will
impose a burden or have a negative impact on surrounding or
adjacent uses or on community facilities or services.
A. No conditional use permit granted by the Board of Aldermen shall be
valid for a period longer than one (1) year from the date it grants the
conditional use permit, unless within such period:
1. A building permit is obtained and construction is begun;
Section
400.670
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.690
AO:495
Section 400.700. Amendments. [R.O. 2009 §25-88; Ord. No. 3033
§4, 10-16-1989]
The application and review procedure and approval standards for
amendments to existing conditional use permits shall be the same as for
new conditional use permits. In the event an application for an amendment
is denied, the original conditional use permit shall remain in effect unless
revoked by the Board of Aldermen.
Section 400.710. Transferability. [R.O. 2009 §25-89; Ord. No. 3033
§5, 10-16-1989]
All conditional use permits shall be approved for a specific location only and
may not be transferred to any other locations.
Section 400.720. Termination. [R.O. 2009 §25-90; Ord. No. 3033 §6,
10-16-1989]
All conditional use permits shall terminate whenever the use of the property
changes and the new use is substantially different from the use for which
the original permit was issued, whenever the site of the conditional use
or the structure thereon are substantially changed or, whenever a vacancy
occurs for twelve (12) consecutive months.
Section 400.730. through Section 400.770. (Reserved)
2. If a building permit is not required, a certificate of occupancy is
obtained and the use of the building commenced.
B. The Board of Aldermen may grant extensions not exceeding one
hundred eighty (180) days each, upon written application, without
notice or hearing.
Section
400.690
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.730
AO:496
DIVISION 7
Variances
Section 400.780. Authorization. [R.O. 2009 §25-96; Ord. No. 2739
§43-96.1, 5-20-1985]
The Board of Adjustment may authorize variations when there are severe
practical difficulties or extreme hardships in carrying out the strict letter
of this Chapter, so that the spirit of this Chapter shall be observed, public
safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. However, no
variation shall be authorized unless the Board of Adjustment determines
that the application complies with the standards set forth in Section
400.810.
Section 400.790. Application. [R.O. 2009 §25-97; Ord. No. 2739
§43-96.2, 5-20-1985]
Section 400.800. Hearing. [R.O. 2009 §25-98; Ord. No. 2739
§43-96.3, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 3366 §3, 11-21-1994]
The Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing on all applications for
variances and notice of said public hearing shall be given by appropriate
officials of the City as provided in Section 400.150.
Section 400.810. Standards. [R.O. 2009 §25-99; Ord. No. 2739
§43-96.4, 5-20-1985]
A. An application for variation shall be filed in the Department of Planning
and Development. The Zoning Administrator shall review the
application to determine whether it complies with all applicable
requirements. Prior to forwarding to the Board of Adjustment, the
Zoning Administrator shall prepare a report describing the
circumstances of the application. The Zoning Administrator shall then
forward the application, his/her report and any recommendations or
actions of any other City department or agency to the Board of
Adjustment. The application shall contain the following information, as
well as such additional information as the Board of Adjustment may
prescribe by regulation and file with the City Clerk/Administrator:
1. The particular requirements of this Chapter which prevent the
proposed construction;
2. The characteristics of the subject property which prevent
compliance with the requirements of this Chapter;
3. The particular hardship which would result if the specific
requirements of this Chapter were applied to the subject property;
4. The reduction of the minimum requirements of this Chapter which
would be necessary to permit the proposed construction.
Section
400.780
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.810
AO:497
Section 400.820. Review Considerations. [R.O. 2009 §25-100; Ord.
No. 2739 §43-96.5, 5-20-1985]
A. The Board of Adjustment shall not grant a variation as authorized in this
Article unless it shall, in each case, make specific written findings of
fact directly based upon the particular evidence presented to it that
support all of the following conclusions:
1. The variation requested arises from a condition which is unique to
the property in question and which is not ordinarily found in the
same zoning district and is not created by an action or actions of
the property owner or the applicant;
2. The granting of the variation shall not adversely affect the rights of
adjacent property owners or residents;
3. The strict application of the provisions of this Chapter from which a
variation is requested will cause severe practical difficulty or
extreme hardship for the property owner represented in the
application;
4. The variation desired will not adversely affect the public health,
safety, order, convenience or general welfare of the community;
5. Granting the variation desired will not violate the general spirit and
intent of this Chapter.
A. In determining whether the evidence presented supports all of the
conclusions required by Section 400.810, the Board of Adjustment shall
consider the extent to which the evidence demonstrates that:
1. The particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical
conditions of the property involved would result in a severe
practical difficulty or extreme hardship upon or for the owner,
lessee or occupant, if the provisions of the Chapter were literally
enforced;
2. The request for a variation is not based exclusively upon the desire
of the owner, lessee, occupant or applicant to secure a greater
financial return from the property;
3. The granting of the variation will not be materially detrimental or
injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in
which the property is located;
4. The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light
to adjacent property, substantially increase the congestion in the
public streets, increase the danger of fire, endanger the public
safety or substantially diminish or impair property values within
the neighborhood.
Section
400.810
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.830
AO:498
Section 400.830. Conditions and Restrictions. [R.O. 2009 §25-101;
Ord. No. 2739 §43-96.6, 5-20-1985]
In granting a variance, the Board of Adjustment may impose such conditions
and restrictions upon the property benefited by the variance as may be
necessary to comply with the standards set out in Section 400.810 to reduce
or minimize any potentially injurious effect of such variance upon other
property in the neighborhood and to carry out the general purpose and
intent of this Zoning Code. Failure to comply with any of these conditions or
restrictions shall constitute a violation of this Chapter.
Section 400.840. Decisions and Notice. [R.O. 2009 §25-102; Ord.
No. 2739 §43-96.7, 5-20-1985]
Section 400.850. Term. [R.O. 2009 §25-103; Ord. No. 2739 §43-96.8,
5-20-1985]
Section 400.860. Appeals. [R.O. 2009 §25-104; Ord. No. 2739
§43-96.9, 5-20-1985]
A. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board of Adjustment
shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirements, decision or
determination of the Zoning Administrator or, to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
Chapter or, to effect any variance.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall render and send to the applicant a
written decision on an application for a variance without unreasonable
delay and in no case more than thirty (30) days after the public hearing.
The Zoning Administrator shall be informed of the decision and shall be
responsible for enforcement.
A. No variance granted by the Board of Adjustment shall be valid for a
period longer than three hundred sixty-five (365) days from the date on
which it grants the variance, unless within such period:
1. A building permit is obtained and the construction or alteration of
the structure is commenced and pursued diligently toward
completion; or
2. A certificate of occupancy is obtained and a use of occupancy
commenced. The Board of Adjustment may grant extensions not
exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days each, upon written
application, without notice or hearing.
A. Board Of Adjustment.
1. Authorization. Any person, any neighborhood organization as
defined in Section 32.105, RSMo., representing such person,
aggrieved by the interpretation or administration of this Zoning
Code may appeal to the Board of Adjustment.
Section
400.830
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.860
AO:499
Section 400.870. through Section 400.910. (Reserved)
2. Time for appeals. Notice of appeal shall be filed within a reasonable
time, not to exceed thirty (30) days from the time the event or
action appealed from occurred.
3. Filing. The person making the appeal shall file the appeal in the
office of the City Clerk/Administrator at the time the appeal is filed.
The fee as established by the Board of Aldermen is on file in the
offices of the City Clerk/Administrator and the Department of
Planning and Development.
4. Procedure. The City Clerk/Administrator shall notify the officer or
the department from whom the appeal is taken. The officer or
department shall immediately transmit to the Board of Adjustment
all the papers and documents constituting the record of the actions
or events which are being appealed.
5. Public hearing. The Board of Adjustment shall set a date for a
public hearing and notice of this hearing shall be given according
to the provisions of Section 400.150. The hearing shall be held no
later than forty-five (45) days from the date the appeal is filed.
6. Decisions on appeals. Within thirty (30) days of the close of the
public hearing, the Board of Adjustment shall affirm or reverse,
fully or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination or other event or action appealed from.
7. Stay of proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings that concern
the action appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal
is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after he/she received
notice of appeal that by reason of facts certified by him/her, a stay
would, in his/her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.
In such case, the proceeding shall not be stayed except in
accordance with a restraining order issued by the Board of
Adjustment or a court of record.
B. Circuit Court. Any person, any neighborhood organization as defined in
Section 32.105, RSMo., representing such person, aggrieved by any
decision of the Board of Adjustment, may petition the Circuit Court
having jurisdiction pursuant to Section 89.110, RSMo. The petition
shall comply with all applicable rules of the court and shall specify the
grounds for appeal.
Section
400.860
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.870
AO:500
DIVISION 8
Architectural Board Review of Site Plans and Building Permits
Section 400.920. Application for Review. [R.O. 2009 §25-113; Ord.
No. 3968 §4, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 4310 §1, 10-3-2011]
A. Building Applications — Submitted To Architectural Review Board.
1. Any building or construction project, as described in Subsections
400.450(1) and (2), except those described in Subsection (2)
hereunder, for which a building permit is required by ordinances of
the City, shall require the review and approval of the Architectural
Review Board. In addition to the application for a building permit,
applicant shall submit to the Department of Planning and
Development five (5) copies of the following items (except item (b))
and materials in duplicate for transmittal to the Architectural
Review Board for its review. The documents herein required for
review by the Architectural Review Board are in addition to and not
in lieu of such plans, detailed drawings and specifications as may
be required for submission to the Department of Planning and
Development by the provisions of all applicable ordinances of the
City.
a. Schematic site plan at a scale of not less than one (1) inch
equals twenty (20) feet with dimensioned property lines,
building setback lines, easements identified, existing and
proposed construction, location of driveways and parking
areas, topographic contours of the existing grades and
proposed finished grades at two (2) foot intervals minimum for
a distance twenty-five (25) feet from the face of the existing
and proposed construction with an indication of direction of
flow of storm water, locating proposed landscape material,
landscape material proposed to be removed and identifying
any accessory structures, proposed or existing.
b. Schematic floor plans (at a minimum scale of one-quarter (¼)
inch equals one (1) foot) showing overall building dimensions.
c. Schematic building elevations (at a minimum scale of onequarter
(¼) inch equals one (1) foot) showing vertical
dimensions, fenestration, proposed materials and colors and
any existing construction where an addition or modification is
proposed. All existing building materials shall be indicated on
the existing building elevations.
d. Color photographs of all buildings located on adjoining
property. Color photographs of all building facades of existing
construction for projects involving remodeling or additions.
Section
400.920
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.920
AO:501
e. Such other documentation, materials and other specific
information that the Architectural Review Board may
reasonably request.
2. Plans for projects involving alterations and repairs, which do not
affect the outward appearance of a building, and existing home
decks, fences, window replacements and roofing shingle
replacements shall not require approval of the Architectural
Review Board.
3. No building permit for a building project subject to this Section
shall be approved or issued by the Building Official until the
Architectural Review Board has completed its review of and has
issued its ruling hereunder with respect to such project.
4. Any proposed new construction or significant modification of
existing construction shall require architectural plans prepared by
and bearing the professional seal and signature of a person
licensed to practice architecture in the State according to Chapter
327, RSMo. Any work associated with the proposed construction
which is engineering in nature and not incidental to the
architectural scope per Chapter 327, RSMo., shall require plans or
drawings prepared by and bearing the seal and signature of a
person licensed under the same Statute to practice engineering.
5. Any building plans and documentation related to such project once
approved by the Architectural Review Board and returned to the
Building Official for further processing of an application for a
building permit shall not thereafter be revised, altered or changed
by the applicant in any way affecting the outward appearance of
the structure nor shall the same be approved, suffered or permitted
by the Building Official, either before or after issuance of a building
permit or at any time during the progress of the execution of the
work, without first resubmitting the project to the Architectural
Review Board for its further review and consideration hereunder
and obtaining its approval thereof.
6. Individual citizen notice. All residents and property owners
residing within three hundred (300) feet of property which is the
subject of review by the Architectural Review Board shall, upon
receipt of the petition by the Zoning Administrator, be notified by
mail that said petition was filed. Said notification shall give the date
of the first (1st) submission of the matter before the Architectural
Review Board, to include a copy of the body's review protocol as
itemized within this Division.
a. When applicable, the notice shall also state where copies of
reports, documents, applications, plans or other relevant
material will be accessible for examination by interested
persons.
Section
400.920
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.920
AO:502
Section 400.930. Application for Review — Consideration. [R.O.
2009 §25-114; Ord. No. 3968 §4, 3-7-2005]
Section 400.940. Meeting Schedule. [R.O. 2009 §25-115; Ord. No.
3968 §4, 3-7-2005]
Within ten (10) days of receiving the application and supporting data, the
Chairman shall call a public meeting of the Architectural Review Board
and a minimum fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of the
meeting shall be given to the applicant and publicly posted. At the meeting
b. The Architectural Review Board, at its sole discretion, may
hold informational meetings intended to inform residents of
the details of proposals involving new construction or uses
within three hundred (300) feet of their homes. This is not to be
construed as fulfilling the requirement for the public hearings
described elsewhere in this Division. Resident notification of
the informational meeting is to be by post card or letter mailed
or hand delivered to properties within three hundred (300) feet
of the property for which new construction or a new use is
petitioned.
A. Promptly after an application for a building permit and all the
supporting data itemized above have been filed in good order in the
Department of Planning and Development, copies of the same
application and supporting data shall be equally distributed to all
members of the Architectural Review Board for their review,
examination and determination, in connection with the general welfare
of the residents of the City, whether the proposed structure will meet
the following requirements:
1. It will conform to the proper architectural standards concerning
appearance and design.
2. It will be in general conformity with the style, design of
surrounding structures, not constituting an unsightly, grotesque or
otherwise unsuitable appearance, detrimental to the welfare of
surrounding property or residents.
3. It will be conducive to the proper architectural development of the
City.
4. It will preserve, to the greatest extent possible, living trees having
a caliper of six (6) or more inches and will be landscaped in general
conformity with surrounding properties.
B. In making any determination hereunder with respect to conformity of
the proposed structure to the standards set out above, the Architectural
Review Board may consider its bulk, scale or total size in relation to the
size of the lot on which the structure is to be situated and to the size of
the other structures in the surrounding neighborhood.
Section
400.920
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.940
AO:503
the Architectural Review Board shall examine the plans, elevations, detail
drawings and specifications, hear the applicant in reference thereto and any
other evidence that may be pertinent.
Section 400.950. Meeting Schedule — Approval — Conditional
Approval — Disapproval. [R.O. 2009 §25-116; Ord. No. 3968 §4,
3-7-2005]
Section 400.960. Meeting Schedule — Issuance of Permit. [R.O.
2009 §25-117; Ord. No. 3968 §4, 3-7-2005]
If the Architectural Review Board returns the application to the Building
Official with approval, the Building Official shall issue the required permits.
If the Architectural Review Board shall return the application to the
Building Official with conditional approval and recommendations, the
Building Official may issue the required permits, provided that the applicant
shall make appropriate changes in the drawings and specifications and
agree to comply with all recommendations of the Architectural Review
Board. Upon denial of any application to the Architectural Review Board,
the Building Official shall not issue a building permit.
Section 400.970. Appeals. [R.O. 2009 §25-118; Ord. No. 3968 §4,
3-7-2005; Ord. No. 4359 §1, 7-16-2012]
A. At said meeting and after said hearing or, at any meeting within fifteen
(15) days subsequent thereto, the Architectural Review Board shall
take one (1) of the following actions:
1. The Architectural Review Board shall approve the application if, in
its opinion, the proposed structure will be in conformity with the
standards set out above;
2. The Architectural Review Board shall conditionally approve the
application if, in its opinion, the proposed structure will be in
conformity with the standards set out above, provided the applicant
makes changes in the drawings and specifications in strict
conformity with recommendations from the Architectural Review
Board; or
3. The Architectural Review Board shall disapprove the application if,
in its opinion, the proposed structure will not be in conformity with
the standards set out above and the Architectural Review Board
has no reasonable recommendations that, if adopted, would cause
it to so conform. The Architectural Review Board shall provide
written reasons for the disapproval.
A. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Architectural Review Board
may appeal to the Board of Aldermen. Appeals shall be filed within ten
(10) days from the date of the decision of the Architectural Review
Board for which the appeal is filed.
Section
400.940
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.970
AO:504
Section 400.980. through Section 400.1030. (Reserved)
B. Any appeal shall be based on one (1) or more of the following grounds
for appeal and the inquiry and review by the Board of Aldermen shall be
limited to the specific grounds stated in the appeal:
1. The Architectural Review Board's decision was outside the scope of
the Board's authority or jurisdiction;
2. The Architectural Review Board's decision is not supported by the
whole record;
a. The Architectural Review Board's decision is, for any other
reason, unauthorized by law; or
b. The Architectural Review Board's decision is arbitrary and
capricious or an abuse of the Board's discretion.
The appeal must set forth sufficient factual detail and
argument so that the grounds for appeal are easily
discernible.
C. Upon an appeal being filed in the office of the City Clerk/Administrator,
the hearing of the appeal will be placed on the agenda of the Board of
Aldermen and processed in accordance with the Board of Aldermen
procedures set forth in Chapter 400, Section 400.150 of the Brentwood
City Code. There will be public notice thereof, as well as due notice to
the parties in interest, including the owners of abutting lots.
D. The Board of Aldermen at such hearing, shall hear such interested
parties as may desire to by heard and after said hearing shall make a
determination with regard to the appeal. The Board may affirm the
decision of the Architectural Review Board, may reject the decision of
the Board and remand the matter to the Architectural Review Board for
further consideration, or may affirm the decision with additional
conditions. If the matter is approved with conditions, and the applicant
complies with the conditions, the permit shall be issued forthwith,
otherwise no permit shall be issued by the Director of Planning and
Development. The action of the Board of Aldermen in regard to the
application, together with the report of the Architectural Review Board,
shall be included in the minutes of the Board of Aldermen.
Section
400.970
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.980
AO:505

DIVISION 9
Site Plan Approval
Section 400.1040. Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §25-124; Ord. No. 2739
§43-97.1, 5-20-1985]
The site plan approval procedure is intended to ensure the adequate review
and consideration of potential impacts of proposed development upon
surrounding uses and activities and to encourage a high standard of site
and building design.
Section 400.1050. Application. [R.O. 2009 §25-125; Ord. No. 2739
§43-97.2, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 3931 §1, 4-19-2004]
A. An application for site plan approval may be filed by any person or their
agent with a financial, contractual or proprietary interest in the
property to be developed according to the submitted plan.
B. All applications for site plan approval shall be filed in the Department of
Planning and Development. The application for site plan approval shall
contain the following information as well as such additional information
as the Planning and Zoning Commission may prescribe by additional
administrative regulation filed with the City Clerk/Administrator:
1. All applications shall be signed by the applicant and shall state the
applicant's name and address.
2. The site plan shall include all necessary data and drawings in order
that the Zoning Administrator can determine whether the proposed
use and development complies with the district requirements and
that City departments affected by the project may assess the
impact of the proposed development on public facilities and
services and on the surrounding area.
3. The preliminary plan may be in sketch form but must be drawn to
scale and with reasonable accuracy. The plan may be drawn "hardlined"
or freehand if skillfully executed. It may consist of one (1) or
more sheets or drawings at a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50)
feet or larger. Engineers' scale, one (1) inch equals twenty (20)
feet, one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet, etc., is preferable to
architects' scale, one-sixteenth (1/16) inch equals one (1) foot, etc.
4. The following data and drawings are required for the preliminary
plan:
a. A site location diagram. A small diagram map indicating
position in the City and in relation to surrounding streets and
the City's major street network which may be a different scale
from the remaining items;
b. Title block and reference information, including:
Section
400.1040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1050
AO:507
(1) Name of project;
(2) Name of property owner;
(3) Name of applicant/developer;
(4) Name of architect and/or engineer;
(5) Scale, both numerical and graphic;
(6) Date of submission with provision for dating revisions.
c. Site dimensions. Show dimensions of site perimeter, applicable
zoning setback lines, site area in square feet and an access.
Dimensions may be approximate for the preliminary
submission;
d. Site surroundings. Indicate the property lines, ownership and
location of all buildings occupying and property abutting
subject property or location within a distance of three hundred
(300) feet from the perimeter of the site. This map may be
drawn at a different scale from other plan items;
e. Easements and restrictions. Indicate location and nature of
easements, zoning boundaries or other restrictions or
limitations on the use of the subject site;
f. Site topography. Provide existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two (2) feet or less. This map may be approximate
and drawn from enlarged U.S.G.S. or MSD base maps for
preliminary submission;
g. Building location, size and siting. Outline in a solid line and
locate with dimensions from the property line the "footprint" of
all buildings. All building extensions or projections beyond the
primary facade should be drawn with dotted lines. Indicate
also building perimeter dimensions and heights;
h. Parking layout and driveways. Include notation of parking stall
size, aisle and driveway widths and number of cars in each row
of parking spaces;
i. Landscaping plan. Describe existing and proposed landscape
material by size and species along with related site
improvements such as retaining walls, walkways, plazas, etc.
Generalized massing of major existing tree groups and
approximate location of all trees over nine (9) inch caliper,
whether to remain or to be removed, to be shown on
preliminary submission. The final plan should locate all trees
over six (6) inch caliper and indicate which are to remain and
which are to be removed as well as describing accurately the
size, type and location of all planned plant material;
Section
400.1050
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1050
AO:508
j. Utilities. Indicate provision for or access to major utilities
including water, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, gas and
electricity;
k. Storm water management and erosion control. Indicate
provisions to be made to direct and detain storm water on site
in accordance with applicable City regulations including
Article V, Division 7, Section 400.2660 of this Code and to
mitigate erosion both during and following completion of
construction;
l. Lighting. Indicate the location of light standards along with
both a graphic and catalog reference describing the proposed
standards.
m. Development data. Indicate in tabular form the following
information:
(1) Site area in square feet and acres;
(2) Gross building floor area in square feet;
(3) Leasable floor area, GLA, square feet;
(4) Percentage of leasable to gross floor area (3/2);
(5) Floor area ratio (3/1);
(6) Building coverage (building "footprints"/1);
(7) Site coverage (6 + parking and driveways area/1);
(8) Parking spaces required;
(9) Parking spaces provided;
(10) Existing and proposed zoning.
5. The final plan shall be drawn and certified or sealed by a licensed
professional engineer or architect. The final plan shall be drawn
accurately to line and scale, one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet or
larger. The final submission shall comply with any approved
preliminary plan and shall incorporate all changes or refinements
resulting from any conditional approval.
6. The final plan shall include all the elements in Subsection (B)(4).
However, all approximate dimensions and data supplied in the
preliminary plan shall be precise and accurate in the final plan.
7. In addition to the requirements in Subsection (B)(4), the final
submission shall include schematic architectural plans. These
plans shall be drawn by a licensed architect or engineer and shall
show the layout and use of interior building floor space by means of
floor plans and building facades. Building profiles and exterior
Section
400.1050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1050
AO:509
Section 400.1060. Review Procedure. [R.O. 2009 §25-126; Ord. No.
2739 §43-97.3, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 2893 §1, 11-2-1987]
materials shall be shown by elevation and/or section drawings.
While these architectural schematics should be drawn to scale,
they may be drawn freehand if accurately and skillfully executed.
A. A site plan shall be submitted with the application for site plan approval
which shall contain, at a minimum, information required by the district
regulations (see Article III) in addition to the application and
submission requirements of this Article.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall coordinate the review and analysis of
the site plan application by the City staff including other affected City
departments before any final action may be taken by the Commission on
the application. This coordinated administrative review of the
application shall be completed within seventy (70) days of filing. The
results of this review shall be compiled by the Zoning Administrator and
reported by him/her to the Commission for its consideration.
C. After the Commission receives the site plan application and associated
documents, the Chairman shall appoint a special committee consisting
of three (3) to five (5) members of the Commission to review the
application and report it has received from the Zoning Administrator.
The Commission's special committee may then either recommend
approval, disapproval or, conditionally approve the site plan
application. The decision rendered by the special committee shall then
be considered by the full Planning and Zoning Commission.
D. At the applicant's discretion, he/she may choose, following the
submission of the report of the Zoning Administrator to the
Commission, to regard his/her initial application as a preliminary site
plan. He/she may then respond to the review of the Zoning
Administrator and Commission and submit a revised final site plan to
the Commission for its consideration and final action within an
additional seventy (70) days thereafter.
E. Every request for rezoning of property to one (1) of the following zoning
districts shall be accompanied by a site plan:
"MR" Multi-Family Residential District
"RSC" Retail-Service Commercial District
"GC" General Commercial District
"PD" Planned Development Overlay District
"LID" Light Industrial District
The action and reasoning of the Planning and Zoning Commission
recommendation shall then be forwarded to the Board of Aldermen.
F. When an application for site plan approval is filed in conjunction with
an application for rezoning, the Commission shall submit the
Section
400.1050
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1060
AO:510
Section 400.1070. Site Development Standards. [R.O. 2009 §25-127;
Ord. No. 2739 §43-97.4, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 4172 §1, 3-24-2009]
conclusions of its review of the site plan, either approval, disapproval
or conditional approval, in accordance with this Section, together with
its recommendation to the Board of Aldermen for its action on the
rezoning.
G. In those instances where final approval of a site plan is dependent upon
a variance approval by the Board of Adjustment, no action will be taken
by the Planning and Zoning Commission on that final review until the
Board of Adjustment has rendered a decision, regardless of the seventy
(70) day time limitation referenced in Subsection (D). In those events
where inaction by the Board of Adjustment delays final review by the
Planning and Zoning Commission beyond the seventy (70) day time
limit, a final review recommendation will be made within forty-five (45)
days following a decision by the Board of Adjustment.
A. In considering any application for approval of a site plan, the
Commission shall consider the following factors:
1. The relationship of proposed uses, functions, sites and buildings
within the development tract to each other;
2. The relationship of proposed uses, functions, sites and buildings
within the tract to existing land uses and the permitted uses of
adjoining tracts in accordance with correct zoning;
3. The provision and distribution of adequate parking facilities;
4. The provision of proper means of access to and from public roads,
including adequate access for firefighting vehicles and equipment;
5. The provision of site amenities including landscaping and fences;
6. Any other factors relevant to the public health, safety and
convenience and general welfare of the residents of the City.
B. The following best practices shall be considered when reviewing an
application for approval of curb cuts in both residential and commercial
zoning districts:
1. For streets classified as minor arterial or above, as defined in
Appendix B, page 16 of the Brentwood Comprehensive Plan, new
curb cuts should be prohibited;
2. For streets classified as collectors, new curb cuts should be
discouraged;
3. For corner lots, City's priority should be to locate the curb cut on
the lower functional classified street, i.e., local street before
collector street and collector street before arterial;
Section
400.1060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1070
AO:511
Section 400.1080. Conditions and Restrictions. [R.O. 2009 §25-128;
Ord. No. 2739 §43-97.5, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 3033 §7, 10-16-1989]
4. Curb cuts should be located as far from the adjacent public street
intersection as practical to achieve maximum available corner
clearance, with consideration of property limits, adjacent curb
cuts, topography and existing drainage facilities;
5. One (1) residential driveway is permitted for each single-family
residential lot. One (1) additional residential driveway is permitted
when the single-family residential lot frontage is at least two (2)
times the minimum front yard lot width for the zoning district and
meets all zoning requirements of the residential district located in
Section 400.1320 or Section 400.1330;
6. One (1) residential driveway is permitted for each attached singlefamily
residential lot with a shared access drive preferable for
multiple attached single-family units. One (1) additional residential
driveway is permitted when the single-family residential lot
frontage is at least two (2) times the minimum front yard lot width
for the zoning district;
7. One (1) residential driveway is permitted for each multi-family
residential lot. One (1) additional residential driveway is permitted
when the multi-family residential front yard lot frontage exceeds
two hundred (200) feet, provided that the sum of the driveway
widths do not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the frontage.
However, more than two (2) access points are reserved for
apartment and condominium style developments with over one
hundred (100) units;
8. No subdivision of an existing piece of ground would be allowed that
would in itself create an inconsistency or inability to comply with
the access management best practices;
9. For larger residential projects (greater than three (3) lots or two (2)
acres) the City shall defer to the most recent version of the St.
Louis County Design Criteria Manual and Standard Drawings,
Section 40.30 Entrance Standards.
A. In approving a site plan application, the Commission may impose
conditions and restrictions and may vary the standards and prescribe
development standards within the range of such discretion as
prescribed elsewhere in the Brentwood City Code, so long as the
general intent of this Article is carried out. In no event, however, shall
any permitted use or use regulations be varied so as to make them less
restrictive than prescribed in the district regulations (Article III).
B. If the Commission imposes conditions or restrictions, it shall designate
specific requirements which must be met before an applicant may be
Section
400.1070
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1080
AO:512
Section 400.1090. Site Plan Approval in Conjunction With
Rezoning. [R.O. 2009 §25-129; Ord. No. 2739 §43-97.6, 5-20-1985]
If the site plan was approved in conjunction with a change of zoning and
if substantial construction or development has not been completed within
twelve (12) months of the Board of Aldermen's approval of the site plan and
rezoning, the Board of Aldermen may, on its motion or on a recommendation
of the Planning and Zoning Commission, rezone the property or any portion
thereof to any one (1) or more of the zoning districts that regulated the
use of such ground immediately prior to the approval of the zoning district
classification and corresponding site plan. A public hearing, other than
the required three (3) readings of a bill, is not required for this rezoning;
however, the owner shall be notified of the proposed rezoning prior to the
introduction of any bill for such rezoning.
Section 400.1100. Site Plan and Building and Occupancy Permits.
[R.O. 2009 §25-130; Ord. No. 2739 §43-97.7, 5-20-1985]
A building permit or certificate of occupancy for any building or structure
within a project that has undergone site plan approval shall not be issued
unless that building or structure is in substantial compliance with the site
plan as approved by the Board of Aldermen.
Section 400.1110. Detailed Site Plan. [R.O. 2009 §25-131; Ord. No.
2739 §43-97.8, 5-20-1985]
If a site plan provides for the construction of a complex of buildings and
site improvements to be developed over an extended period of time, a
detailed site plan shall be submitted for review by the Planning and Zoning
Commission in accordance with this Section for each specific building
project. Such detailed site plans may be submitted in advance of or in
conjunction with an application for a building permit. Of primary
importance in this review will be a determination that the detailed site plan
complies with the site plan approval for the total development or project.
Section 400.1120. Term. [R.O. 2009 §25-132; Ord. No. 2739
§43-97.9, 5-20-1985]
No site plan review by the Commission shall be valid for a period longer
than twelve (12) months from the date granted, unless within such period a
building permit is obtained and substantial construction is commenced. The
Board of Aldermen may grant extensions not exceeding twelve (12) months
each upon written request of the original applicant and resubmission of
the application if the application as resubmitted is substantially the same
as the initially approved application. However, the Board has the power
granted final approval of a site plan, building permit and certificate of
occupancy.
C. Failure to comply with any of these conditions or restrictions shall
constitute a violation of this Chapter.
Section
400.1080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1120
AO:513
in such cases to attach new conditions to its reapproval or disapprove
the reapplication. Where the application for reapproval contained changes
which the Board concludes materially alter the initial application, it shall
refer the application to the Zoning Administrator who shall initiate a new
site plan review procedure as stated in Section 400.1050.
Section 400.1130. Trust Indenture. [R.O. 2009 §25-133; Ord. No.
2739 §43-64, 5-20-1985]
Section 400.1140. through Section 400.1180. (Reserved)
A. The developer of land shall submit in association with the site plan for a
proposed project, a proposed trust indenture relating to all of the land
within the development. This trust indenture shall provide for the
appointment of a Board of Trustees to be selected by the owners of the
tract in an equitable manner. The Board of Trustees shall be charged
with the duty under this Chapter and under such trust indenture to
maintain all streets, private parks, common areas, walks, fountains,
pools, statuary, landscaping, recreational areas and any other areas or
structures for the common use of the tenants or owners of property
within the development. The trust indenture shall provide an equitable
means of assessment against all land within such tract, with the
exception of public lands, to ensure that the above described areas and
structures shall be maintained in compliance with this Chapter and
other ordinances of the City. In this manner, such areas and structures
will remain attractive and useful to the owners and tenants of property
within the development and shall not be injurious to the health, safety
or welfare of residents of surrounding areas or be detrimental to
property values of land and improvements within such tract or in
surrounding areas.
B. The trust indenture shall also provide that the conveyance or change of
ownership or lease of any part of such tract shall be subject to the terms
of this Chapter and of such trust indenture and that no right or power
conferred on the trustees by such indenture to comply with the
provisions of this Subsection shall be abrogated. Such trust indenture
shall be submitted to the City Attorney for approval as to the legal form
and shall be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of the County prior to
the issuance of any building permit. No change or amendment shall be
made in terms or provisions of the original trust indenture without the
written consent of the City Attorney.
Section
400.1120
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1140
AO:514
DIVISION 10
Building Permits and Certificate of Occupancy
Section 400.1150. Building Permits — Required. [R.O. 2009
§25-143; Ord. No. 2739 §43-99.1, 5-20-1985]
No building shall be constructed, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor
shall any such work be started until a building permit for the work has
been issued by the Building Official. The application for a building permit
shall be in the name of the person for whom the work or construction is to
be done. Building permits shall expire one (1) year after date of issuance.
Application for renewal must be made by the applicant upon expiration
unless substantial construction has been initiated and is being pursued
diligently toward completion.
Section 400.1160. Building Permits — Application. [R.O. 2009
§25-144; Ord. No. 2739 §43-99.2, 5-20-1985]
A. The application shall be prepared on forms provided by the Department
of Planning and Development and available in his/her office. The
application shall be signed by the applicant and shall state his/her name
and address.
B. In addition to the specific requirements in this Section, every
application for a building permit shall further comply with all applicable
provisions of the Building Code as well as pertinent Sections of the
City's other technical codes. The Zoning Administrator shall issue
regulations requiring such other information as may be necessary to
determine compliance of the application with this Article and a copy of
the applicable provisions from the Building Code and said regulations
shall be available in the Department of Planning and Development.
C. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by three (3)
copies of engineering and/or architectural plans and specifications for
commercial applications and two (2) copies for residential applications,
drawn to an appropriate scale. The plans shall be sufficiently detailed to
allow the determination of compliance with all relevant City codes,
ordinances and regulations and shall show the proposed site
improvements, including all new construction and reconstruction,
structural alteration or repair of existing structures. In addition, the
plans shall indicate the shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon,
the exact size and location on the lot of existing structures and the lines
within which the buildings or structures shall be erected or altered, the
existing and intended use of each building or part of building, the
number of families the building is designed to accommodate if a
residence or apartment, the number of persons the building is designed
to accommodate for each separate use or non-residential function and
such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as
may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this
Chapter. The Building Official shall forward one (1) copy of the building
Section
400.1150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1160
AO:515
Section 400.1210. Site and Landscape Plans. [R.O. 2009 §25-145;
Ord. No. 2739 §§43-75.1 — 43-75.2, 5-20-1985]
permit application to the Zoning Administrator for his/her review. One
(1) copy of such plans shall be returned to the owner, upon approval, by
the Building Official.
D. All dimensions shown on those plans relating to the location and size of
the lot to be built upon shall be related to known, accepted street or
property lines. The Director of Planning and Development or the
Commission may require that the lot and the location of the building
thereon shall be staked out on the ground before construction is
started.
E. At the time a building permit is issued, the applicant shall pay the City a
fee in accordance with the schedule of fees established by the Board of
Aldermen. The fee shall be paid in the office of the City Clerk/
Administrator.
F. For any construction, reconstruction or structural alteration valued at
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more, the Building Official shall
not issue a building permit until a performance bond or escrow
agreement to cover the cost of completion of improvements has been
filed with the City Clerk/Administrator in a form and with a company
approved by the City Attorney.
A. Prior to the issuance of any building permit for the construction or
improvement of a parking or loading area subject to this Section, a
suitable parking site and landscape plan shall be submitted to the
Planning and Zoning Commission indicating the landscaping, as well as
the parking layout, proposed drainage on the premises, proposed
lighting on the premises and all driveways extending beyond the
property line into the public right-of-way.
B. The landscaping plan shall be prepared by a qualified architect or
landscape architect and shall meet with the approval of the Commission
which shall review the proposed parking area and its landscaping to
ascertain that the plan will promote and facilitate the objectives of this
Section. Any deviation from the approved plan shall constitute a
violation of this Chapter. Plans shall be drawn to an accurate scale and
shall show the layout of the lot entrances and exits, drainage provisions,
lighting provisions, surfacing, curb barriers and location and type of
landscaping, including by name and size the types of trees, hedges,
shrubs and plants to be used. This required parking site and landscape
plan may be incorporated and made part of a site plan submitted in
accordance with other zoning district requirements and Division 9 of
this Article.
C. Any application for a building permit for the construction of a parking
or loading facility shall be accompanied by a parking site and landscape
plan to be reviewed and approved, if appropriate, by the Planning and
Section
400.1160
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1210
AO:516
Section 400.1220. Review Procedure. [R.O. 2009 §25-146; Ord. No.
2739 §43-99.3, 5-20-1985]
Section 400.1230. Certificate of Occupancy — Required. [R.O. 2009
§25-147; Ord. No. 2739 §43-100.1, 5-20-1985]
No person shall occupy, nor shall any owner or agent thereof permit the
occupancy of any building or addition thereto or part thereof, for any
purpose until a certificate of occupancy has been issued. The certificate
of occupancy so issued shall state that the occupancy complies with this
Chapter and all other applicable provisions of this Code including, but not
limited to, the Building Code and all other safety codes.
Section 400.1240. Certificate of Occupancy — Application. [R.O.
2009 §25-148; Ord. No. 2739 §43-100.2, 5-20-1985]
Zoning Commission. Such application shall be accompanied also by
detailed construction plans and specifications of the planned
improvements and a statement regarding the proposed methods of
maintenance and operation.
A. The Zoning Administrator shall review the building permit application
and determine that it complies with all applicable submission
requirements and all applicable City ordinances relating to the
development of land and shall return the application with his/her
recommendations to the Building Official.
B. If an application is refused by the Building Official for the reason that
the application fails to satisfy the applicable requirements of this
Zoning Code and other City ordinances, the applicant may appeal to the
Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions of Division 7 of
this Article.
A. Whenever the sale of a building results in a change in the occupant, or
whenever premises are rented to an occupant, or whenever there is a
change of use of the premises, the occupant shall be required to apply
for and receive a certificate of occupancy in accordance with the
provisions of this Article and all other applicable ordinances and
regulations of the City or other public jurisdiction having jurisdiction
over some aspect of the development such as fire protection, sewers,
etc.
B. An application for a certificate of occupancy shall be filed in the office of
the Building Official. At the time the application is filed, the applicant
shall pay the requisite fee. Notice of such charges shall appear on all
occupancy permit applications.
C. Certificates of occupancy may be issued upon application by landlord or
owner of property and the Director of Planning and Development may
make periodic inspections of such property.
Section
400.1210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1240
AO:517
D. Conditional Occupancy Permit.
1. A conditional occupancy permit may be issued by the Director of
Planning and Development if, in the Director's sole discretion:
a. Any deficiency or non-compliance with this Code would not
seriously endanger the health or safety of the occupants or the
community; and
b. The occupant has made to the City a sufficient cash deposit to
ensure completion of the work and corrections and repairs of
all conditions in violation of City ordinance; and
c. The occupant has entered into an agreement setting forth
deadlines for the work to be done, the expiration date of the
temporary occupancy permit, and the conditions upon which
the City may utilize the cash deposit to perform the work to
correct and repair defects; and
d. The occupant has already submitted all applications and plans
to the City and has obtained building permits, approvals of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, Architectural Review Board,
Board of Aldermen, and all other required governmental
approvals from the City for the work.
2. No conditional occupancy permit shall be issued for a period
exceeding one hundred twenty (120) days. However, a conditional
occupancy permit may be extended only once for a period not to
exceed sixty (60) days if the Building Commissioner finds that:
a. Any deficiency or non-compliance with this Chapter would not
seriously endanger the health or safety of the occupants or the
community; and
b. The occupant has made substantial progress toward bringing
the property into compliance with the Municipal Code; and
c. All required corrections can be made within the time granted
for the extension.
3. All required work to correct and repair the violations shall be
completed prior to the expiration of the conditional occupancy
permit. Immediately following the completion of the work, the
occupant shall contact the City for an inspection of the work and
the property.
4. Upon the expiration or revocation of the conditional occupancy
permit, the property shall be vacated. No person shall be allowed to
reside or occupy the property; however, work to correct and repair
deficiencies and violations may be completed at the property only
during the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. Monday through
Friday, and on Saturday from 10:00 A.M. until 4:00 P.M. No audible
Section
400.1240
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1240
AO:518
work from the exterior is to be done on Sunday without the express
permission of the Director of Planning and Development.
5. The amount of the cash deposit shall be, at a minimum, twenty-five
percent (25%) of the estimated cost of all work required or one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) whichever is more;
amounts above this minimum may be required if a higher amount is
necessary to ensure the occupant's compliance with the Municipal
Code and/or be sufficient to ensure that at least a portion of the
violations can be corrected or repaired by the City. The Agreement
between the City and the occupant shall be in the form approved by
the City and must also be signed by the owner of the property (if
different from the occupant). The City may require submission of
contracts and other documents pertaining to the work.
6. The cash deposit shall be deposited by the City in a manner such
that the deposit will be separately accounted for apart from other
City funds. The City shall document the use, replacement, or
release of such funds, as deposited by each occupant, according to
generally accepted accounting principles. Occupant shall not
receive any interest on the funds deposited.
7. The cash deposit shall only be released or utilized by the City in
accordance with the terms with the Agreement and this Section.
Upon final inspection by the City and satisfactory completion of
all required work by the occupant, the deposit shall be released
to the occupant. Provided, however, if the Director of Planning
and Development determines that the work has been timely and is
substantially complete, the Director of Planning and Development
may release up to ninety percent (90%) of the cash deposit to the
occupant to pay contractors and third parties for the remainder of
the work. The remaining ten percent (10%) shall be held until all
work is completed.
In the event that the work is not timely completed or in the event
that the work is defective or non-compliant with City ordinance, the
City may use an occupant's deposited funds for expenses incurred
to perform abatement, complete the work or otherwise ensure
compliance with all applicable codes and requirements. If the City
so utilizes such funds, the occupant shall be obligated to deposit a
sum equal to the amount so used so as to maintain full funding of
the required deposit.
8. Any occupant aggrieved by a decision of the Director of Planning
and Development in the administration of this Section may file a
written appeal to the City Administrator within ten (10) days of the
decision appealed from. The City Administrator shall make a
written determination of the appeal within ten (10) business days of
the occupant's appeal, unless circumstances prevent a timely
Section
400.1240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1240
AO:519
Section 400.1250. Conditional Occupancy Permit. [Ord. No. 4379
§1, 10-15-2012]
determination, in which case the determination shall be made as
soon as reasonably possible.
In the event that the occupant believes that the City Administrator
improperly denies such an appeal, the occupant may file a written
appeal to the Board of Aldermen within five (5) days of the date of
the City Administrator's decision.
9. If the occupant fails to comply with an obligation of this Section,
the City shall withhold or withdraw any other permits or approvals
pertaining to the occupant or the property until such noncompliance
is cured.
10. The City may pursue any other available remedy in order to enforce
its ordinance. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the
authority of the City to pursue equitable or legal remedies,
abatement or other remedy available to the City.
A. A conditional occupancy permit may be issued by the Director of
Planning and Development if, in the Director's sole discretion:
1. Any deficiency or non-compliance with this Code would not
seriously endanger the health or safety of the occupants or the
community; and
2. The occupant has made to the City a sufficient cash deposit to
ensure completion of the work and corrections and repairs of all
conditions in violation of City ordinance; and
3. The occupant has entered into an agreement setting forth
deadlines for the work to be done, the expiration date of the
temporary occupancy permit, and the conditions upon which the
City may utilize the cash deposit to perform the work to correct and
repair defects; and
4. The occupant has already submitted all applications and plans to
the City and has obtained building permits, approvals of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, Architectural Review Board,
Board of Aldermen, and all other required governmental approvals
from the City for the work.
B. No conditional occupancy permit shall be issued for a period exceeding
one hundred twenty (120) days. However, a conditional occupancy
permit may be extended only once for a period not to exceed sixty (60)
days if the Director of Planning and Development finds that
1. Any deficiency or non-compliance with this Chapter would not
seriously endanger the health or safety of the occupants or the
community; and
Section
400.1240
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1250
AO:520
2. The occupant has made substantial progress toward bringing the
property into compliance with the Municipal Code; and
3. All required corrections can be made within the time granted for
the extension.
C. All required work to correct and repair the violations shall be
completed prior to the expiration of the conditional occupancy permit.
Immediately following the completion of the work, the occupant shall
contact the City for an inspection of the work and the property.
D. Upon the expiration or revocation of the conditional occupancy permit,
the property shall be vacated. No person shall be allowed to reside or
occupy the property; however, work to correct and repair deficiencies
and violations may be completed at the property only during the hours
of 7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. Monday through Friday, and on Saturday
from 10:00 A.M. until 4:00 P.M. No audible work from the exterior is to
be done on Sunday without the express permission of the Director of
Planning and Development.
E. The amount of the cash deposit shall be, at a minimum, twenty-five
percent (25%) of the estimated cost of all work required or one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) whichever is more; amounts
above this minimum may be required if a higher amount is necessary to
ensure the occupant's compliance with the Municipal Code and/or be
sufficient to ensure that at least a portion of the violations can be
corrected or repaired by the City. The agreement between the City and
the occupant shall be in the form approved by the City and must also be
signed by the owner of the property (if different from the occupant).
The City may require submission of contracts and other documents
pertaining to the work.
F. The cash deposit shall be deposited by the City in a manner such that
the deposit will be separately accounted for apart from other City
funds. The City shall document the use, replacement, or release of such
funds, as deposited by each occupant, according to generally accepted
accounting principles. Occupant shall not receive any interest on the
funds deposited.
G. The cash deposit shall only be released or utilized by the City in
accordance with the terms with the agreement and this Section.
Upon final inspection by the City and satisfactory completion of all
required work by the occupant, the deposit shall be released to the
occupant. Provided however, if the Director of Planning and
Development determines that the work has been timely and is
substantially complete, the Director of Planning and Development may
release up to ninety percent (90%) of the cash deposit to the occupant
to pay contractors and third parties for the remainder of the work. The
remaining ten percent (10%) shall be held until all work is completed.
Section
400.1250
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1250
AO:521
Section 400.1260. through Section 400.1290. (Reserved)
In the event that the work is not timely completed or in the event
that the work is defective or non-compliant with City ordinance, the
City may use an occupant's deposited funds for expenses incurred to
perform abatement, complete the work or otherwise ensure compliance
with all applicable codes and requirements. If the City so utilizes such
funds, the occupant shall be obligated to deposit a sum equal to the
amount so used so as to maintain full funding of the required deposit.
H. Any occupant aggrieved by a decision of the Director of Planning and
Development in the administration of this Section may file a written
appeal to the City Administrator within ten (10) days of the decision
appealed from. The City Administrator shall make a written
determination of the appeal within ten (10) business days of the
occupant's appeal, unless circumstances prevent a timely
determination, in which case the determination shall be made as soon
as reasonably possible.
In the event that the occupant believes that the City Administrator
improperly denies such an appeal, the occupant may file a written
appeal to the Board of Aldermen within five (5) days of the date of the
City Administrator's decision.
I. If the occupant fails to comply with an obligation of this Section, the
City shall withhold or withdraw any other permits or approvals
pertaining to the occupant or the property until such non-compliance is
cured.
J. The City may pursue any other available remedy in order to enforce its
ordinance. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the authority of
the City to pursue equitable or legal remedies, abatement or other
remedy available to the City.
Section
400.1250
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1260
AO:522
ARTICLE III
District Regulations
Section 400.1300. Districts Established. [R.O. 2009 §25-251; Ord.
No. 2739 §43-20, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 3662 §2, 7-19-1999]
The various zoning districts provided for in this Chapter are designed
to fulfill the intent and purposes of the Chapter as described in Section
400.030 and further to restrict the location of uses and buildings designed
for specific uses, to regulate and limit the height, location and size of
buildings, to regulate and limit the intensity, improvement and use of lots,
and to regulate and determine the area of yards and other spaces within
and surrounding buildings in a manner that will contribute to the orderly
growth, quality of life and attractive appearance of the City. For the above
purposes and to promote the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the City, the following districts are hereby authorized:
Formerly
"A" Single-Family Residential District "A" Residence District
"B" Single-Family Residential District "B" Residence District
"AR" Attached Single-Family Residential
District
New
"MR" Multi-Family Residential District "D" Multiple Dwelling
District
"RSC" Retail-Service Commercial District "E" Local Commercial
District
"GC" General Commercial District "F" Commercial District
"PD" Planned Development Overlay District New
"LID" Light Industrial District "G" Industrial District
"FP" Flood Plain Overlay District New
"UD" Urban Development District New
Section 400.1310. Boundaries. [R.O. 2009 §25-252; Ord. No. 2739
§43-21, 5-20-1985]
The boundaries of the districts are shown upon the District Zoning Map as
recorded with the County Recorder's office, Clayton, Missouri. The District
Zoning Map, together with all notations, references, amendments and other
information shown thereon, is hereby incorporated into and made a part
of this Chapter and shall have the same force and effect as if fully set out
and described in this Chapter. The District Zoning Map shall be properly
attested and kept on file in the office of the Clerk of the City. The district
zoning boundary lines on the District Zoning Map shall be determined by
use of the scale appearing on the map.
Section
400.1300
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1320
AO:523
Section 400.1320. "A" Single-Family Residential District. [R.O. 2009
§25-253; Ord. No. 2739 §§43-22.1 — 43-22.5, 5-20-1985; Ord. No.
3822 §2, 3-18-2002]
A. The "A" District is intended to provide for the development, protection
and conservation of areas of predominantly single-family detached
residences on lots of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
B. Permitted Uses. Any structure or land in the "A" Single-Family
Residential District may be used for the following purposes subject to
the other provisions and limitations of this Chapter and of other
applicable ordinances and Statutes of the City, County or State:
1. Detached single-family dwellings;
2. Group homes. No group home shall be located within five hundred
(500) feet of another group home. The exterior appearance of the
home and property shall be in reasonable conformance with the
general neighborhood standards. Group homes shall be
eleemosynary or not-for-profit in nature. [Ord. No. 4639 §2,
7-20-2015]
3. Public parks, playgrounds and publicly owned libraries and
community buildings;
4. Private parks, open space and recreation facilities owned and
maintained in common by the residents of a subdivision;
5. Home occupations as provided in Article V, Division 2;
6. Accessory uses as provided in Article V, Division 3.
C. Conditional Uses. The Board of Aldermen may authorize the following
uses by conditional use permit as provided in Article II, Division 6, after
receipt of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission
and subject to such restrictions and conditions as are deemed
necessary. The Board, by simple majority vote, may add any restriction
or condition it feels appropriate. [Ord. No. 4723 § 5, 8-15-2016]
1. Public utility substations and transmission facilities;
2. Private clubs;
3. Churches and other houses of worship, on lots of not less than onehalf
(½) acre;
4. Child day care centers, on lots of not less than one-half (½) acre;
5. Public or private not-for-profit schools, on lots of not less than onehalf
(½) acre.
D. Use Regulations.
1. Lot size requirements (see Section 400.1860).
Section
400.1320
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1320
AO:524
Section 400.1330. "B" Single-Family Residential District. [R.O.
2009 §25-254; Ord. No. 2739 §§43-23.1 — 43-23.5, 5-20-1985; Ord.
No. 3822 §3, 3-18-2002]
a. Minimum lot area. Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
b. Minimum lot width. Fifty (50) feet.
c. Minimum lot depth. Eighty (80) feet.
2. Building bulk regulations. Maximum structure height, see Section
400.1850: two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet,
whichever is less.
3. Yard and setback requirements (see Sections 400.1840 and
400.1870).
a. Minimum front yard. Twenty-five (25) feet.
b. Minimum side yard. Eight (8) feet.
c. Minimum rear yard. At least twenty-five (25) feet.
4. Maximum building coverage. Twenty-five percent (25%).
5. Driveways and off-street parking.
a. All driveways must be paved with a durable, dust-free, loadbearing
surface and may not exceed an area equal to forty
percent (40%) of the area of the yard in which the driveway is
located. The driveway may not be wider than the width of the
garage plus twenty-four (24) inches as measured at the main
opening in width of door, but in no event shall the driveway
exceed forty percent (40%) of the front or rear yard area in
which the driveway is located.
b. For remaining off-street parking regulations, see Article IV.
6. Environmental controls. All development shall conform with the
environmental performance standards provided in Article V,
Division 6 and with all other appropriate environmental controls
including those relating to landscaping, lighting, buffering, storm
water detention and erosion control provided in Article V;
7. Signs. See Chapter 410.
E. Use Limitations. There are no use limitations specified.
A. Purpose. The "B" District is intended to provide for the development,
protection and conservation of areas of predominantly single-family
detached residences on lots of not less than five thousand (5,000)
square feet.
Section
400.1320
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1330
AO:525
B. Permitted Uses. Any structure or land in the "B" Single-Family
Residential District may be used for the following purposes, subject to
all of the other provisions and limitations of this Chapter and of other
applicable regulations, ordinances and Statutes of the City, County or
State.
1. Detached single-family dwellings;
2. Group homes. No group home shall be located within five hundred
(500) feet of another group home. The exterior appearance of the
home and property shall be in reasonable conformance with the
general neighborhood standards. Group homes shall be
eleemosynary or not-for-profit in nature. [Ord. No. 4639 §3,
7-20-2015]
3. Public parks, playgrounds and publicly owned libraries and
community buildings;
4. Private parks, open space and recreation facilities owned and
maintained in common by the residents of a subdivision;
5. Home occupations as provided in Article V, Division 2;
6. Accessory uses as provided in Article V, Division 3.
C. Conditional Uses. The Board of Aldermen may authorize the following
uses by conditional use permit as provided in Article II, Division 6, after
receipt of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission
and subject to such restrictions and conditions as are deemed
necessary. The Board, by simple majority vote, may add any restrictions
or conditions it feels appropriate. [Ord. No. 4723 § 5, 8-15-2016]
1. Public utility substations and transmission facilities;
2. Private clubs;
3. Churches and other houses of worship, on lots of not less than onehalf
(½) acre;
4. Child day care centers, on lots of not less than one-half (½) acre;
5. Public or private not-for-profit schools or recreational buildings, on
lots of not less than one-half (½) acre;
6. Educational or recreational buildings, or both, of non-profit
institutions; provided that such buildings are on a tract of ground
under single ownership containing four (4) or more acres.
D. Use Regulations.
1. Lot size requirements (see Section 400.1860).
a. Minimum lot area. Five thousand (5,000) square feet.
b. Minimum lot width. Forty (40) feet.
Section
400.1330
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1330
AO:526
Section 400.1340. "AR" Attached Single-Family Residential District.
[R.O. 2009 §25-255; Ord. No. 2739 §§43-24.1 — 43-24.6, 5-20-1985]
c. Minimum lot depth. Seventy-five (75) feet.
2. Building bulk regulations. Maximum structure height, see Section
400.1850: Two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet,
whichever is less.
3. Yard and setback requirements (see Sections 400.1840 and
400.1870).
a. Minimum front yard. Twenty-five (25) feet.
b. Minimum side yard. Five (5) feet.
c. Minimum rear yard. At least twenty (20) feet.
4. Maximum building coverage. Forty percent (40%).
5. Driveways and off-street parking.
a. All driveways must be paved with a durable, dust-free, loadbearing
surface and may not exceed an area equal to forty
percent (40%) of the area of the yard in which the driveway is
located. The driveway may not be wider than the width of the
garage plus twenty-four (24) inches as measured at the main
opening in width of door, but in no event shall the driveway
exceed forty percent (40%) of the front or rear yard area in
which the driveway is located.
b. For remaining off-street parking regulations, see Article IV.
6. Environmental controls. All development shall conform with the
environmental performance standards provided in Article V,
Division 6 and with all other appropriate environmental controls
including Section 400.1880 and Article V, Division 7,
7. Signs. See Chapter 410.
E. Use Limitations. There are no use limitations specified.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the "AR" District is to protect and conserve as
well as to provide for the development of attached, single-family
residences, including duplexes, town houses, condominium apartment
dwellings as well as detached single-family residences, at a density not
to exceed twelve (12) units per acre.
B. Permitted Uses.
1. Detached single-family dwellings;
2. Attached single-family dwellings including:
a. Two-family dwellings or duplexes;
Section
400.1330
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1340
AO:527
b. Town houses.
3. Group homes. No group home shall be located within five hundred
(500) feet of another group home. The exterior appearance of the
home and property shall be in reasonable conformance with the
general neighborhood standards. Group homes shall be
eleemosynary or not-for-profit in nature. [Ord. No. 4639 §4,
7-20-2015]
4. Public parks;
5. Private parks, open space and recreation facilities owned and
maintained in common by the residents of a subdivision or
condominium association;
6. Home occupations, as provided in Article V, Division 2;
7. Accessory uses as provided in Article V, Division 3.
C. Conditional Uses. The Board of Aldermen may authorize the following
uses by conditional use permit as provided in Article II, Division 6, after
receipt of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission
and subject to such restrictions and conditions as are deemed
necessary. The Board, by simple majority vote, may add any restrictions
or conditions it feels appropriate. [Ord. No. 4723 § 5, 8-15-2016]
1. Apartment dwellings for condominium ownership including garden
apartments or low-rise elevator apartment buildings;
2. Private clubs;
3. Churches and other houses of worship, on lots of not less than onehalf
(½) acre;
4. Public or private not-for-profit schools, on lots of not less than onehalf
(½) acre;
5. Public utility substations and transmission facilities;
6. Child day care centers, on lots of not less than one-half (½) acre.
D. Use Regulations.
1. Development site requirements. No site shall be developed within
the "AR" District for a permitted use unless meeting the following
minimum standards, whether the site is to be further subdivided
into residential lots for attached or detached single-family
residences or occupied under condominium ownership:
a. Minimum site area. One-half (½) acre (21,780 square feet).
b. Minimum site width. One hundred (100) feet.
c. Minimum site depth. Seventy (70) feet (see Sections 400.1840
and 400.1870).
Section
400.1340
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1340
AO:528
2. Bulk regulations.
a. Maximum structure height, see Section 400.1850. Three (3)
stories or thirty-five (35) feet.
b. Maximum density. Twelve (12) dwelling units per net acre.
3. Yard and setback requirements. (see Sections 400.1840 and
400.1870). The following yard and setback requirements will apply
at the perimeter of any site being developed in the "AR" District by
an individual owner or developer:
Main
Building
Accessory
Building
Swimming
Pool 2/
Enclosure
a. Minimum front yard or
side yard at street (in
feet)
25 25 25
b. Minimum side yard (in
feet)
5 5 5
c. Minimum rear yard (in
feet)
10 10 6
4. Off-street parking. See Article IV.
5. Environmental controls. All development shall conform with the
environmental performance standards provided in Article V,
Division 6 and with all other appropriate environmental controls
including Section 400.1880 and Article V, Division 8.
6. Signs. See Chapter 410.
E. Development Standards. The following standards are intended to
ensure the provision of adequate sunlight, open space and privacy for
the occupants of detached or attached single-family dwellings such as
town houses or duplexes:
Attached Single-
Family Dwellings
Detached
Single-Family
Dwellings Duplex Townhouse
Minimum lot size or site
area occupied by each unit
(in square feet per unit)
5,000 2,500 2,000
Minimum lot width (in feet
per unit)
40 20 20
Minimum building width (in
feet per unit)
NA 20 20
Maximum building coverage
(percent)
35 40 45
Section
400.1340
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1340
AO:529
Section 400.1350. "MR" Multi-Family Residential District. [R.O.
2009 §25-256; Ord. No. 2739 §§43-25.1 — 43-25.7, 5-20-1985; Ord.
No. 2830 §1, 9-15-1986; Ord. No. 3033 §8, 10-16-1989]
Attached Single-
Family Dwellings
Detached
Single-Family
Dwellings Duplex Townhouse
Minimum private open space
not common open space (in
square feet per unit)
1,500 750 600
Front yard setback (from
right- of-way, in feet)
25 25 25
Minimum distance between
separate buildings or cluster
of units (in feet)
20 20 20
Side yard setback (where
units not attached, in feet)
10 (both)
0 (one side)
10 None or 5
Minimum project size,
number of units
N/A 8 10
Rear yard depth (in feet) 20 20 20
F. Use Limitations.
1. A minimum of one-half (½) acre shall be required for the
establishment of an "AR" District unless in the judgment of the
Board of Aldermen a smaller district is justified in a transitional
circumstance separating a lower density residential district from a
higher density residential, a commercial or industrial district.
2. Every development of attached or detached single-family dwellings
within this district shall be in accordance with an approved
subdivision plat or shall be accompanied by a condominium
agreement legally executed and recorded in the County for the
residential units within the development.
A. Purpose. The "MR" District is intended to provide, by site plan approval
for the development, protection and conservation of apartment
dwellings built for rental occupancy or condominium ownership of
individual dwelling units within multi-family buildings.
B. Permitted Uses. Any structure or land in the "MR" Multi-Family
Residential District may be used for the following purposes, subject to
all of the other provisions of this Chapter and of other applicable
regulations, ordinances and Statutes of the City, County or State.
1. Attached and detached single-family dwelling including town
houses and duplexes;
Section
400.1340
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1350
AO:530
2. Garden or walk-up apartments;
3. Elevator apartments;
4. Apartments for the elderly;
5. Group homes. No group home shall be located within five hundred
(500) feet of another group home. The exterior appearance of the
home and property shall be in reasonable conformance with the
general neighborhood standards. Group homes shall be
eleemosynary or not-for-profit in nature. [Ord. No. 4639 §5,
7-20-2015]
6. Public parks;
7. Private parks, open space and recreation facilities owned and
maintained by the owner of an apartment building or complex or, in
common by the condominium owners of apartments or town houses
built within this district;
8. Accessory uses as provided in Article V, Division 3.
C. Conditional Uses. The Board of Aldermen may authorize the following
uses by conditional use permit as provided in Article II, Division 6, after
receipt of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission
and subject to such restrictions and conditions as are deemed
necessary. The Board, by simple majority vote, may add any restrictions
or conditions it feels appropriate. [Ord. No. 4723 § 5, 8-15-2016]
1. Public utility substations and transmission facilities;
2. Churches and other houses of worship, on lots of not less than onehalf
(½) acre;
3. Private clubs;
4. Child day care centers, on lots of not less than one-half (½) acre;
5. Public or private not-for-profit schools, on lots of not less than onehalf
(½) acre;
6. Accessory retail sales or services designed to serve only the
residents of a given multi-family apartment development and
without any visible signage or advertising.
D. Site Plan Approval Required. A site plan shall be required for all
proposed developments within the "MR" District as provided in Article
II, Division 9.
E. Development Standards For Multiple-Family Dwellings. Development
standards for multiple-family dwellings are as follows:
1. Maximum density. Twenty (20) units per net acre, exclusive of
public rights-of-way or the right-of-way of major private internal
Section
400.1350
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1350
AO:531
circulation streets. Apartments designed exclusively for the elderly
with corresponding parking per Article IV may be built at a
maximum density of thirty (30) units per net acre.
2. Bulk regulations. Maximum structure height is four (4) stories or
fifty (50) feet.
3. Yard and setback requirements.
a. Minimum front yard.
(1) With parking in front of building, fifty (50) feet with a
minimum ten (10) foot landscape buffer at the right-of-way.
(2) Without parking in front of building, thirty (30) feet.
b. Minimum side or rear yard. No building built within this
district shall be located closer than fifteen (15) feet from any
side or rear property line. If any property adjacent to the site is
zoned to an "A", "B" or "AR" zoning classification, all buildings
less than three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height,
whichever shall be greater, shall be set back a minimum of fifty
(50) feet from the property line abutting such a district. All
buildings taller than three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet
shall be set back a minimum of one (1) additional foot for each
additional foot in height from property zoned to an "A", "B" or
"AR" category. Only landscaping and fences serving as a buffer
may be located within the first twenty-five (25) feet of the
resulting setbacks.
4. Maximum site coverage. Fifty-five percent (55%).
5. Off-street parking and loading. See Article IV.
6. Environmental controls. All development shall conform with the
environmental performance standards provided in Article V,
Division 6 and with all other appropriate environmental controls
including Section 400.1880 and Article V, Division 7.
7. Signs. See Chapter 410.
F. Development Standards — Single-Family Dwellings. The standards for
development of all detached single-family dwellings within this district
shall be governed by the requirements of Subsection (E).
G. Use Limitations.
1. Elevators shall be provided for vertical circulation in any instance
where a resident would otherwise be required to walk up a vertical
distance of two (2) stories or twenty (20) feet from the front or
primary entrance of a building to the entrance of the apartment or
dwelling.
Section
400.1350
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1350
AO:532
Section 400.1360. "RSC" Retail-Service Commercial District. [R.O.
2009 §25-257; Ord. No. 2739 §§43-26.1 — 43-26.6, 5-20-1985; Ord.
No. 3455 §2, 12-4-1995; Ord. No. 3543 §4, 6-16-1997; Ord. No. 3662
§4, 7-19-1999; Ord. No. 3752 §§1 — 2, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 3847 §1,
10-21-2002; Ord. No. 3942 §2, 6-21-2004; Ord. No. 4115 §1,
2-4-2008]
2. All ingress and egress to property within the "MR" District from a
public right-of-way shall be subject to specific approval by the
Planning and Zoning Commission by site plan approval as provided
in Article II, Division 9.
3. Every development of attached or detached single-family dwellings
within this district shall be in accordance with an approved
subdivision plat or shall be accompanied by a condominium
agreement legally executed and recorded in the County for the
residential units within the development.
A. Purpose. The "RSC" Retail-Service Commercial District is intended to
primarily accommodate convenience retail shopping, services and
professional offices which are compatible in scale and intensity of use
with adjacent residential uses.
B. Permitted Uses. Any structure or land in the "RSC" Retail-Service
Commercial District may be used for the following purposes, subject to
all of the other provisions and limitations of this Chapter and of other
applicable regulations, ordinances and Statutes of the City, County or
State. Within the "RSC" District, permitted uses are prescribed for
different classes of sites based on site size.
1. Class A: Less than one-half (½) acre. The following uses are
permitted on sites of one-half (½) acre (21,780 square feet) or less
in area:
a. Professional offices;
b. Accessory uses as provided in Article V, Division 3.
2. Class B: More than one-half (½) acre. The following uses are
permitted on sites of one-half (½) acre (21,780 square feet) or
greater provided that the total gross leasable floor area of any
single store, shop, establishment or office facility shall not exceed
five thousand (5,000) square feet in area.
a. Personal service businesses;
b. Bakery shops, including the processing of bakery goods for
sale only on the premises;
c. Drugstores;
d. Grocery stores, delicatessens and specialty food sales;
Section
400.1350
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1360
AO:533
e. Butcher shops;
f. Dry cleaning pickup stations but no plants or laundry facilities;
g. Books, stationery stores;
h. Ice cream and candy store;
i. Offices;
j. Churches and other houses of worship;
k. Financial institutions;
l. Private child day care centers;
m. Public or private non-commercial parks or open space;
n. Public or private not-for-profit schools;
o. Public facilities of an administrative, recreational,
transportation or public safety function, but excluding
maintenance, storage or service facilities;
p. Accessory uses as provided in Article V, Division 3;
q. Any use which in the judgment of the Planning and Zoning
Commission is essentially identical or very similar to one (1) or
more of the above listed uses and which conforms with the
intent and purpose of this Section and with the use limitations
provided in Subsection (F);
r. Barbershop;
s. Bicycle sales and repair shop;
t. Dance academy;
u. Electric radio and television repair shops;
v. Shoe repair shop;
w. Photography gallery;
x. Tailor shop.
C. Conditional Uses. The Board of Aldermen may authorize the following
uses by conditional use permit as provided in Article II, Division 6, after
receipt of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission
and subject to such restrictions and conditions as are deemed
necessary. The Board, by simple majority vote, may add any restrictions
or conditions it feels appropriate. [Ord. No. 4723 § 5, 8-15-2016]
1. Class A:
a. Public utility substations and transmission facilities;
Section
400.1360
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1360
AO:534
b. Personal service businesses;
c. Retail sales;
d. Books and stationery stores;
e. Ice cream and candy stores;
f. Offices;
g. Dry cleaning pickup stations provided they do not involve
plants or laundry facilities;
h. Public or private non-commercial parks and open spaces;
i. Any use, which in the judgment of the Zoning Administrator, is
essentially identical to or, similar to, one (1) or more of the
above listed uses and which conforms with the intent and
purpose of this Section and with the use limitations provided in
Subsection (F).
2. Class B:
a. All uses in Subsection (B) which exceed five thousand (5,000)
square feet;
b. Motor vehicle filling and service stations, see Article V,
Division 4;
c. Drive-in or carry-out sales of food or other goods or services
including drive-in banking facilities;
d. Mortuary;
e. Motor vehicle repairs and washing, including the regular
installation of accessories, tires or batteries;
f. Indoor or outdoor commercial entertainment or recreation
facilities including, but not limited to, video games, theatres,
bowling, swimming pools, miniature golf, etc.;
g. Sales, rental, leasing or storage of motor vehicles, trailers,
boats or aircraft;
h. Public utility substations and transmission facilities;
i. Restaurant, tavern or cocktail lounge;
j. Orphanage or children's home;
k. Nursing or retirement home;
l. Commercial parking lot;
Section
400.1360
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1360
AO:535
m. Residential use attached or on the same premises as a
permitted use provided the permitted commercial use is the
primary use;
n. Dry cleaning or laundry facility;
o. Sale of goods at wholesale;
p. Check-cashing business (classified under NAICS Code 522390)
and personal credit institutions (all uses within NAICS Code
522210) based on the following special criteria:
(1) All property lines of the lot on which the business is
located shall be at least three hundred (300) feet from the
nearest property line of any church, synagogue or similar
place of worship, any school or any residentially zoned
property;
(2) All property lines of the lot on which the business is
located shall be at least one thousand (1,000) feet from the
nearest property line of any other use classified within
NAICS Code 522390 or NAICS Code 522210 or any
pawnshop, including such businesses or pawnshops
located outside the Brentwood City limits;
(3) The establishment shall not be open for business between
the hours of 8:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.;
(4) The establishment shall have an interior space for patrons
to transact business and shall have no drive-up or walk-up
window;
(5) No bars, heavy mesh screens or similar material shall be
allowed on the exterior of the building and no such
material located on the interior of the building shall be
visible from the outside of the building;
(6) Such additional criteria deemed necessary by the Board of
Aldermen to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
q. Pawnbrokers;
r. Tattoo, body piercing or branding establishments;
s. Coin-operated laundry.
D. Site Plan Required. A site plan shall be required for all proposed
developments within the "RSC" District as provided in Article II,
Division 9.
E. Use Regulations.
1. Lot size requirements.
Section
400.1360
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1360
AO:536
a. Minimum lot area. Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square
feet.
b. Minimum lot width. Fifty (50) feet.
c. Minimum lot depth. One hundred (100) feet.
2. Building bulk regulation.
a. Maximum structure height. Two and one-half (2½) stories or
thirty-five (35) feet.
b. Maximum site coverage. Seventy percent (70%).
c. Maximum floor area ratio. One-half (½).
3. Yard and setback requirements.
a. Minimum front yard. No building or structure shall be located
closer than twenty-five (25) feet from a public right-of-way. If
parking is to be located in front of a building or structure, the
structure or building shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50)
feet from the right-of-way. The provisions of Section 400.1840
shall prevail where applicable on major streets and highways.
In every instance, the first ten (10) feet of the front yard
setback from the right-of-way shall be provided with and
maintained with sidewalks, unless improved sidewalks exist in
the abutting public right-of-way, and with landscaping,
including, but not limited to, deciduous trees at regular
intervals.
b. Minimum side yard. None required where commercial
buildings are constructed simultaneously with party walls or
fire walls or, if abutting a public alley. If a side yard is provided
or if the property abuts property of a different zoning
classification, a minimum side yard of twelve (12) feet shall be
provided.
c. Minimum rear yard. None required where property abuts
"RSC" or "GC" commercial districts or the "LID" Light
Industrial District. A twenty-five (25) foot rear yard shall be
provided where property abuts a residential zoning district.
d. Transitional yards. Where a side or rear lot line coincides with
a side or rear lot line of any lot in an adjacent residential
zoning district ("A", "B", "AR" or "MR"), then a landscaped yard
of at least fifteen (15) feet in width shall be provided along
such a lot. In addition, for any use which involves the
construction of a new structure or the expansion of an existing
structure, a masonry wall or solid fence of at least six (6) feet
but not more than eight (8) feet in height shall be provided in
such transitional yard within two (2) feet of the property line.
Section
400.1360
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1360
AO:537
4. Off-street parking and loading. See Article IV.
5. Environmental controls. All development shall conform with the
environmental performance standards provided in Article V,
Division 6 and with all other appropriate environmental controls,
including Section 400.1880 and Article V, Division 7.
6. Signs. See Chapter 410.
7. Architectural standards. The following standards shall apply to
construction in this district.
a. The use of metal siding is prohibited on any elevation of any
building that is visible from Manchester Road, Brentwood
Boulevard, Eager Road or Hanley Road and on any elevation
that abuts property that is zoned or used for residential
purposes. This requirement does not pertain to metal roofs.
b. If mechanical HVAC equipment that is installed on the roof of
any structure in this district is visible from grade level in
residential areas or is visible from Manchester Road,
Brentwood Boulevard, Eager Road or Hanley Road, said
equipment shall be screened by a wall with a finish surface
compatible in design and color to that which is used as a finish
building wall material. The purpose of the screen is to prevent
said equipment from being visible from residential areas while
serving as a deterrent to the transmission of sound into
residential areas.
F. Use Limitations
1. All business establishments shall be retail or service
establishments dealing directly with consumers primarily and all
goods produced or treated on the premises shall be sold at retail on
the premises where produced unless otherwise permitted by
conditional use permit, see Article II, Division 6 to be sold at
wholesale.
2. All businesses, services, storage, merchandise display, repairing
and processing shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed
building, except for accessory off-street motor vehicle parking for
customers, employees, residents or visitors, and off-street loading,
or unless expressly permitted by a conditional use permit, see
Article II, Division 6 of this Chapter.
3. Processes and equipment employed and goods processed or sold
should be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of
odor, dust, smoke, cinders, gas, noise, vibration, refuse matter,
water-carried waste, pollutants or matter which in any manner
create or constitute a nuisance.
Section
400.1360
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1370
AO:538
Section 400.1370. "GC" General Commercial District. [R.O. 2009
§25-258; Ord. No. 2739 §§43-27.1 — 43-27.6, 5-20-1985; Ord. No.
2776 §1, 2-17-1986; Ord. No. 3099 §1, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 3461 §2,
2-5-1996; Ord. No. 3543 §4, 6-16-1997; Ord. No. 3662 §5, 7-19-1999;
Ord. No. 3752 §§1 — 2, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 3847 §1, 10-21-2002; Ord.
No. 4115 §1, 2-4-2008; Ord. No. 4175 §1, 4-6-2009]
A. Purpose. The "GC" General Commercial District is intended, by site
plan approval and other procedures hereinafter set forth, to provide for
the development of retail commercial, business service and office uses.
B. Permitted Uses. Any structure or land in the "GC" General Commercial
District may be used for the following purposes, subject to all of the
other provisions and limitations of this Chapter and of other applicable
regulations, ordinances and Statutes of the City, County or State.
Within the "GC" District, permitted uses are prescribed for different
classes of sites based on site size.
1. Class A: Less than one-half (½) acre. The following uses are
permitted on sites of one-half (½) acre (21,780 square feet) or less
in area:
a. Professional offices;
b. Accessory uses as provided in Section Article V, Division 3.
2. Class B: More than one-half (½) acre. The following uses are
permitted on sites of one-half (½) acre (21,780 square feet) or
greater:
a. Stores in which beverages, pharmaceuticals, household
supplies and personal use items are sold at retail;
b. Retail service establishments, including:
(1) Barbershops;
(2) Beauty shops;
(3) Dry cleaning pickup stations but no plants or laundry
facilities;
(4) Self-service laundry and dry cleaning establishments;
(5) Shoe repair shops;
(6) Custom dressmaking;
(7) Tailoring;
(8) Photography studio;
(9) Watch repair;
(10) Opticians and optometrists.
Section
400.1370
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1370
AO:539
3. Grocery stores, delicatessens and specialty food sales;
4. Bakeries, including the processing of bakery goods for sale only on
the premises;
5. Household appliance sales and repair;
6. Home and office furniture and furnishings sales and repair,
including antiques and interior decorations;
7. Pet shops, pet sales, food and supplies;
8. Garden supplies;
9. Hardware, paint, glass or wallpaper sales;
10. Medical or dental clinic or laboratory;
11. Printing, lithography and publishing, including office duplicating;
12. Retail stores providing for the sale of consumer goods normally
found in a shopping center, including the sale of clothing and
apparel, equipment for hobbies and sports, gifts, plants, dry goods
and toys;
13. Auditoriums and other assembly halls;
14. Offices;
15. Private clubs, lodges or organizations of a fraternal or religious
nature;
16. Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors;
17. Radio, television broadcasting studios;
18. Private or public schools;
19. Churches and other houses of worship;
20. Financial institutions without separate, freestanding drive-in
facilities;
21. Public facilities of an administrative, recreational, transportation or
public safety function, but excluding maintenance, storage or
service facilities;
22. Veterinarian or animal hospital.
C. Conditional Uses. The Board of Aldermen may authorize the following
uses by conditional use permit as provided in Article II, Division 6, after
receipt of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission
and subject to such restrictions and conditions as are deemed
necessary. The Board, by simple majority vote, may add any restriction
or condition it feels appropriate. [Ord. No. 4723 § 5, 8-15-2016]
Section
400.1370
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1370
AO:540
1. Class A:
a. Public utility substations and transmission facilities;
b. Personal service businesses;
c. Retail sales;
d. Books and stationery stores;
e. Ice cream and candy stores;
f. Offices;
g. Dry cleaning pickup stations provided they do not involve
plants or laundry facilities;
h. Public or private non-commercial parks and open spaces;
i. Any use, which in the judgment of the Zoning Administrator, is
essentially identical to or, similar to one (1) or more of the
above listed uses and which conforms with the intent and
purpose of this Section and with the use limitations provided in
Subsection (E).
2. Class B:
a. Public utility substations and transmission facilities, collection
facilities and processing plants;
b. Private child day care centers or nurseries;
c. Orphanages or children's homes;
d. Nursing or retirement homes;
e. Commercial parking facilities;
f. Motor vehicle service or filling stations;
g. Enclosed or open recreational uses including, but not limited
to, video games, tennis, handball or paddleball, swimming,
skating, gymnasium or health club, bowling, etc., but excluding
outdoor theaters;
h. Motels and hotels;
i. Restaurants;
j. Drive-in or carry-out sales of foods or of other goods or
services, including freestanding drive-in banking facilities;
k. Taverns and cocktail lounges;
Section
400.1370
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1370
AO:541
l. Sales, rental, leasing or storage of motor vehicles, trailers,
boats or other recreational equipment involving any display,
storage or parking out-of-doors;
m. Motor vehicle repairs and washing or the installation of tires,
batteries or accessories;
n. Wholesaling or warehousing of manufactured goods except
explosives, flammable gases or liquids;
o. Dry cleaning or laundry facility;
p. A facility for residential or outpatient treatment of substance
abuse;
q. Coin-operated laundry;
r. Pet boarding facility, including day care and overnight
boarding for domesticated dogs and cats.
D. Use Regulations.
1. Lot size requirements.
a. Minimum lot area. Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square
feet.
b. Minimum lot width. Fifty (50) feet.
c. Minimum lot depth. One hundred (100) feet.
2. Building bulk regulations.
a. Maximum structure height. Two and one-half (2½) stories or
thirty-five (35) feet.
b. Maximum site coverage. Seventy percent (70%).
c. Maximum floor area ratio. One-half (½).
3. Yard and setback requirements:
a. Minimum front yard. No building or structure shall be located
closer than twenty-five (25) feet from a public right-of-way. If
parking is to be located in front of a building or structure, the
structure or building shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50)
feet from the right-of-way. The provisions of Section 400.1840
shall prevail where applicable on major streets and highways.
In every instance, the first ten (10) feet of the front yard
setback from the right-of-way shall be provided with and
maintained with sidewalks, unless improved sidewalks exist in
the abutting public right-of-way, and with landscaping
including, but not limited to, deciduous trees at regular
intervals.
Section
400.1370
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1370
AO:542
b. Minimum side yard. None required where commercial
buildings are constructed simultaneously with party walls or
fire walls or, if abutting a public alley. If a side yard is provided
or if the property abuts property of a different zoning
classification, a minimum side yard of twelve (12) feet shall be
provided.
c. Minimum rear yard. None required where property abuts an
"RSC" or "GC" commercial district or a "LID" Light Industrial
District. If any property adjacent to the site is zoned to an "A",
"B", "AR" or, "MR" zoning classification, there shall be a
twenty-five (25) foot rear yard.
d. Transitional yards, etc.
(1) Where a side or rear lot line coincides with a side or rear
lot line of any lot in an adjacent residential zoning district
("A", "B", "AR" or "MR"), then a landscaped yard of at least
twelve (12) feet in width shall be provided along such a lot.
In addition, for any use which involves the construction of
a new structure or the expansion of an existing structure, a
masonry wall or solid fence of at least six (6) feet but not
more than eight (8) feet in height shall be provided in such
transitional yard within two (2) feet of the property line.
(2) Where the rear or side wall of any non-residential
structure is located directly across the street from the
front yard of any residential structure located in a
residential district, a landscaped yard of at least twelve
(12) feet in width shall be provided along the entire length
of such rear or side wall. The transitional yard
requirement may be modified by conditional use permit or
by site plan approval as provided in Article II, Division 6.
Such modifications may impose more stringent or less
stringent requirements.
4. Off-street parking and loading. See Article IV.
5. Environmental controls. All development shall conform with the
environmental performance standards provided in Article V,
Division 6 and with all other appropriate environmental controls,
including Section 400.1880 and Article V, Division 7.
6. Signs. See Chapter 410.
7. Architectural standards. The following standards shall apply to
construction in this district.
a. The use of metal siding is prohibited on any elevation of any
building that is visible from Manchester Road, Brentwood
Boulevard, Eager Road or Hanley Road and on any elevation
Section
400.1370
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1370
AO:543
Section 400.1375. "MC" Manchester Corridor Commercial District
[Ord. No. 4873, 4-1-2019]
that abuts property that is zoned or used for residential
purposes. This requirement does not pertain to metal roofs.
b. If mechanical HVAC equipment that is installed on the roof of
any structure in this district is visible from grade level in
residential areas or, is visible from Manchester Road,
Brentwood Boulevard, Eager Road or Hanley Road, said
equipment shall be screened by a wall with a finish surface
compatible in design and color to that which is used as a finish
building wall material. The purpose of the screen is to prevent
said equipment from being visible from residential areas while
serving as a deterrent to the transmission of sound into
residential areas.
E. Use Limitations.
1. All businesses, services, storage, merchandise display, repairing
and processing shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed
building, except for accessory off-street motor vehicle parking for
customers, employees, residents or visitors and off-street loading
or unless expressly permitted by conditional use permit (see Article
II, Division 6).
2. Used motor vehicles, trailers, boats or recreation vehicles may be
sold only in conjunction with and on the same lot or site as the sale
of new vehicles of the same type and under the same business
ownership or management.
3. Processes and equipment employed and goods processed or sold
should be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of
odor, dust, smoke, cinders, gas, noise, vibration, refuse matter,
water-carried waste, pollutants or matter which in any manner
create or constitute a nuisance.
4. Site plan approval by the Board of Aldermen on the
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
required for all proposed developments in the "GC" General
Commercial District.
A. Purpose. The "MC" Manchester Corridor Commercial District is
intended, by site plan approval, design standards, supplemental
standards, and other procedures hereinafter set forth, to provide for
the development of retail commercial, office, business and personal
service, and multi-family uses for an area along either side of the
Manchester Road corridor in the City of Brentwood. It is intended to
promote larger planned, mixed-use development with an emphasis on
architecture and site design that creates a distinct character for the
area and promotes property assembly to create unified land use
Section
400.1370
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1375
AO:544
development. The purposes of this district include the following goals
and objectives:
1. Reduce vehicular access points for greater pedestrian and
vehicular traffic safety;
2. Limit permitted uses for smaller parcels to encourage and promote
property assembly for larger, planned mixed-use development;
3. Create a pedestrian-friendly, walkable environment with clear and
ample access to the City and Great Rivers Greenway trail system
and open-spaces along the flood mitigation areas;
4. Encourage building site placement and design that encourages
creation of a "sense of place" and capitalizes on the trail and parklike
areas that the flood mitigation project will create in the area;
5. Promote a mix of land uses and density that creates an identity for
the area and can offer the potential to create a "live/work"
environment that can take advantage of the District's proximity to
public transit;
6. Encourage increased private investment that will more closely
mirror the City's significant investment to mitigate/eliminate the
recurrent flooding;
7. Provide benefit to existing property owners though flood mitigation
and the increased value of land that these regulations promote.
B. Applicability. These provisions of this Section shall apply to all
development within the "MC" District involving:
1. New construction on a vacant or cleared site;
2. Rehabilitation of existing structures which exceeds current market
value of the land and improvements according to the most recent
St. Louis County Assessor market valuation by more than fifty
percent (50%);
3. Represents a change of use from its most recent or current use to a
use not of the same type; or
4. Is no longer a legally non-conforming use in accord with the
provisions of Article VI, Division 1 and Division 2 of this Chapter.
5. In addition, site plan approval by the Board of Aldermen on the
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission in accord
with the provisions of Article II, Division 9 of this Chapter shall be
required for all proposed developments in the "MC" Manchester
Corridor Commercial District involving new construction on a
cleared site or renovation/rehabilitation of an existing building
requiring a building permit.
Section
400.1375
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1375
AO:545
C. Permitted And Conditional Uses — General. Any structure or land in the
"MC" Corridor Commercial District may be used for purposes as listed
in Subsections (D) and (E) of this Section, subject to all other provisions
and limitations of this Chapter and of other applicable regulations,
ordinances and Statutes of the City, County or State. Within the "MC"
District, permitted and conditional uses are prescribed for different
sites based on site size; however, permitted uses and conditional uses
are subject to the following additional requirements and restrictions:
1. All development shall be in accordance with the City's adopted
Comprehensive Plan or parts thereof or applicable amendments,
including proposed land use and public improvement elements.
2. All business, services, storage, merchandise display, repairing and
processing shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building,
except for the following:
a. Accessory off-street motor vehicle parking for customers,
employees, residents or visitors and off-street loading;
b. Outdoor area of display of seasonal merchandise or other uses
defined as "special uses" in Article I, Section 400.020 and
subject to the provisions thereof;
c. Other uses expressly permitted by conditional use permit (see
Article II, Division 6).
3. Used motor vehicles (automobiles, light trucks, and motorcycles
capable of being titled and licensed under Missouri law), may be
sold only in conjunction with and on the same lot or site as the sale
of new vehicles of the same type and under the same business
ownership or management.
4. Processes and equipment employed, and goods processed or sold,
should be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of
odor, dust, smoke, cinders, gas, noise, vibration, refuse matter,
water-carried waste, pollutants or matter which in any manner
create or constitute a nuisance.
D. Permitted Uses. Depending on the site size as described below, the
following uses are permitted in the "MC" District.
1. Class A: Two (2) Acres Or Greater. In addition to the permitted
Class B and Class C uses, the following uses are permitted on sites
of two (2) acres (87,120 square feet) or greater:
a. Professional offices;
b. Retail stores providing for the sale of new consumer goods
(i.e., clothing and apparel, equipment for hobbies and sports,
jewelry, books, candy, gifts, dry goods, toys, etc.) and including
the sale of plants, pet shops, and bakeries;
Section
400.1375
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1375
AO:546
c. Personal service establishments, including beauty shops, nail
salons, dry cleaning pick-up stations but no plants or laundry
facilities, custom dressmaking and tailoring, photography
studio, spas and massage therapy (subject to definition of a
massage therapy business);
d. Grocery stores, delicatessens and specialty food sales;
e. Home and office furniture and furnishings sales and repair,
including antiques and interior decorations;
f. Hardware, paint, glass, wallpaper or flooring sales;
g. Garden supplies;
h. Medical or dental clinic or laboratory;
i. Printing, lithography and publishing;
j. Public facilities of an administrative, recreational,
transportation or public safety function;
k. Public parks and open spaces, pedestrian and biking trails, and
properties associated with stormwater and flood mitigation
facilities;
l. Household appliance sales and repair;
m. Veterinarian or animal hospital;
n. Outdoor display and sale of merchandise as an accessory use
to a permitted use subject to the provisions of Subsection
(C)(2)(b) above.
o. Any use, which in the judgement of the Director of Planning
and Development, is essentially identical to or, substantially
similar to, one (1) or more of the above listed uses and which
conforms with the intent and purpose of this Section and with
the General Use limitations provided in Subsection (C) above.
2. Class B: At Least One (1) Acre But Less Than Two (2) Acres. The
following uses are permitted on sites of at least one (1) acre
(43,560 square feet) but less than two (2) acres (87,120 square
feet):
a. Professional offices;
b. Retail stores providing for the sale of new consumer goods
(i.e., clothing and apparel, equipment for hobbies and sports,
jewelry, books, candy, gifts, dry goods, toys, etc.) and including
the sale of plants, pet shops, and bakeries;
c. Personal service establishments, including beauty shops, nail
salons, dry cleaning pick-up stations but no plants or laundry
Section
400.1375
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1375
AO:547
facilities, custom dressmaking and tailoring, photography
studio, spas and massage therapy (subject to definition of a
massage therapy business);
d. Public facilities of an administrative, recreational,
transportation or public safety function;
e. Public parks and open spaces, pedestrian and biking trails, and
properties associated with stormwater and flood mitigation
facilities;
f. Outdoor display and sale of merchandise as an accessory use
to a permitted use subject to the provisions of Subsection
(C)(2)(b) above.
g. Any use, which in the judgement of the Director of Planning
and Development, is essentially identical to, or substantially
similar to, one (1) or more of the above listed uses and which
conforms with the intent and purpose of this Section and with
the General Use limitations provided in Subsection (C) above.
3. Class C: Less Than One (1) Acre. The following uses are permitted
on sites of less than one (1) acre (43,560 square feet).
a. Professional offices;
b. Public parks and open spaces, pedestrian and biking trails, and
properties associated with stormwater and flood mitigation
facilities.
E. Conditional Uses. The Board of Aldermen may authorize the following
uses by conditional use permit as provided in Article II, Division 6, after
receipt of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission
and subject to such restrictions and conditions as are deemed
necessary. The Board may add any restrictions or conditions it deems
best serve the public interest after consideration of the circumstances
of the use, the facility, the specific site and the surrounding environs.
1. Class A Or B Sites.
a. Public utility substations and transmission facilities, collection
facilities and processing plants;
b. Commercial parking facilities and parking structures
associated with multiple-building and mixed-use planned
development;
c. Enclosed or open commercial recreational uses, including, but
not limited to, video games, tennis, handball or paddleball,
swimming, skating, gymnasium or health club, bowling, dance
studios, etc., but excluding outdoor theaters;
d. Hotels;
Section
400.1375
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1375
AO:548
e. Restaurants, micro-breweries, micro-distilleries, wine bars
offering food, beverages and/or on-site entertainment and
outdoor dining;
f. Drive-through facilities, drive-in or carry-out sales of foods or
of other goods or services; including restaurants, financial
institutions, drug stores and car washes;
g. Dry cleaning or laundry facility;
h. Pet boarding facility, including day care and overnight
boarding for domesticated dogs and cats;
i. Manufacturer-franchised new-vehicle automobile dealership
whose point-of-sale is within the District (including used car
sales in proportion to annual average National Automobile
Dealers Association (NADA) ratios between new and used
vehicle sales based on published NADA data at a
manufacturer-franchised dealership) and including vehicle
service facilities;
j. Day care centers;
k. Any building or structure more than three (3) stories or fortyfive
(45) feet in height;
l. Apartment or condominium dwellings;
m. Warehouse or storage accessory to a permitted or conditional
use but only to the extent that such use does not exceed more
than thirty percent (30%) of the gross floor area of the primary
use;
n. Any development containing a mix of the permitted uses
specified in Subsection (D)(1) or (D)(2) above or conditional
uses specified in this Subsection (E);
o. Single-tenant retail with a building footprint greater than
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet;
p. Banks, credit unions, or other financial institutions (but not
including check cashing businesses, short-term/payday loan
operations, pawn shops, or rent to-own facilities);
q. Private non-commercial parks and open spaces.
2. Class C Sites:
a. Retail stores providing for the sale of new consumer goods
(i.e., clothing and apparel, equipment for hobbies and sports,
jewelry, books, candy, gifts, dry goods, toys, etc.) and including
the sale of plants, pet shops, and bakeries;
Section
400.1375
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1375
AO:549
b. Personal service establishments, including beauty shops, nail
salons, dry cleaning pick-up stations but no plants or laundry
facilities, custom dressmaking and tailoring, photography
studio, spas and massage therapy (subject to definition of a
massage therapy business);
c. Public facilities of an administrative, recreational,
transportation or public safety function;
d. Private non-commercial parks and open spaces.
F. Use Regulations.
1. Lot Size Requirements.
a. Minimum Lot Area:
(1) Class A — Two (2) acres (87,120 square feet).
(2) Class B — One (1) acre (43,560 square feet);
(3) Class C — One-half (1/2) acre (21,780 square feet).
b. Minimum Lot Width:
(1) Class A — Two hundred fifty (250) feet.
(2) Class B — One hundred fifty (150) feet.
(3) Class C — One hundred twenty-five (125) feet.
c. Minimum Lot Depth:
(1) Class A — Two hundred fifty (250) feet.
(2) Class B — One hundred fifty (150) feet.
(3) Class C — One hundred twenty-five (125) feet.
2. Maximum Floor Area Ratio. The regulations of Article III, Section
400.1400(E)(1), Use Regulations shall apply.
3. Building Bulk, Height, And Setback Regulations. The regulations of
Article III, Section 400.1400(E)(3) and (E)(4), Building Regulations
and Building Bulk Regulations shall apply; provided, however, that
building height can be further limited during the site plan approval
process to avoid circumstances where excessive height would
result in structures in this District being substantially disproportion
to the height of neighboring properties, especially residential
properties, in other zoning districts so as to compromise access to
light and air or lend the appearance that properties in this District
loom over or appear to dominate uses on nearby properties.
4. Yard And Setback Requirements. In the "MC" Manchester Corridor
Commercial District, building setback for all Class B and Class C
Section
400.1375
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1375
AO:550
uses, or a development approved by site plan review and in
accordance with the procedures of Article III, Section 400.1380,
yard and setback requirements will be determined as part of the
site plan approval process. All proposed development and uses on
individual lots must comply with the standards below:
a. Minimum Front Yard. Buildings shall be located at least five (5)
feet from the right-of-way where the property line is
coterminous with the right-of-way but in any event not closer
than fifteen (15) feet from the back of curb line of Manchester
Road. The provisions of Section 400.1840 shall prevail where
applicable on Manchester Road. Where improved sidewalks
exist in the abutting public right-of-way, the provisions of this
Subparagraph (a) may be waived or modified as part of the site
plan review process of Article II of this Chapter that is required
for all development and uses within the "MC" District. See
applicable example for setbacks on the north and south side of
Manchester Road in Figure 5-1.
b. Minimum Side Yard. None required where commercial
buildings are constructed simultaneously with party walls or
firewalls, otherwise a minimum side yard of ten (10) feet shall
be provided subject to the exceptions of Subsection (4)(c),
below (See Figure 5-2):
c. Building Setbacks Along Streets Intersecting Manchester
Road. Along any street intersecting Manchester Road and
within any portion of the "MC" District wherever the MC
District contains or adjoins a publicly maintained greenway,
trail or park area, in order to provide viewsheds into the
adjoining park-like scenes, the building setbacks show in
Figure 5-3 shall apply.
Section
400.1375
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1375
AO:551
(1) In locations where the side yard is adjacent to an existing
or proposed street connecting to Manchester Road
generally on a north/south axis, the side yard or building
setback line shall be not less than fifty (50) feet measured
from the centerline of said street or not less than thirtytwo
(32) feet from the back curb line of either side of said
street;
(2) In locations where the front yard is adjacent to an existing
or proposed street connecting to Manchester Road
generally on a north/south axis, the front yard or building
setback line shall be not less than fifty (50) feet measured
from the centerline of said street or not less than thirtytwo
(32) feet from the back curb line of either side of said
street;
(3) Either of these standards may be modified during the site
plan review process of Article II, Division 9 of this Chapter
as required in Subsection (B)(5) of this Section but in any
event the viewshed created by this standard shall not
reduce the distance between buildings abutting either side
of such street to less than one hundred (100) feet.
d. Minimum Rear Yard. A minimum rear yard of ten (10) feet shall
be provided. If any property adjacent to the site is zoned to an
"A," "B," "AR" or, "MR" zoning classification, there shall be a
twenty-five (25) foot rear yard and a sight-proof fence
complying with the provisions of Article V, Division 5, of this
Chapter.
e. Transitional Yards, Etc.
(1) Where a side or rear lot line coincides with a side or rear
lot line of any lot in an adjacent residential zoning district
("A," "B," "AR" or "MR"), then a landscaped yard of at least
twelve (12) feet in width shall be provided along such a lot.
In addition, for any use that involves the construction of a
new structure or the expansion of an existing structure, a
masonry wall or solid fence complying with Article V,
Division 5 of this Chapter of at least six (6) feet but not
more than eight (8) feet in height shall be provided in such
transitional yard within two (2) feet of the property line.
Section
400.1375
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1375
AO:552
(2) Where the rear or side wall of any non-residential
structure is located directly across the street from the
front yard of any residential structure located in a
residential district, a landscaped yard of at least twelve
(12) feet in width shall be provided along the entire length
of such rear or side wall.
(3) The transitional yard requirement may be modified by
conditional use permit or by site plan approval as provided
in Article II, Division 9. Such modifications may impose
more stringent or less stringent requirements in order to
mitigate the adverse effects of one (1) land use upon
another or conflicts between two (2) different land uses.
5. Off-Street Parking And Loading. All off-street parking and loading is
required to comply with Article IV of this Chapter, but those
requirements may be modified in conjunction with the site plan
review process to reduce parking requirements and minimize
paved surfaces based on the standards outlined in Subsection
(G)(3), of this Section. Access to off-street parking and loading must
be accessed via controlled access points and may not allow for
parking that provides direct pull-in and back-out parking to and
from Manchester Road across the site frontage. To reduce curbcuts
onto Manchester Road, all off-street parking for new
development or redevelopment of existing sites must have access
to an adjoining street other than Manchester Road and must
provide for cross-access to adjacent property.
6. Environmental, Stormwater Management, Grading And Erosion;
And Flood Hazard Controls. All development shall conform with the
environmental performance standards provided in Article V,
Division 6; the stormwater management, grading and erosion
control provisions of Article V, Division 7; and the flood hazard
control requirements of Article V, Division 8.
7. Signs. In conjunction with site plan review, a comprehensive sign
plan in accord with the provisions of Chapter 410 must be provided
and approved as part of site plan approval.
G. Development Requirements, Guidelines, And Standards. To achieve the
goals and objectives as outlined in Subsection (A) of this Section and
achieve the City's vision for the Manchester Road Corridor, the
following development standards are established for each class and use
within the Manchester Road Corridor. It is recognized that not all of the
standards may be attainable with particular property or uses.
Therefore, the regulations in the "MC" District are intended to provide
flexibility to property owners and developers for many types of
development particularly for the Class A and B sites as provided for in
Subsection (F) of this Section with respect to building height and
development density. In addition, the regulations are meant to provide a
certain degree of latitude to the Planning and Zoning Commission and
Section
400.1375
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1375
AO:553
the Board of Aldermen to vary from these or other regulations when
reviewing site plans in order to achieve the goals and objectives of
the Comprehensive Plan and these regulations. The degree to which a
site plan for development meets or exceeds the design standards set
forth in this Subsection shall be considered and will be evaluated when
considering site plans for proposed development. A developer should
be prepared to explain why certain development standards cannot
be met or that alternatives serve the same purpose as the standard.
The standards are intended to allow the Manchester Road Corridor to
become another recognized location within the City as a live/work/relax
location. Examples of the various standards and/or design features
intended to be carried out within the "MC" District are included
throughout this Section.
1. Building Design. New buildings should be designed to include
common features and materials so that a sense of place and
character is created for the "MC" District.
a. Exterior Building Materials. Building materials should be used
and installed in keeping with the chosen architectural style.
Building material colors should be varied and complementary
and three (3) colors per elevation required. Except as minor
accents for trim such as window frames or entry doors,
primary or garish colors should be avoided. Materials should
be of a scale appropriate to the pedestrian and complement
adjacent structures. The table entitled "Exterior Material
Legend" below provides a listing of approved/not approved
materials. This table is intended to provide direction but is not
intended to represent absolute approval or disapproval of any
listed item and will depend on building architecture.
EXTERIOR MATERIAL LEGEND
Acceptable Exterior
Materials
Generally Unacceptable
Exterior Materials
Brick or brick veneer Vinyl or aluminum siding
Natural Stone (limestone,
brownstone, lannon stone,
marble, granite)
Veneer based plywood siding
Metal panels (used as accent
features, includes types such
as Alucobond, Alpolic, or
similar)
Plywood panels (such as
T1-11)
Cement-fiber siding Plexiglas
Section
400.1375
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1375
AO:554
EXTERIOR MATERIAL LEGEND
Acceptable Exterior
Materials
Generally Unacceptable
Exterior Materials
Decorative Concrete Masonry
Units (CMU) or architectural
cement block
Corrugated Metal with
exposed fasteners (used as
accent features and
comprising no more than
thirty percent (30%) of the
exterior building materials
used)
Concrete, including pre-cast
panels (may be used when
incorporating color, texture
and architectural finish
features)
Painted smooth concrete
masonry units (unless used in
locations behind screen walls)
Exterior grade wood (must be
appropriate species for
climate)
Exposed steel framing (unless
integral to the design)
Composite siding Corrugated tin roofing (unless
dictated by the specific
architectural style)
EIFS or Stucco (not on the
first story and not more than
thirty percent (30%) of the
wall area exclusive of
windows and doors)
Smooth-face concrete block
Vinyl trim (accent only) Standing seam or batten
seam metal roofing (unless
dictated by the specific
architectural style)
Glass block (may be used only
as a feature element, not for
glazing or windows)
Shake shingles
Brick and stone pavers
Manufactured stone
Commercial grade asphalt
shingles
Slate roofing
Concrete tile roofing
b. Building Details. Each building shall incorporate several
common architectural features, appropriate for the
architectural style chosen. Examples include pilasters, piers,
columns, friezes, cornices, and window surrounds. Building
Section
400.1375
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1375
AO:555
elements such as awnings, signs, doors, windows, and lighting
should complement the architecture of the building facade and
finishes (See Example 1).
c. Design Features And Structures. Use of awnings, canopies, or
other design features should enhance main facades, especially
at building entries. Attached structures such as covered
arcades or porte cocheres shall be compatible with and
complement the overall design of the building and its facade
(See Example 2).
d. Building Entrances. Building entrances are required to be
clearly delineated and indicate a clear transition from the
exterior to the interior of the building. Every main entrance is
required to have a special emphasis when compared to the
other portions of the building. The building address should be
clearly displayed in a readable typeface of sufficient size for
reading from a vehicle at a reasonable distance and oriented to
the street or drive frontage recognized by the US Postal
Service and the City's Fire and Police Departments (See
Example 3).
e. Facade Articulation. Buildings and parking structures of three
(3) stories or less in height designed with completely flat
facades and monotone color schemes are not permitted. All
buildings and parking structures are required to have
horizontal and vertical facade variations such as pop-outs,
bays, recesses, arches banding, columns, or similar features.
Buildings of more than three (3) stories may have a flat facade
of uniform design above the third floor (See Example 4).
Section
400.1375
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1375
AO:556
f. Height And Roofline. Single-story buildings should have
varying roofline elevations to add architectural interest and
avoid the appearance of long, monotonous roofline expanses. A
variation such as a parapet or tower is required every fifty (50)
feet of roofline. Also, if mechanical HVAC equipment that is
installed on the roof of any structure in this district is visible
from grade level in residential areas or, is visible from
Manchester Road or any primary access road within a larger
development, said equipment shall be screened by a wall with
a finish surface compatible in design and color to that which is
used as a finish building wall material. The back of parapets
should also not be visible from Manchester Road or any
primary access road within a larger development and must
match the color and materials of the building (See Example 5).
g. Pedestrians/Bicycle Access. All buildings must be designed to
encourage pedestrian activity and social interaction and create
a walkable environment that encourages pedestrian access, as
well as bicycle access, to and within the Manchester Road
Corridor and connectivity to the adjacent greenway trail
system.
h. Windows. Windows are key to the overall design of a building
and the relationship between the exterior and interior. Eye
level windows are required to relate to the scale of a person.
Clear glass for storefronts, windows and doors, within the
retail merchandising areas is required. Slightly tinted glass for
energy efficiency purposes may be used. Window tints shall be
grey, blue, or bronze. Mirrored glass is prohibited. Window
signage is strongly discouraged (See Example 6).
i. Signs. Signs may only be located on buildings and will be
planned for as part of the building's overall design and should
Section
400.1375
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1375
AO:557
integrate similar or complementary materials as the building,
be harmonious in color, with controlled lighting and must
include a comprehensive sign plan as provided for in Section
410.135 (See Example 7).
(1) Corporate logos are any letter, character or symbol used to
represent a person, corporation or business enterprise and
are considered graphics which are defined as signage.
Corporate logos may be incorporated into a sign so long as
the sign is compliant with the provisions of Chapter 410
and is an integrated element of the building design and
facade.
(2) Signs, other than those indicating entry or exit locations,
may not be located on parking structures or within parking
lots except for instances where a parking structure
contains ground floor retail uses.
(3) Billboards are not permitted on any property within the
"MC" District.
2. Site Design. New developments are required to match or
complement surrounding new developments and landscapes to
create a building and site design which follow the standards of this
Chapter and adds positively to the overall "MC" District
environment. Where applicable and appropriate site design should
provide:
a. Outdoor seating at work places and restaurants that is:
• Situated to provide a pleasant environment for users that is
not adjacent to parked automobiles or other environmental
detriments;
• Located so as not to block or constrict entry and exit doors
or impede pedestrian or bicycle movements;
• Not located within the ten (10) foot shared sidewalk and
bikeway on the south of Manchester Road.
b. Access to the Great Rivers Greenway and Flood Mitigation
Greenway trail and park networks with a paved, ADAaccessible
pathway of not less than six (6) feet in width from
building entries and that is clearly delineated through parking
areas or structures via changes in paving materials, texture,
and/or color. Pedestrian easements and connections of
appropriate width that can connect to other uses within the
Section
400.1375
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1375
AO:558
area shall also be provided where possible and appropriate
with adjacent landscaping and lighting particularly where such
connections are between buildings. To encourage and promote
biking to and from the "MC" District bike racks shall be
provided at appropriate locations at any building (See Example
8).
c. Elements such as plazas or large patio areas that can be used
for occasional entertainment events and promote social
interaction in pleasant environments.
d. Signage for wayfinding both within a development and the
area overall that is of clear and consistent design.
e. Public art of appropriate type and scale that can help to create
an identity for the "MC" District.
Other site design components related to building placement,
screening, landscaping, and lighting and related standards are
outlined below as follows:
f. Building Placement. Building placement must comply with the
following standards:
(1) The main facade of a building must be oriented to face the
principal street on which it has frontage and for which it is
addressed by the US Postal Service.
(2) Buildings on corner lots must be oriented so that the main
facade is giving equal treatment to each street on which it
has frontage. Also, these buildings should include a
prominent architectural feature of greater height than the
rest of the roof, or emphasis at the corner where the two
(2) public streets meet.
g. Utilities serving a site and the on-site structures must be
located in underground easements that can serve multiple
properties.
h. Screening. The following is required for screening:
(1) Loading and service areas shall be screened with walls and
landscaping. Where adjacent to residential areas, loading
and service areas shall be located away from bordering
residential property lines whenever possible and such
areas must be completely screened and appropriately
Section
400.1375
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1375
AO:559
buffered with appropriate trees in accord with the
standards set forth in Article IV, Section 400.1730. In
all instances, views into loading and service areas from
adjacent properties or uses must be minimized.
(2) Mechanical equipment, whether ground level or roof top,
shall be screened from ground-level view. Large trash
receptacles, dumpsters, utility meters, satellite dishes,
antennas, etc., shall be similarly treated and may not be
located on the side of a building. Screening material shall
consist of a masonry wall, sight-proof fencing of aluminum,
steel, vinyl, dense landscaping, or any other such material
that is found compatible and approved as part of the site
plan approval process.
(3) Chain-link fencing (including cloth, canvas, or vinyl-slat
covered), smooth-face concrete block, and barb or razor
wire topped fences and chain link are prohibited.
i. Landscaping. The landscaping requirements shall be as
established by Article II, Division 10, Section 400.1210. In
addition, the following requirements shall apply to all
landscape plans:
(1) A landscape plan sealed by a landscape architect
registered in Missouri shall be submitted in conjunction
with the development or site plan.
(2) A landscape plan shall be drawn to scale, include
dimensions and distances, and clearly delineate all
existing and proposed vehicular movement and parking,
and the location, size and description of all landscaping
materials. All easements, transition buffer areas and
setback areas shall be labeled and dimensioned. Outdoor
furniture and fixtures for commercial and mixed-use
development are encouraged and shall be considered part
of the landscaping plan and identified on the landscape
plan. The landscape plan must include an irrigation plan.
(3) The property owner or designated agent shall be
responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement
of all landscaping materials. All plant material and
landscaped bed areas shall be tended and maintained in a
healthy growing condition, free from refuse, debris and
weeds.
j. Lighting. Proper layout, height, fixture selection and lighting
level shall be incorporated as part of the site design
requirements (See Examples 9 and 10). In addition, a lighting
plan shall be submitted in conjunction with the site plan
required by subsection (B) and Article VI, Division 1 and
Section
400.1375
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1375
AO:560
Division 2 of this Chapter based on the following standards
unless varied as a result of the site plan review:
(1) Site lighting (including parking and loading areas) shall
use LED bulb technology from a concealed source and
shall comply with, and shall have a color rendering index
(CRI) of not less than sixty-five (65) and a correlated color
temperature (CCT) of approximately 4,000 Kelvin (K) but
not more than 4800 K so as to most closely represent
daylight, not distort colors, but avoid the blue portion of
the spectrum common to some LED lumens.
(2) Site lighting and building lighting shall not spill over onto
adjoining properties, highways, or in any way interfere
with the vision of oncoming motorists.
(3) Lighting fixtures shall be of a directional type capable of
shielding the light source from direct view and aimed
downward. The development plan or site plan must show
the relationship of fixtures and the light patterns to each
other, to the project site, to the buildings, and to the
adjacent rights-of-way.
(4) Site and parking lot lighting fixtures shall complement and
harmonize with those of adjacent developments.
(5) Fixtures used to accent architectural features,
landscaping or art shall be located, aimed or shielded to
minimize light spill into the surrounding environment.
(6) Architectural lighting shall be recessed under roof
overhangs or generated from a concealed source, low-level
light fixture(s). Roof lights, lighted roof panels, and other
methods of illuminating buildings, deemed inappropriate,
are not allowed.
(7) Decorative, low-level intensity, non-concealed source
lighting that defines on-site vehicular and/or pedestrian
ways are acceptable.
(8) The lighting plan shall not conflict with the landscape plan,
and the two (2) shall be submitted simultaneously for
review.
(9) Where developers are constructing public street
improvements in conjunction with planned development
projects, street lighting standards, luminaries, and fixture
Section
400.1375
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1375
AO:561
colors and styles shall be as established by the City and
approved by the City's Director of Public Works or its
traffic engineer.
3. Parking And Access. Developments which, in the opinion of the
Planning and Zoning Commission and/or the Director of Planning
and Development during site plan review, might generate a
significant increase in traffic, vehicular turning movements, or
alteration of traffic patterns, will require a traffic study by the
City's traffic engineer. Site layout and design must address the
needs of motorists, pedestrians, bicycles, and other forms of
transportation. Access and safety on the site should be ensured for
all users. In addition to the parking requirements established in
Article IV, Sections 400.1470 through 400.1620, the following will
be required:
a. Major internal circulation roadways must be separated from
parking areas using curb and gutter, landscaping, pedestrian
walkways, and lighting.
b. Separated cross-access for automobiles and pedestrians in
parking lots is required. Cross-access for pedestrians shall
consist of a dissimilar material from the parking lot.
c. Pedestrian cross-access within parking lots shall connect to
sidewalks, bike paths, and/or multi-use paths within the public
rights-of-way.
d. Loading and service areas should be located away from street
edge and public circulation patterns.
e. Shared Off-Street Parking For Different Categories Of Uses: In
order to minimize stormwater runoff through minimizing
paved surfaces, development in the "MC" District should
encourage situations where shared parking might be
appropriate. Subject to site plan review by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and written authorization of the Zoning
Administrator, business establishments constituting different
categories of use whose hours of operation have minimal
overlap may share parking as follows:
(1) Office use and a retail sales and service use. The parking
requirement for the retail sales and service use may be
reduced by twenty percent (20%), provided that the
reduction does not exceed the minimum parking
requirement for the office use.
(2) Residential use and a retail sales and service use (other
than eating and drinking establishments or entertainment
uses). The parking requirement for the residential use may
be reduced by thirty percent (30%), provided that the
Section
400.1375
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1375
AO:562
Section 400.1380. "PD" Planned Development Overlay District.
[R.O. 2009 §25-259; Ord. No. 2739 §§43-28.1 — 43-28.6, 5-20-1985;
reduction does not exceed the minimum parking
requirement for the retail sales and service use.
(3) Office Use And A Residential Use. The parking
requirement for the residential use may be reduced by fifty
percent (50%), provided that the reduction does not
exceed the minimum parking requirements for the office
use.
f. Shared Off-Street Parking For Uses Of The Same Type: Subject
to site plan review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and
written authorization of the Zoning Administrator, business
establishments constituting commercial uses of the same type
having over-lapping operating hours may share parking
allowing reductions in the total minimum number of required
parking spaces as follows:
(1) Up to a twenty percent (20%) reduction in the total
minimum number of required parking spaces for four (4)
or more separate establishments.
(2) A fifteen percent (15%) reduction in the total minimum
number of required spaces for three (3) separate
establishments.
(3) A ten percent (10%) reduction in the total minimum
number of required spaces for two (2) establishments.
(4) The establishments, for which the shared parking
application is being made shall be located within eight
hundred (800) feet of the parking facility. The parking
facility shall be in a commercially zoned district.
(5) The reduction to parking quantities allowed through
shared parking shall be determined as a percentage of the
minimum parking requirement as stated in Article V,
Section 400.1570 of the City Code of Ordinances.
4. Clearance Of Existing Improvements. Properties within the "MC"
District that are cleared for future redevelopment and are not
subject to an approved site plan in accord with the provisions of
Subsection (B)(5) above must have properly issued demolition and
grading permits requiring all building and site improvements to be
removed as part of the site clearance. In addition, the site must be
properly graded and seeded with grass within sixty (60) days of the
completion of the grading or within a time period specified by the
permit (permits) in consideration of the time of the year. Proper
maintenance of the cleared site will be required in accord the
property maintenance provisions of the Municipal Code.
Section
400.1375
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1380
AO:563
Ord. No. 2830 §1, 9-15-1986; Ord. No. 3543 §4, 6-16-1997; Ord. No.
3662 §6, 7-19-1999; Ord. No. 3847 §1, 10-21-2002; Ord. No. 4115 §1,
2-4-2008; Ord. No. 4175 §1, 4-6-2009]
A. Purpose. The "PD" Planned Development Overlay District is intended,
by site plan approval and other procedures set forth in this Section, to
encourage the appropriate development of retail, office and multifamily
residential uses, or combinations thereof, in the best interests of
the City. Specifically, the district is intended to:
1. Relate the development of retail, office and multi-family residential
uses to the adopted development plan "Brentwood Boulevard/
Manchester Road Commercial Study" for the major business
corridors including land use and public improvements;
2. Provide for a scale and flexibility of development which could not
otherwise be achieved through fixed single-use zoning districts;
3. Encourage site consolidation and planned mixed-use development;
4. Induce and ensure high quality future development through the use
of site plan approval procedures which provide for the specific
consideration of access, parking, drainage, landscaping and design
factors.
B. Permitted Uses. Permitted uses by site plan approval procedures are as
follows:
1. All uses permitted in the "MR" Multi-Family Residential District;
2. All uses permitted in the "RSC" Retail-Service Commercial District;
3. All uses permitted in the "GC" General Commercial District;
4. Motels and hotels.
C. Conditional Uses. The Board of Aldermen may authorize the following
uses by conditional use permit as provided in Article II, Division 6, after
receipt of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission
and subject to such restrictions and conditions as are deemed
necessary. The Board, by simple majority vote, may add any restrictions
or conditions it feels appropriate. [Ord. No. 4723 § 5, 8-15-2016]
1. Public utility substations and transmission facilities, collection
facilities and processing plants;
2. Private child day care centers or nurseries;
3. Orphanages or children's homes;
4. Nursing or retirement homes;
5. Commercial parking facilities;
6. Motor vehicle service or filling stations;
Section
400.1380
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1380
AO:564
7. Enclosed or open recreational uses including, but not limited to,
video games, tennis, handball, paddleball, swimming, skating,
gymnasium or health club, bowling, indoor soccer, etc., but
excluding outdoor theaters;
8. Restaurants;
9. Drive-in or carry-out sales of foods or of other goods or services,
including freestanding drive-in banking facilities;
10. Taverns and cocktail lounges;
11. Sales, rental, leasing or storage of motor vehicles, trailers, boats or
other recreational equipment involving any display, storage or
parking out-of-doors;
12. Motor vehicle repairs and washing or the installation of tires,
batteries or accessories;
13. Any building or structure exceeding six (6) stories or seventy-five
(75) feet in height;
14. Warehousing or wholesaling of manufactured goods except
explosives, flammable gases or liquids or finished products;
15. Any display, storage or parking out-of-doors of equipment, vehicles
or merchandise other than motor vehicles normally required by
employees, customers or users of the site;
16. Dry cleaning plant or laundry;
17. Pet boarding facility, including day care and overnight boarding for
domesticated dogs and cats.
D. Site Plan Approval Required. Site plan approval by the Board of
Aldermen on the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall be required by all proposed developments in the "PD"
district (see Article II, Division 9); provided however, that existing
detached single-family residences within the "PD" district shall be
exempt from this requirement where the construction contemplated is
the improvement of a single dwelling, such that the development
standards included in Section 400.1350, Subsection (F) are met and the
proposed improvement would not cause the violation of any pre-existing
condition of approval for the overall "PD" project.
E. Use Regulations.
1. Intensity of development. Uses may be developed at the following
densities based on the percentage of the total project that they
represent:
Section
400.1380
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1380
AO:565
Use Percent of
Project
Units per Acre FAR
Residential 0 — 20 25 —
Residential 20 — 80 30 —
Residential 80 — 100 20 —
Retail 0 — 20 0.5
Retail 20 — 80 2.0
Retail 80 — 100 1.0
Office 0 — 20 0.5
Office 20 — 80 2.5
Office 80 — 100 1.0
Motel/hotel 0 — 20 100
Motel/hotel 20 — 80 200
Motel/hotel 80 — 100 150
2. Lot size requirements.
a. Minimum lot area. One (1) acre (43,560 square feet); provided
however, that the minimum lot size may be waived by the
Board of Aldermen if the parcel in question has certain unique
characteristics such as, but not limited to, significant
topographic change, significant trees or wooded areas, wet
lands, flood plains or soil conditions, watercourses or utility
easements, unusual shape or proportions or, if the Board
should determine such waiver to be in the general public
interest.
b. Minimum lot width. One hundred fifty (150) feet.
c. Minimum lot depth. One hundred fifty (150) feet.
3. Building bulk regulations. Any building or group of buildings
constituting a development of one (1) or two (2) acres shall not
exceed four (4) stories or fifty-two (52) feet in height and must
satisfy conditions below. Any building or group of buildings
constituting a development of two (2) acres or more shall not
exceed six (6) stories or seventy-five (75) feet in height and must
satisfy the conditions below. Any building exceeding six (6) stories
or seventy-five (75) feet in height must receive a conditional use
permit in accordance with Article II, Division 6, subject also to the
conditions expressed in this Section.
a. Any building over two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five
(35) feet in height and up to four (4) stories or fifty-two (52)
feet in height shall have a minimum of fifty (50) feet of building
setback between the building and any single-family residential
district "A", "B" or "AR".
Section
400.1380
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1380
AO:566
b. Any building over four (4) stories or fifty-two (52) feet in height
and up to six (6) stories or seventy-five (75) feet in height shall
have a minimum building setback of one hundred (100) feet
between the building and any single-family residential district.
The building height shall be measured from the lowest exposed
finished grade elevation on the side nearest the single-family
residential district to the highest point on the building directly
above, excluding chimneys, ornamental spires and towers.
4. Maximum site coverage. The amount of gross site area covered by
buildings and structures, surface parking, pavement for motor
vehicle circulation or permitted exterior business services, storage,
merchandise display, repair or processing shall not exceed the
following:
Allowable Site Coverage
Maximum
Coverage
Without Bonus
Bonus
Coverage
Coverage
With Bonus
Residential uses 50% 1 to 15% Up to 65%
Offices, motels/
hotels and
institutional uses
60% 1 to 15% Up to 75%
Businesses or
commercial uses
other than offices
65% 1 to 15% Up to 80%
a. In a mixed use development, the maximum coverage will be an
average of those uses which make up to twenty percent (20%)
or more of the project, based on their percentage of the total
development.
b. The Board of Aldermen may allow the permitted coverage to be
increased as a bonus by an additional factor of up to fifteen
percent (15%) as shown above in consideration of special or
outstanding landscape and site planning features as
demonstrated by a site plan submitted in accordance with
Article II, Division 9. The features to be considered in the
granting of any bonus coverage would include the provision of:
(1) A high quality landscape plan with proper irrigation and
intense planting and retention of mature plant materials;
(2) Use of low walls, terraces, berms and earth sculpting;
(3) Special pedestrian facilities and features such as plazas,
covered walkways, foundations and seating areas and
outdoor recreation facilities.
Section
400.1380
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1380
AO:567
c. The balance of the site not covered by buildings and
structures, surface parking, pavement for motor vehicle
circulation or permitted exterior business services, storage,
merchandise display, repair and processing shall be open
space devoted to landscaping, pedestrian circulation, plazas
and buffering.
d. Any landscaped plazas on the roof or deck of a building or
parking garage which is publicly accessible by pedestrian from
ground level may, at the discretion of the Board of Aldermen,
be excluded from the calculation of site coverage.
5. Yard and setback requirements.
a. Front yard. No building or structure shall be located closer
than twenty-five (25) feet from any right-of-way. If parking is to
be located in front of a building or structure, the structure or
building shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the
public right-of-way or planned right-of-way. The provisions of
Section 400.1840 shall prevail where applicable on major
streets and highways. In every instance, the first fifteen (15)
feet of the front yard setback from the right-of-way shall be
provided and maintained with sidewalks, unless improved
sidewalks exist in the abutting public right-of-way, and with
landscaping including, but not limited to, deciduous trees at
regular intervals.
b. Side and rear yards. The site, landscape treatment and grading
and any visual screening to be provided in any side or rear yard
shall be determined by the recommendation of the Planning
and Zoning Commission and the Board of Aldermen by site
plan approval in accordance with Article II, Division 9. In no
instance shall the setback and buffer be less than ten (10) feet
at any side or rear property line. The Board of Aldermen may
waive this requirement where the use and development of the
abutting properties is defined and provided for in a site plan
for approval. However, a side or rear yard which abuts
property in any residential zoning district ("A", "B", "AR" or
"MR") must be a minimum of fifty (50) feet in width. Twentyfive
(25) feet of such side or rear yard adjacent to a residential
district shall be provided with natural landscaping and there
shall be no motor vehicle parking or driveways therein, except
to cross the side or rear yard to give access to the property.
6. Off-street parking and loading. See Article IV.
7. Environmental controls. All site development shall conform with
the environmental performance standard provided in Article V,
Division 6 and with all other appropriate environmental controls
including Section 400.1880 and Article V, Division 7.
8. Signs. See Chapter 410.
Section
400.1380
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1380
AO:568
Section 400.1390. "LID" Light Industrial District. [R.O. 2009
§25-260; Ord. No. 2739 §§43-29.1 — 43-29.5, 5-20-1985; Ord. No.
3033 §§9 — 10, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 3263 §1, 2-1-1993; Ord. No.
9. Architectural standards. The following standards shall apply to
construction in this district.
a. The use of metal siding is prohibited on any elevation of any
building that is visible from Manchester Road, Brentwood
Boulevard, Eager Road or Hanley Road and on any elevation
that abuts property that is zoned or used for residential
purposes. This requirement does not pertain to metal roofs.
b. If mechanical HVAC equipment that is installed on the roof of
any structure in this district is visible from grade level in
residential areas or, is visible from Manchester Road,
Brentwood Boulevard, Eager Road or Hanley Road, said
equipment shall be screened by a wall with a finish surface
compatible in design and color to that which is used as a finish
building wall material. The purpose of the screen is to prevent
said equipment from being visible from residential areas while
serving as a deterrent to the transmission of sound into
residential areas.
F. Use Limitations.
1. All development shall be in accordance with an adopted
Comprehensive Plan or parts thereof, including proposed land use
and public improvement elements.
2. All business, services, storage, merchandise display and repairing
and processing shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed
building, except for off-street motor vehicle parking for customers,
employees, residents or, visitors and off-street loading. Exceptions
may be granted by obtaining a conditional use permit in
accordance with Article II, Division 6.
3. Used motor vehicles, trailers, boats or recreational vehicles may be
sold only in conjunction with and on the same lot or site as the sale
of new vehicles of the same type and under the same business
ownership or management. Such sale of used vehicles shall be
subject to approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with
Article II, Division 6.
4. Unless otherwise permitted in this Article for specified uses, goods
sold on the premises shall be sold only at retail.
5. Processes and equipment employed and goods processed or sold
should be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of
odor, dust, smoke, cinders, gas, noise, vibration, refuse matter,
water-carried waste, pollutants or matter which in any manner
create or constitute a nuisance.
Section
400.1380
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1390
AO:569
3543 §4, 6-16-1997; Ord. No. 3662 §7, 7-19-1999; Ord. No. 3692 §1,
4-17-2000; Ord. No. 3847 §1, 10-21-2002; Ord. No. 4142 §1,
9-15-2008; Ord. No. 4175 §1, 4-6-2009; Ord. No. 4497 §1, 3-3-2014]
A. Purpose. The "LID" Light Industrial District is intended to
accommodate light industrial manufacturing and warehousing
activities at a scale and intensity of use that is compatible with the
development in the City.
B. Permitted Uses. No building or structure shall be used and no building
or structure shall be erected, structurally altered or enlarged except for
any of the following uses, provided that such uses are in conformity
with all applicable ordinances and laws regulating the emission of odor,
smoke, toxic gases, dirt, dust, fly ash and other particulate matter, the
generation of noise and vibration and relating to fire prevention and
safety:
1. Manufacturing or fabrication of any commodity except explosives,
flammable gases or liquids;
2. Warehousing or wholesaling of manufactured goods, except
explosives, flammable gases or liquids as finished products;
3. Public utility facilities;
4. Research laboratories and facilities;
5. Retail activities conducted as an accessory to manufacturing,
fabrication or warehousing of commodities. For the purpose of this
provision, the term "accessory" shall mean a retail activity limited
to not more than thirty percent (30%) of the floor area of a building
or site;
6. Offices;
7. Enclosed or open recreational uses including, but not limited to,
video games, tennis, handball or paddleball, swimming, skating,
gymnasium or health club, bowling, miniature golf, outdoor
theaters, etc.;
8. Any display, storage or parking out-of-doors of equipment, vehicle
or merchandise;
9. Retail sale similar to sales via the Internet or mail order sales.
Sales are to be the type that customers do not visit the premises for
either selection or pickup of merchandise as a regular aspect of the
sales activity;
10. Private or public schools;
11. Professional offices.
12. Churches and other places of worship. [Ord. No. 4588 §1,
11-17-2014]
Section
400.1390
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1390
AO:570
C. Conditional Uses. The Board of Aldermen may authorize the following
uses by conditional use permit as provided in Article II, Division 6, after
receipt of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission
and subject to such restrictions and conditions as are deemed
necessary:
1. Motor vehicle repair or washing;
2. Private child day care centers or nurseries;
3. Restaurants;
4. Drive-in or freestanding banking facilities;
5. Pet boarding facility, including day care and overnight boarding for
domesticated dogs and cats.
The Board, by simple majority vote, may add any restrictions
or conditions it feels appropriate. [Ord. No. 4723 § 5,
8-15-2016]
D. Site Plan Approval. Site plan approval by the Board of Aldermen with
recommendations from the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
required for all proposed developments within the "LID" Light
Industrial District as provided for in Article II, Division 9.
E. Use Regulations.
1. Lot size requirements.
a. Minimum lot area. One (1) acre (43,560 square feet), except
for public utility substations which may have a minimum area
of five thousand (5,000) square feet.
b. Minimum lot width. One hundred fifty (150) feet.
c. Minimum lot depth. One hundred fifty (150) feet.
2. Building bulk regulations.
a. Maximum structure height. Three (3) stories or forty-five (45)
feet.
b. Maximum site coverage. Eighty percent (80%).
3. Yard and setback requirements.
a. Minimum front yard. No building or structure shall be located
closer than twenty-five (25) feet from a public right-of-way. If
parking is to be located in front of a building or structure, the
building or structure shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50)
feet from the street right-of-way.
b. Minimum side yard. None required where industrial buildings
are constructed simultaneously with party walls or fire walls. If
Section
400.1390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1390
AO:571
a side yard is provided or if the property abuts property of a
different zoning classification, a minimum side yard of twelve
(12) feet shall be provided.
c. Minimum rear yard. Twenty-five (25) feet.
d. Transitional yards. Where a side or rear lot line coincides with
a side or rear lot line of any lot in an adjacent residential
zoning district ("A", "B", "AR" or "MR"), then a landscaped yard
of at least twenty-five (25) feet in width shall be provided along
such a lot. In addition, for any use which involves the
construction of a new structure or the expansion of an existing
structure, a masonry wall or solid fence of at least six (6) feet
but not more than eight (8) feet in height shall be provided in
such transitional yard within two (2) feet of the property line.
4. Off-street parking and loading. See Article IV.
5. Environmental controls. All development shall conform with the
environmental performance standards provided in Article V,
Division 6 and with all other appropriate environmental controls
including Section 400.1880 and Article V, Division 7;
6. Signs. See Chapter 410.
7. Architectural standards. The following standards shall apply to
construction in this district.
a. The use of metal siding is prohibited on any elevation of any
building that is visible from Manchester Road, Brentwood
Boulevard, Eager Road or Hanley Road and on any elevation
that abuts property that is zoned or used for residential
purposes. This requirement does not pertain to metal roofs.
b. If mechanical HVAC equipment that is installed on the roof of
any structure in this district is visible from grade level in
residential areas or, is visible from Manchester Road,
Brentwood Boulevard, Eager Road or Hanley Road, said
equipment shall be screened by a wall with a finish surface
compatible in design and color to that which is used as a finish
building wall material. The purpose of the screen is to prevent
said equipment from being visible from residential areas while
serving as a deterrent to the transmission of sound into
residential areas.
F. Use Limitations. Processes and equipment employed and goods
processed or sold should be limited to those which are not objectionable
by reason of odor, dust, smoke, cinders, gas, noise, vibration, refuse
matter, water-carried waste, pollutants or matter which in any manner
create or constitute a nuisance.
Section
400.1390
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1400
AO:572
Section 400.1400. Urban Development. [R.O. 2009 §25-261; Ord.
No. 3662 §2(Exh. A), 7-19-1999; Ord. No. 3733 §1, 11-20-2000]
A. Purpose. The Urban Development ("UD") District is intended, by site
plan approval and other procedures set forth in this Section, to
encourage the development of multi-family residential, retail or office
uses or combinations thereof, to foster co-existing mixed uses in the
best interests of the City. Specifically, the district is intended to:
1. Facilitate the development of multi-family residential, retail, office
and light industrial uses to accomplish the goals of the
Comprehensive Plan, adopted in 1990 and amended from time to
time, for specific areas of the City for which this type of mixed-use
development is authorized by the Zoning District Map.
2. Provide for a scale and flexibility of development which could not
otherwise be achieved through fixed single-use zoning districts;
3. Encourage site consolidation and allow for planned mixed-use
development;
4. Induce and ensure high quality future development through the use
of site plan approval procedures which provide for the specific
considerations of traffic, parking, drainage, landscaping and design
factors.
B. Permitted Uses. Permitted uses by site plan approval procedures are
the following uses in buildings less than two (2) stories or thirty-five
(35) feet in height as measured in accordance with the definition
contained in Section 400.020:
1. Single-family attached residential dwellings;
2. Multi-family residential dwellings, regardless of ownership;
3. A single building for office use occupied by one (1) or more tenants.
C. Conditional Uses. The Board of Aldermen may authorize the following
uses by conditional use permit as provided in Article II, Division 6, after
receipt of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission
and subject to such restrictions and conditions as are deemed
reasonable or necessary. The Board, by simple majority vote, may add
any restrictions or conditions it feels appropriate. [Ord. No. 4723 § 5,
8-15-2016]
1. Public utility substations and transmission facilities;
2. Private child and elder day care centers or nurseries;
3. Skilled or assisted living facilities;
4. Enclosed or open recreational uses including, but not limited to,
video games, tennis, handball, paddleball, swimming, skating,
Section
400.1400
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1400
AO:573
gymnasium or health club, bowling, indoor soccer, etc., but
excluding indoor or outdoor theaters;
5. Retail sales;
6. Restaurants;
7. Drive-in or carry-out sales of foods or of other goods or services,
including free standing drive-in banking facilities;
8. Any building or structure exceeding two (2) stories or thirty-five
(35) feet in height;
9. Hotel including ancillary uses;
10. Any use, which in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, is similar
to the above uses.
D. Site Plan Approval Required. Site plan approval by the Board of
Aldermen utilizing the site plan approval process on the
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
required for all proposed developments, alterations, expansions or
changes in the " UD" District (see Article II, Division 9). Upon any
rezoning to a "UD" District any existing buildings or improvements
need not comply with applicable building setback restrictions set forth
in this Section with respect to front yards, side yards, or rear yards but
such non-compliance shall be considered by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the Board of Aldermen in determining the propriety of
any alteration, expansion or change in use; further, the complete
demolition and reconstruction of any such building or improvements
shall comply with such setback provisions subject to any waiver of the
same by the Board of Aldermen as authorized in this Section. [Ord. No.
4777, 5-16-2017]
E. Use Regulations.
1. Intensity of development. Property may be developed at the
following densities:
Single or Mixed
Use
Percent of
Project
Units Per
Acre FAR
Residential Up to 100 80 2.5
Retail Up to 100 N/A 2.0
Office Up to 100 N/A 2.5
Motel/hotel Up to 100 125 3.0
Manufacturing Up to 100 N/A 1.5
2. Lot size requirements.
a. Minimum lot area. One (1) acre (43,560 square feet).
Section
400.1400
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1400
AO:574
b. Minimum lot width. One hundred fifty (150) feet.
c. Minimum lot depth. One hundred fifty (150) feet.
However, the minimum lot size or dimension in this
Section may be waived by the Board of Aldermen if the
parcel in question has certain unique characteristics
such as, but not limited to: significant topographic
change, significant trees or wooded areas, wet lands,
flood plains, soil conditions, watercourses, utility
easements, unusual shape or proportions, or if the
Board should determine such waiver to be in the
general public interest.
3. Building regulations. The following table summarizes the pertinent
building regulations. Specific descriptive language follows the
table.
Regulation 1 — 2 Acres 2 — 4 Acres Over 4 Acres
Building
height
4 stories or 52
feet
6 stories or 75
feet
Unlimited
Front yard1
setback
20 feet2 or 25
feet3
30 feet2 or 20
feet3
0.5 foot per 1 foot
height Minimum of
20 feet
Side yard
setback
15 feet3 15 feet3 15 feet3
Rear yard
setback
15 feet3 15 feet3 15 feet3
Site coverage 80%4 80%4 80%4
1 A front yard is defined as any yard between the building line
and any public right-of-way.
2 If the property fronts on property zoned or used for residential
purposes.
3 If the property fronts on property zoned for any use other than
residential.
4 Subject to an optional increase to ninety percent (90%)
provided certain conditions are met.
4. Building bulk, height and setback restrictions.
a. Building height restrictions. The building height shall be
measured from the lowest exposed finished grade elevation to
the highest point on the building directly above, excluding
chimneys, ornamental spires and towers.
Section
400.1400
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1400
AO:575
(1) Any building or group of buildings constituting a
development of one (1) or two (2) acres shall not exceed
four (4) stories or fifty-two (52) feet in height.
(2) Any building or group of buildings constituting a
development of two (2) to four (4) acres shall not exceed
six (6) stories or seventy-five (75) feet in height.
(3) Any building or group of buildings on property exceeding
four (4) acres is unlimited in height.
b. Building setback restrictions.
(1) Front yards.
(a) Any building up to four (4) stories or fifty-two (52) feet
in height shall have a minimum building setback of
twenty (20) feet between the building and the
property line when the property abuts or is within one
hundred (100) feet of property zoned "A", "B", "AR",
"MR" or "UD" and is used residentially. If the front
yard of the property faces property used for any other
purpose or in any other zoning district, the building
setback is fifteen (15) feet. Every portion of a lot
between the building and a public street right-of-way
shall be considered a front yard. In every instance, the
first fifteen (15) feet of the front yard setback from the
right-of-way shall be provided and maintained with
sidewalks, unless improved sidewalks exist in the
abutting public right-of-way; and with landscaping
including, but not limited to, deciduous trees at thirtyfive
(35) foot intervals.
(b) Any building over four (4) stories or fifty-two (52) feet
in height and up to six (6) stories or seventy-five (75)
feet in height shall have a minimum building setback
of twenty-five (25) feet between the building and the
property line when the property abuts or is within one
hundred (100) feet of property zoned "A", "B", "AR",
"MR" or "UD" and is used residentially. If the front
yard of the property faces property used for any other
purpose or in any other zoning district, the building
setback is fifteen (15) feet. Every portion of a lot
between the building and a public street right-of-way
shall be considered a front yard. In every instance, the
first fifteen (15) feet of the front yard setback from the
right-of-way shall be provided and maintained with
sidewalks, unless improved sidewalks exist in the
abutting public right-of-way, and with landscaping
including, but not limited to, deciduous trees at thirtyfive
(35) foot intervals.
Section
400.1400
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1400
AO:576
(c) Any building over six (6) stories or seventy-five (75)
feet in height shall have a building setback of one-half
(½) foot of building setback per foot of building height
but in no case less than twenty (20) feet nor is it
required to be greater than one hundred (100) feet
between the building and the property line when the
property abuts or is within one hundred (100) feet of
property zoned "A", "B", "AR", "MR" or "UD" and is
used residentially. If the front yard of the property
faces property used for any other purpose or in any
other zoning district, the building setback is fifteen
(15) feet. Every portion of a lot between the building
and a public street right-of-way shall be considered a
front yard. In every instance, the first fifteen (15) feet
of the front yard setback from the right-of-way shall be
provided and maintained with sidewalks, unless
improved sidewalks exist in the abutting public rightof-
way, and with landscaping including, but not limited
to, deciduous trees at thirty-five (35) foot intervals.
(2) Side and rear yards.
(a) The building setback shall not be less than fifteen (15)
feet at any side or rear property line. The site
landscape treatment and grading and any visual
screening to be provided in any side or rear yard shall
be determined by the recommendation of the Planning
and Zoning Commission and the Board of Aldermen by
site plan approval in accordance with Article II,
Division 9. The Board of Aldermen may reduce this
requirement to five (5) feet where the use and
development of the abutting properties is defined and
provided for in a previously approved site plan.
(b) The building setback for a side or rear yard which
abuts property in any residential zoning district ("A",
"B", "AR", "MR" or "UD" used as residential) must be a
minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. All of that twentyfive
(25) foot side or rear yard adjacent to a residential
district shall be provided with natural landscaping and
there shall be no motor vehicle parking or driveways
therein, except to cross the side or rear yard to give
access to the property.
(c) However, the minimum building setback set forth in
this Section may be waived by the Board of Aldermen
if the parcel in question has certain unique
characteristics such as, but not limited to: significant
topographic change, significant trees or wooded
areas, wet lands, flood plains, soil conditions,
watercourses, utility easements, unusual shape or
Section
400.1400
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1400
AO:577
proportions, or if the board should determine such
waiver to be in the general public interest.
c. Maximum site coverage.
(1) Unless the site qualifies for the bonus in site coverage
under the regulations of Subsection 400.1400(E)(4)(d), the
amount of gross site area covered by building and
structures, surface parking, pavement for motor vehicle
circulation or permitted exterior business services,
storage, merchandise display, repair or processing shall
not exceed eighty percent (80%) of the site.
(2) The balance of the site not covered by buildings and
structures, surface parking, pavement for motor vehicle
circulation or permitted exterior business services,
storage, merchandise display, repair and processing shall
be open space devoted to landscaping, pedestrian
circulation, plazas and buffering.
(3) Any landscaped plazas on the roof or deck of a building or
parking garage which is publicly accessible by pedestrian
from ground level may, at the discretion of the Board of
Aldermen, be excluded from the calculation of site
coverage.
d. Bonus site coverage.
(1) For those uses falling under Section 400.1400(B)(2 — 3) or
Section 400.1400(C)(2), (3), (4), (8), (9) or (10), the Board
of Aldermen may, after receiving the recommendation of
the Planning and Zoning Commission, authorize a bonus in
the site coverage of up to ten percent (10%) if, in the
opinion of the Board, the proposal has special or
outstanding landscape, architectural and site planning
features as demonstrated by the site plan submitted in
accordance with Article II, Division 9. The features to be
considered in the granting of any bonus coverage would
include the provision of:
(a) A high quality landscape plan with proper irrigation
and intense planting and retention of mature plant
materials;
(b) Use of low walls, terraces, berms and earth sculpting;
(c) Special pedestrian facilities and features such as
plazas, covered walkways, foundations and seating
areas and outdoor recreation facilities;
(d) Water features;
(e) Outstanding architectural aesthetics.
Section
400.1400
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1400
AO:578
(2) Any landscaped plazas on the roof or deck of a building or
parking garage which is publicly accessible by pedestrian
from ground level may, at the discretion of the Board of
Aldermen, be excluded from the calculation of site
coverage.
5. Off-street parking and loading. See Article IV.
a. The Board of Aldermen, upon the affirmative recommendation
from the Planning and Zoning Commission, may authorize a
reduction in the required parking to one and one-half (1½)
parking spaces per unit in this district in consideration of the
following:
(1) Substantiation by the applicant that anticipated occupancy
of the project will be tenants and/or owners that are not
likely to require a parking ratio greater than three (3)
parking spaces for each two (2) units (or one and one-half
(1½) parking spaces per unit). In the event the occupancy
mix changes to the point that the reduced parking ratio is
not satisfactory for the development, the City may
withhold issuance of occupancy permits until such time as
the additional parking necessary is furnished.
(2) Site planning features as demonstrated by a site plan
submitted in accordance with Article II, Division 9. Site
development features to be considered in the granting of
any reduction in required parking would include:
(a) A high quality landscape plan with proper irrigation
and intense planting and retention of mature plant
materials;
(b) Use of low walls, terraces, berms and earth sculpting;
(c) Special pedestrian facilities and features such as
plazas, covered walkways, foundations and seating
areas and outdoor recreation facilities.
6. Environmental controls. All site development shall conform with
the environmental performance standard provided in Article V,
Division 6 and with all other appropriate environmental controls
including Section 400.1880 and Article V, Division 7.
7. Signs. See Chapter 410.
8. Architectural standards. The use of metal siding is prohibited on
any elevation of any building that is visible from Manchester Road,
Brentwood Boulevard, Eager Road or Hanley Road and on any
elevation that abuts property that is zoned or used for residential
purposes. This requirement does not pertain to metal roofs.
F. Use Limitations.
Section
400.1400
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1400
AO:579
Section 400.1410. "FP" Flood Plain Overlay District. [R.O. 2009
§25-262; Ord. No. 2739 §§43-30.1 — 43-30.4, 5-20-1985; Ord. No.
3662 §1, 7-19-1999]
1. All development shall be in accordance with an adopted
Comprehensive Plan or parts thereof, including proposed land use
and public improvement elements.
2. All business, services, storage, merchandise display and repairing
and processing shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed
building, except for off-street motor vehicle parking for customers,
employees, residents or visitors and off-street loading. Exceptions
may be granted by obtaining a conditional use permit in
accordance with Article II, Division 6.
3. Used motor vehicles, trailers, boats or recreational vehicles may be
sold only in conjunction with and on the same lot or site as the sale
of new vehicles of the same type and under the same business
ownership or management. Such sale of used vehicles shall be
subject to approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with
Article II, Division 6. This shall not be construed to prohibit the
otherwise legal sale of motor vehicles, trailers, boats or
recreational vehicles by a resident at his/her residence.
4. Processes and equipment employed and goods processed or sold
should be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of
odor, dust, smoke, cinders, gas, noise, vibration, refuse matter,
water-carried waste, pollutants or matter which in any manner
create or constitute a nuisance.
A. Purpose. The intent of the "FP" Flood Plain Overlay District is to protect
future development in the City from those areas subject to rising or
fluctuating water levels or flooding. The district boundary shall be the
100-year flood plain as determined by the Federal Insurance
Administration, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
and adopted by the City as the official flood plain boundaries within the
City, see Article V, Division 8. The regulations of this district shall
supersede the regulations of all other zoning categories in this Chapter.
B. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in all areas
designated as 100-year flood plain on the official Zoning Map:
1. All uses in the basic underlying district, provided they have a low
flood damage potential, do not obstruct flood flows and meet the
other requirements of the Flood Plain Overlay District and are in
accordance with the Federal Insurance Administration regulations
(FIA regulations shall be on file in the Department of Planning and
Development) and in compliance with Article V, Division 8;
Section
400.1400
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1410
AO:580
Section 400.1420. through Section 400.1460. (Reserved)
2. Public and private non-commercial parks, playgrounds, golf
courses, picnic grounds, swimming pools, wildlife and nature
preserves;
3. Yard areas for residences;
4. Off-street parking and loading;
5. Accessory uses and activities customarily incidental to any of the
above uses or uses permitted in non-flood plain portions of a legally
subdivided parcel, excluding permanent structures related to or
used by such accessory use or activity (see Article V, Division 3).
C. Conditional Uses. No conditional uses are permitted other than those
allowed in the underlying district. Conditional uses are subject to the
requirements of the Flood Plain Overlay District and Article V, Division
8 and to the Federal Insurance Administration regulations as well as the
review procedures provided in Article II, Division 6.
D. Use Regulations. All use regulations of the underlying zoning district
shall apply to the Flood Plain Overlay District.
Section
400.1410
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1420
AO:581

ARTICLE IV
Off-Street Parking And Loading
DIVISION 1
Generally
Section 400.1470. Applicability. [R.O. 2009 §25-276; Ord. No. 2739
§43-70.1, 5-20-1985]
For every use, activity or structure permitted by this Chapter and for
all buildings or structures erected in accordance therewith, there shall
be provided sufficient space for access and off-street standing, parking,
circulation, unloading and loading of motor vehicles that may be expected
to transport its occupants, whether as patrons, residents, customers,
employees, guests or otherwise, to an establishment, activity or place of
residence at any time under normal conditions for any purpose. When a
use is expanded, accessory off-street parking and loading shall be provided
in accordance with the regulations herein for the area or capacity of such
expansion in combination with the previously existing uses, structure or
activity.
Section 400.1480. Procedure. [R.O. 2009 §25-277; Ord. No. 2739
§43-70.2, 5-20-1985]
Every building permit application for a new, enlarged or remodeled
building, structure or use shall include therewith, as specified further in
this Chapter, a parking site and landscape plan, drawn to scale and fully
dimensioned, showing any off-street parking or loading facilities and related
site improvements and landscaping.
Section 400.1490. Decreased Parking Demand. [R.O. 2009 §25-278;
Ord. No. 2739 §43-70.3, 5-20-1985]
When a building or structure undergoes a decrease in the number of
dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, number of employees or
other unit of measurement specified hereinafter as a means for determining
required off-street or loading facilities, or when the application of the
standards herein would result in a requirement for fewer total off-street
parking or loading spaces than are provided on the subject site, the
available off-street parking and loading facilities may be so reduced
accordingly, provided that existing off-street parking or loading facilities
may be so decreased only when the parking or loading facilities remaining
would at least equal or exceed the off-street parking or loading
requirements resulting from application of the provisions of these standards
to the entire building or structure as modified in use or capacity.
Section 400.1500. Floor Area. [R.O. 2009 §25-279; Ord. No. 2739
§43-71.1, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 4119 §1, 3-17-2008]
Section
400.1470
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1500
AO:583
Section 400.1510. Use of Residential Parking Facilities. [R.O. 2009
§25-280; Ord. No. 2739 §43-71.2, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 3822 §4,
3-18-2002]
Facilities accessory to a residential use which are developed in any
residential district in accordance with the requirements of this Article shall
be used solely for the parking of passenger motor vehicles or commercial
vehicles of not more than five (5) tons gross weight owned by occupants of
the dwelling structures to which such facilities are accessory or by guests of
such occupants. There shall be no more than two (2) vehicles per occupant
of the premises of legal driving age permitted on such driveway or parking
facility (see Section 365.070).
Section 400.1520. Repair, Service or Sales Use of Parking Facilities.
[R.O. 2009 §25-281; Ord. No. 2739 §43-71.3, 5-20-1985]
It shall be unlawful to utilize any required off-street parking or loading
facilities for motor vehicle repair work, service, display or sales of any kind
except as expressly permitted elsewhere in this Chapter.
Section 400.1530. Use of Required Parking as Commercial or
Public Lot. [R.O. 2009 §25-282; Ord. No. 2739 §43-71.4, 5-20-1985]
No area designated as a required parking area in connection with any
designated building or use shall be operated as a commercial or public
parking lot providing parking spaces for the general public or for the
occupants, tenants, customers, clients or residents of any other use or
activity for a fee or other compensation.
Section 400.1540. Ingress and Egress. [R.O. 2009 §25-283; Ord. No.
2739 §43-71.5, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 4172 §1, 3-24-2009]
All entrances and exits to parking and loading areas from a public right-ofway,
except for those being provided for individual single-family residential
lots, shall be subject to specific approval by the Board of Aldermen by
A. The term "floor area", as employed in this Article, shall mean the gross
leasable floor area (GLA) or the total interior floor area of a building or
structure measured at the inside face of the exterior walls, but
excluding stairwells, elevator shafts, lobbies and bathrooms located for
common or public usage of the total building rather than for tenant or
internal usage and space occupied by mechanical equipment or space
related to the operation and maintenance of the building.
B. The term "total floor area", as employed in this Article, shall mean the
gross floor area (GFA) or the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several stories of the building, including accessory buildings, measured
from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of
party walls and including garages, porches, utility rooms, stairways,
recreation rooms and storage rooms, but excluding the open areas of
multi-story atriums, unenclosed balconies and patios.
Section
400.1500
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1540
AO:584
site plan approval in accordance with Article II, Division 9 in order to
ensure the smooth and safe circulation of vehicles to and from the public
street system. In no event shall parking or loading spaces be provided in a
manner requiring the backing out of vehicles into public right-of-way with
the exception of driveways for individual single-family residential lots on
local streets.
Section 400.1550. Location of Parking or Loading Space. [R.O. 2009
§25-284; Ord. No. 2739 §43-71.6, 5-20-1985]
Section 400.1560. Zoning of Accessory Parking. [R.O. 2009 §25-285;
Ord. No. 2739 §43-71.7, 5-20-1985]
All accessory parking facilities, whether provided in fulfillment of or in
excess of the requirements of this Article and whether located on the same
or on a different lot from the principal use as provided in the preceding
Section, shall be located on the property zoned within the same or a less
restrictive zoning district as the principal use served by the parking.
A. All required off-street parking or loading spaces shall be provided on
the same parcel of land occupied by the use or building to which it is
appurtenant. Provided however, that where there are, in the judgment
of the Planning and Zoning Commission, practical difficulties in
satisfying the requirement for parking space and/or if the public safety
or convenience would be better served by another location, the
Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend authorization of an
alternate location for any portion of the required parking for a nonresidential
use which will adequately serve the public interest, subject
to the following conditions:
1. Required accessory off-street parking facilities may be provided
elsewhere than on the lot on which the principal use served is
located, provided that the property occupied as parking is in the
same possession, either by deed, by easement or by long-term lease
which has a term equal to or exceeding the projected life of the
facility occupied by the principal use. The owner shall be bound by
covenants filed on record in the office of the County Clerk,
requiring the owners, heirs or assigns to maintain the required
number of off-street parking spaces during the existence of such
principal use.
2. Pedestrian access shall be available within a walking distance of
not more than three hundred (300) feet measured from the nearest
point of public access to the building to the nearest part of the
accessory parking area.
3. Such separated parking space shall be usable without causing
unreasonable traffic congestion, detriment to any residential
neighborhood or hazard to pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
Section
400.1540
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1570
AO:585
Section 400.1570. Joint Parking Facilities. [R.O. 2009 §25-286; Ord.
No. 2739 §43-71.8, 5-20-1985]
Section 400.1580. Number of Parking and Loading Spaces
Required. [R.O. 2009 §25-287; Ord. No. 2739 §43-71.9, 5-20-1985]
The required number of off-street parking and loading spaces is set forth in
Sections 400.1600 and 400.1610.
Section 400.1590. Exemptions From Required Parking. [R.O. 2009
§25-288; Ord. No. 2739 §43-71.10, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 4074 §1,
6-18-2007; Ord. No. 4119 §1, 3-17-2008]
A. Off-street parking facilities for different buildings, structures or uses, or
for mixed uses, may be provided and used collectively or jointly in any
zoning district in which separate off-street parking facilities for each
constituent use would be permitted, subject to the following provisions:
1. The total number of spaces so located together is not less than the
sum of the separate requirements for each use.
2. A legally sufficient written agreement ensuring the perpetual joint
usage of the common parking for the combination of uses or
buildings is properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned,
approved as to form and execution by the Board of Aldermen and
City Attorney and filed with and made part of the application for a
building permit.
3. Up to fifty percent (50%) of the parking spaces required for a
theater or other place of evening entertainment, for a church, for
multi-family dwelling units or for a school may be provided and
used jointly by banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service
establishments and similar uses not normally open, used or
operated during evening hours if specifically approved by the
Board of Aldermen, provided however, that written agreement
ensuring the retention for such purpose should be properly drawn
and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form and
execution by the Board of Aldermen and the City Attorney and
should be filed and made part of the application for a building
permit. Such approval may be rescinded by the Board of Aldermen
of the City and additional parking shall be obtained by the owners if
the Board determines that such joint use is resulting in a public
nuisance or otherwise adversely affecting the public health, safety
or welfare.
A. The number of parking and loading spaces to be constructed may be
less than the number of spaces required herein for the "PD" Planned
Development Overlay District if the following conditions are met to the
satisfaction of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Board of
Aldermen:
Section
400.1570
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1590
AO:586
Section 400.1600. Schedule of Required Parking Spaces. [R.O. 2009
§25-289; Ord. No. 2739 §§43-73, 43-73.1 — 43.73.6, 5-20-1985; Ord.
No. 3033 §§11 — 12, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 4119 §1, 3-17-2008; Ord.
No. 4175 §1, 4-6-2009]
1. Evidence is submitted firmly documenting that the special nature
of the use, activity or building proposed requires less parking area
or spaces than required by this Chapter for the same.
2. The site plan submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission in
accordance with Article II, Division 6 or Article II, Division 9
indicates that the location and layout of that portion of the parking
requirement designated not to be constructed can and will be
constructed accordingly if the Board of Aldermen determines at
any time that all or any portion of this parking is necessary in the
interest of the public health, safety and welfare.
B. In no event shall that portion of the required parking or loading which is
so designated not to be constructed as provided herein be counted as
open space or other non-paved area required by other provisions of this
Chapter.
C. The Board of Aldermen, upon the affirmative recommendation from the
Planning and Zoning Commission, may authorize a reduction in the
number of parking and loading spaces required by this Chapter after a
study by a registered professional engineer experienced in traffic and
parking studies is conducted, when such study clearly demonstrates
that a modification is warranted for a specific project. Said study shall
meet the latest guidelines and procedures as outlined in "Shared
Parking" published by the Urban Land Institute (ULI). Prior to any
change of use or occupancy, additional analysis may be required if the
Director of Planning and Development determines that the reduced
parking ratio is no longer satisfactory for the development. Such
changes must be authorized by the Board of Aldermen upon the
affirmative recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
D. A total reduction of not more than twenty percent (20%) for
developments less than two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet in
gross floor area (GFA) under single ownership or management control,
of the required off-street parking and loading spaces, where it has been
demonstrated by study of the combined uses and customary operation
of the uses that adequate parking would be provided. The Board of
Aldermen may authorize upon affirmative recommendation by the
Planning and Zoning Commission a further reduction beyond twenty
percent (20%) for developments greater than two hundred thousand
(200,000) square feet of gross floor area (GFA) under single ownership
or management control based on a similar approved study as above.
A. Criteria For Number Of Spaces. The following shall be the minimum
number of accessory off-street parking spaces required for each land
use, activity, building or structure permitted by this Chapter. When the
Section
400.1590
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1600
AO:587
determination of the number of required off-street parking spaces
results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of one-half
(½) space or less should be disregarded and any fraction over onehalf
(½) space shall count as one (1) space. Parking spaces required
on the basis of building floor area shall apply to gross floor area
as defined herein unless otherwise specified. Parking spaces required
on an employee basis shall be based on the maximum number of
employees on duty or residing, or both, on the premises at any one time,
which would include any overlap of employees at a change of shift.
B. Residential And Lodging Uses.
1. Single-family and two-family dwellings and town houses for sale on
lots or condominium ownership. Two (2) parking spaces for each
dwelling unit.
2. Multiple-family dwellings or apartments. Two (2) parking spaces
for each dwelling unit. The allowable parking for multi-family,
rental apartments designed for and exclusively occupied by
individuals over the age of sixty (60) may be reduced to one (1)
parking space per two (2) households at the specific approval of the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
3. Motels and hotels. One (1) parking space for each sleeping room
offered for tourist accommodation plus one (1) additional space for
every two (2) persons regularly employed on the premises.
Additional spaces shall be provided for restaurants or places of
assembly within the development as scheduled elsewhere.
4. Nursing home. One (1) parking space for every three (3) beds
occupied at maximum capacity plus one (1) space for every vehicle
used in the operation of the facility stored on site (such as
limousines, buses and/or ambulance).
5. Assisted living. One (1) parking space for every two (2) beds
occupied at maximum capacity plus one (1) space for every vehicle
used in the operation of the facility stored on site (such as
limousines, buses and/or ambulance).
C. Retail And Service Uses.
1. Indoor retail businesses. Five (5) parking spaces for each one
thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area (GFA).
2. Recreation centers, swimming pools, skating rinks and other public
or private recreation and amusement facilities. One (1) parking
space for every three (3) customers or patrons computed on the
basis of maximum servicing capacity at any one time, as
determined by the requirements of the City including the Fire Code
or Building Code as applicable, plus one (1) additional space for
every two (2) persons regularly employed on the premises at a peak
period of use.
Section
400.1600
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1600
AO:588
3. Bowling alleys. Five (5) parking spaces per lane.
4. Restaurants and other eating and drinking establishments without
drive-in or carry-out facilities. Eighteen (18) parking spaces for
every one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area (GFA),
including outdoor patio areas which provide seating for patrons
(exclusive of outdoor waiting areas).
5. Carry-out, drive-in or other fast-food restaurant.
a. One thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet or less of gross
leasable area in size. Eight (8) parking spaces for every one
thousand (1,000) square feet of gross leasable floor area:
b. Over one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross
leasable area in size. Twenty (20) base spaces plus ten (10)
parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of
building gross floor area (GFA) specifically including the
kitchen and storage areas.
6. Automobile service stations. One (1) parking space for each gas
pump, three (3) spaces for each service bay or similar facility, four
(4) spaces for one thousand (1,000) feet of gross leasable floor area
(GLA) associated with the sale of convenience items and one (1)
space for every two (2) persons employed on the premises.
7. Grocery store or supermarket. Six (6) spaces per one thousand
(1,000) square feet of gross floor area (GFA).
8. Accessory basement storage or inventory use. On-site parking shall
be provided on the basis of one-half (½) space per one thousand
(1,000) square feet of accessory basement space. (See Section
400.2100(17)).
9. Warehouse. Two (2) parking spaces for every three (3) employees.
10. Banking facilities. Four and one-half (4½) spaces for every one
thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area (GFA) in addition to
stacking space for three (3) vehicles for each drive-through window
or ATM land plus the space at the window or ATM. Banks with
headquarter facilities may utilize the office parking rates for the
portion of the building dedicated to office space separate from the
customer service lobby of the retail bank.
11. Barber/beauty salon. Two and one-half (2½) spaces for every
station staffed during the maximum shift. If station number is not
known at time of application, then four hundred (400) square feet
of the proposed building or tenant space per station may be used to
calculate the expected number of stations.
12. Dry cleaning or laundry facilities. Four (4) spaces per one thousand
(1,000) square feet of gross floor area (GFA) used for the retail
operation.
Section
400.1600
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1600
AO:589
Section 400.1610. Off-Street Loading Requirements. [R.O. 2009
§25-290; Ord. No. 2739 §§43-74, 43-74.1 — 43-74.6, 5-20-1985]
D. Offices.
1. General offices. Three and one-half (3½) parking spaces per one
thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area (GFA) for business,
professional, governmental or institutional offices, but excluding
medical offices.
2. Medical or dental offices or clinics. Five (5) parking spaces per one
thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area (GFA).
E. (Reserved)
F. Miscellaneous Uses.
1. Libraries, museums, galleries and similar uses: Parking or storage
space for all vehicles used directly in the operation of such
establishment plus four (4) parking spaces for each one thousand
(1,000) square feet of total floor area.
2. Hospitals. Eighty-five one-hundredths (.85) space per employee on
duty at any one (1) shift change or sixty-five one-hundredths (.65)
space per full-time equivalent total employment, whichever is
greater, and additional parking spaces shall be provided for visitors
on the basis of six-tenths (.6) space per hospital bed.
3. Pet care facilities. One (1) space for every four hundred (400)
square feet of gross floor area (GFA).
A. Adequate space shall be provided to accommodate the loading and
unloading of trucks, tractors and trailers servicing any commercial or
industrial or any large scale residential or institutional use. The
standards required for the provisions of such spaces are described in
this Section. Loading berth space which is utilized for the location of
trash collection or compaction units shall be provided for and shall be in
addition to the loading space requirements provided in Subsection (F)
of this Section.
B. Area Of Loading Berths Or Space. A required off-street loading berth or
space shall be at least twelve (12) feet in width and at least thirty-five
(35) feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuver space and shall have
a vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet.
C. Access To Loading Area. Each required off-street loading space or berth
shall be afforded appropriate means of vehicular access to a street,
highway or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic
movement.
D. Surfacing. All open off-street loading shall be improved with a
compacted select gravel base and surfaced with an all-weather dustless
Section
400.1600
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1610
AO:590
Section 400.1620. through Section 400.1660. (Reserved)
material, suitably designed for the intended use to a standard approved
by the City Engineer.
E. Screening. All loading berths or spaces and truck circulation which
abut or are adjacent to a residential district shall be set back at least
fifty (50) feet therefrom unless it is completely screened therefrom by
building walls or a solid fence, wall or landscaping, or any combination
thereof, not less than six (6) feet in height and set back at least fifteen
(15) feet therefrom.
F. Schedule Of Off-Street Loading Spaces.
1. Offices and personal or community service establishments. One (1)
loading space shall be provided for each such use, including
schools, medical or dental clinics, auditoriums or clubs, etc., having
greater than six thousand (6,000) square feet of gross floor space.
2. Residential or housing uses. Any building or project containing
more than fifty (50) apartment dwelling units shall provide one (1)
loading berth for each two hundred (200) units or fraction thereof.
No loading space is required for any building or project containing
less than fifty (50) apartment dwelling units.
3. Business or commercial uses. Every building or use of land
consisting of over three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross floor
area designed or adaptable for retail business purposes or
warehouse, wholesale or manufacturing use shall be provided with
loading space as follows:
Total Gross Floor Area Number of Loading Spaces
Required
Up to 15,000 square feet 1 space
15,000 to 50,000 square feet 2 spaces
50,000 to 100,000 square feet 3 spaces
Each additional 100,000
square feet
1 additional space
4. Other similar users. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
determine to which of the above categories of loading regulation
any specific use, including designated conditional uses, shall
belong or, determine other appropriate standards to be
recommended to the Board of Aldermen for addition to this Section
by amendment of this Chapter whenever the above regulations
prove inapplicable.
Section
400.1610
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1620
AO:591

DIVISION 2
Design and Maintenance Standards
Section 400.1670. Applicability. [R.O. 2009 §25-301; Ord. No. 2739
§43-72, 5-20-1985]
The following design and maintenance standards shall apply to all accessory
parking facilities and to all commercial or public parking facilities built as a
primary land use.
Section 400.1680. General On-Site Circulation Design Standards.
[R.O. 2009 §25-302; Ord. No. 2739 §43-72.1, 5-20-1985]
Section 400.1690. General On-Site Parking and Loading Design
Standards. [R.O. 2009 §25-303; Ord. No. 2739 §43-72.2, 5-20-1985;
Ord. No. 3033 §13, 10-16-1989]
A. There shall be an adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of
pedestrian circulation facilities, roadways, driveways, off-street parking
and loading space.
B. Roads, pedestrian walks and open space shall be designed as integral
parts of an overall site design. They shall be properly related to existing
and proposed building and appropriate landscaping.
C. Buildings, vehicular circulation and open spaces shall be arranged so
that pedestrians moving between buildings are not unnecessarily
exposed to vehicular traffic.
D. Landscaped, paved and comfortably graded pedestrian walks shall be
provided along the lines of the most intense use, particularly from
building entrances to streets, parking areas and adjacent buildings.
E. The materials used in the design of paving, lighting fixtures, retaining
walls, fences, curbs and benches shall be of good appearance, easily
maintained and indicative of their function.
F. Ramps shall be provided giving access from parking areas to the
building served for disabled persons utilizing wheelchairs.
A. Parking facilities shall be landscaped and screened from public view to
the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness and monotony of large
concentrations of parked cars.
B. Parking facilities shall be designed with careful regard to orderly
arrangement, topography, landscaping, ease of access and shall be
developed as an integral part of an overall site design.
C. Any above grade loading facility shall be screened from public view to
the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness.
Section
400.1670
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1690
AO:593
Section 400.1700. Size of Parking Spaces. [R.O. 2009 §25-304; Ord.
No. 2739 §43-72.3, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 3033 §14, 10-16-1989]
D. Parking spaces shall be specially designated for the parking of vehicles
of disabled persons according to the following schedule. Such spaces
shall be twelve (12) feet wide and located close to the building entry.
Total Parking Spaces
in Lot Up to 100
Accessible Parking Spaces
Required
1 per each 25 spaces or fraction
thereof
101 — 150 5
151 — 200 6
201 — 300 7
301 — 400 8
401 — 500 9
501 and over 2% of total parking spaces in lot
A. The following schedule of parking space and layout standards shall
apply to all parking facilities provided in the City in accordance with
this Article:
Angle of Parking Row to Driveway Aisle
(degrees)
30 45 60 90
One-way One-way One-way
One- or twoway
Depth of parking
row
17 20 20 18
Width of parking
space
9 9 9 9
Width of aisle 11 13 18 23
Parallel parking spaces shall be at least twenty-three (23) feet in
length and eight (8) feet in width.
B. Upon approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission, up to thirty
percent (30%) of the required parking spaces may be smaller than
provided in the preceding Section for those uses of a site or lot which
have little turnover and are typically occupied all day or overnight, such
as for offices or apartments. Approved small car spaces shall be
grouped and clearly marked for small car use, rather than being
scattered simply to solve layout difficulties. Such small car spaces may
be provided in the following manner:
Section
400.1690
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1700
AO:594
Section 400.1710. Parking Surface, Drainage and Maintenance.
[R.O. 2009 §25-305; Ord. No. 2739 §43-72.4, 5-20-1985; Ord. No.
3822 §5, 3-18-2002]
All open off-street parking areas shall be improved with a compacted base
surfaced with an approved (by the Building Department, see Section
365.070) all-weather, dustless, load-bearing material suitably designed for
the intended use. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided with
adequate storm water drainage facilities to prevent damage or
inconvenience to abutting property and/or public streets and alleys. Parking
and loading areas shall be maintained in a clean, orderly and dust-free
condition at the expense of the owner or lessee. The detention of storm
water runoff shall be subject to further regulations in accordance with
Article V, Division 7.
Section 400.1715. Marking. [R.O. 2009 §25-306; Ord. No. 2739
§43-72.5, 5-20-1985]
All parking spaces shall be marked by durable painted lines at least four
(4) inches wide and extending the length of the space or by curbs or
other means to indicate individual spaces. Signs or markers located on the
surface within a parking lot shall be used as necessary to ensure efficient
and safe traffic operation of the lot.
Small Car Spaces Angle of Parking Row to Driveway Aisle
(degrees)
30 45 60 90
One-way One-way Oneway
One-way or twoway
Depth of parking
row in feet
15 18 18 16
Width of parking
space in feet
8 8 8 8
Width of aisle in
feet
11 13 18 23
C. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve the use of
continuous curbs as wheel stops and thus measure the size of parking
spaces to be two (2) feet less in length than otherwise required. In such
instances the parking layout should allow for the vehicle to overhang
the curb by two (2) feet and such overhang area must be clear of all
obstructions such as signs, trees, etc., and may not be regarded as
required landscape area or pedestrian circulation space.
Section
400.1700
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1720
AO:595
Section 400.1720. Lighting. [R.O. 2009 §25-307; Ord. No. 2739
§43-72.6, 5-20-1985]
Lighting shall be provided to illuminate any off-street parking or loading
spaces to be used at night in accordance with Section 400.1880. If provided,
the lighting shall be arranged and installed to deflect, shade and focus lights
away from adjacent properties. The height, type, spacing and degree of
cutoff of a light standard may be further regulated by the City Engineer in
relation to specific site conditions or types of development.
Section 400.1730. Screening and Landscaping. [R.O. 2009 §25-308;
Ord. No. 2739 §43-72.7, 5-20-1985]
A. All parking and loading areas shall be properly screened and
landscaped as set forth in this Division. It is the purpose and intent of
this Article to require adequate protection for contiguous property
against undesirable effects from the creation and operation of parking
or loading areas and to protect and preserve the appearance and
character of the surrounding neighborhoods and of the City through the
screening effects and aesthetic qualities of such landscaping.
1. The landscaping shall include, to the extent necessary to further
the intent of this Section, shrubs, bushes, hedges, trees, decorative
walls or fencing as set forth below.
2. The frontage along the entire parking or loading area adjacent to
any public or private street shall be landscaped and protected so as
to separate and screen any parking area from the adjacent streets,
including the provision of deciduous, hardwood street trees at not
more than thirty-five (35) feet on center located either within the
right-of-way, if approved by the appropriate public agency, or
parallel to the right-of-way on the subject property.
3. When off-street parking or loading areas and other areas zoned for
any use except single-family and two-family residential districts are
located adjacent to a residential district or to any lot upon which
there is a dwelling as a permitted use, there shall be provided along
the lot line a continuous, solid fence or a masonry wall to a height
adequate to prevent the direct light from motor vehicle headlights
being cast on adjacent residential units but with a minimum height
of four (4) feet and not more than eight (8) feet except that the
height of such fence or wall shall not exceed three and one-half
(3½) feet within fifteen (15) feet of the public right-of-way.
4. In addition to any landscaped front, back or side yard areas
required by this or any other Section, a minimum of ten (10) square
feet of interior landscaped area shall be provided within the
parking lot for each parking space. The landscaping shall be in one
(1) or more areas so as to minimize and reduce the apparent size of
parking areas.
Section
400.1720
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1730
AO:596
5. All interior landscaped areas provided in accordance with the
preceding paragraph shall be raised and curbed and shall have a
minimum area of fifty (50) square feet and a minimum width of five
(5) feet. Each separate interior landscaped area shall include at
least one (1) deciduous shade tree of a type and size required by
this Article and there shall be a minimum of two (2) trees, within
and up to, every one hundred (100) linear feet of parking for each
parking row. Such trees shall be spaced evenly wherever possible
and the ends of parking rows abutting a circulation aisle shall be
defined by interior landscaped areas whenever feasible.
6. Deciduous shade trees shall have a minimum caliper of three (3)
inches in the trunk measured one (1) foot above the ground with a
clear trunk of at least five (5) feet where provided for screening,
buffering or aesthetic effect. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of
six (6) feet in height at planting. All trees shall be properly planted
and staked. The number of such trees shall be determined by the
application of the above mentioned landscape standards; provided
however, that in no instance shall there be less than two (2) such
trees in conjunction with the development of any parking facility or
lot.
7. No landscaped hedge shall be less than two (2) feet in height and
three (3) feet in spread; however, no hedge, wall or berm shall
exceed three (3) feet in height within ten (10) feet of any driveway
opening. The individual plants used in the development of such a
hedge shall be placed so as to be not more than twenty-four (24)
inches on center.
8. The use of earth sculpting or berms shall be encouraged, provided
these are designed in an area of enough size so as to avoid erosion,
drainage or maintenance problems.
9. Interior planting bed areas which are used for the planting of trees,
or which are used for landscaping treatment generally, may be
treated with either grass and/or other types of ground cover or
open spaced pavers on a sand and gravel base located beneath and
surrounding trees and shrubs.
10. All landscaping shall be permanently maintained in good condition
with at least the same quality and quantity of landscaping as
initially approved. In order to present a healthy, neat and orderly
appearance, landscaped areas shall be provided with adequate
irrigation for the maintenance of grass, shrubs, ground covering
and other landscaping by utilizing a sprinkler system, home bibs
and/or such other method of providing water.
11. A perimeter landscaped buffer strip shall be provided and
maintained at a width of not less than five (5) feet between a
parking lot or driveway and the abutting property line at a side or
rear yard. The landscaped strip shall be at least ten (10) feet in
Section
400.1730
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1730
AO:597
Section 400.1740. Number of Entrances and Exits to Parking Lots.
[R.O. 2009 §25-309; Ord. No. 2739 §43-72.8, 5-20-1985]
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend to the Board of
Aldermen as stipulated in Section 400.1540 the location and width of the
entrance to and exits from every parking lot. There shall be not more than
one (1) entrance and one (1) exit or one (1) combined entrance and exit
along any street unless same is deemed necessary by the Commission for
the alleviation of traffic congestion and interference of traffic movement
along such street.
Section 400.1750. Signs. [R.O. 2009 §25-310; Ord. No. 2739
§43-72.9, 5-20-1985]
Parking direction and regulation signs may be provided in accordance with
Chapter 410 showing the ownership of any parking lot and the permitted
use thereof. If the lot is so operated that a charge is made for the use of
the parking facilities, the rates for parking shall be legibly shown upon the
parking regulation sign.
Section 400.1760. Attendant Shelter. [R.O. 2009 §25-311; Ord. No.
2739 §43-72.10, 5-20-1985]
A shelter for the use of a parking lot attendant may be maintained on the
lot provided the location, construction and design of same shall be first
approved by the Board of Aldermen.
Section 400.1770. Maintenance. [R.O. 2009 §25-312; Ord. No. 2739
§43-72.11, 5-20-1985]
Any persons operating or owning a parking lot shall keep it free, as may
be practical, of dust and loose particles and shall promptly remove the
snow and ice from the surface of the parking lot. Such persons shall also
keep all adjacent sidewalks free from dirt, ice, sleet and snow and shall
keep the sidewalks in a safe condition for use by pedestrians. All signs,
markers or any other methods used to indicate direction of traffic movement
and location of parking spaces shall be maintained in a neat and legible
condition. Likewise any walls, landscaping, including trees and shrubbery,
as well as surfacing and curbing of the parking lot shall be maintained in
good condition throughout its use for parking purposes and the Board of
width along any front or side property line abutting a public or
private street. Other, more restrictive standards for yards or
buffering shall govern where required by this Chapter.
12. All landscaped areas in parking areas or adjacent to parking or
loading areas, or that can be encroached upon by a motor vehicle,
shall be provided with an adequate, permanent curb as approved
by the City Engineer to restrict the destruction of the landscaped
areas by vehicles. Adequate scuppers and/or weep holes shall be
provided through the curbing to permit drainage.
Section
400.1730
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1770
AO:598
Aldermen shall have the authority to prohibit the use of the area for parking
purposes unless and until proper maintenance, repair or rehabilitation is
completed, including the replacement of any landscaping material which
may die from time to time, or the failure of the landscape irrigation or
surface drainage system within the parking area.
Section 400.1780. through Section 400.1820. (Reserved)
Section
400.1770
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1780
AO:599

ARTICLE V
Supplemental Regulations
DIVISION 1
Generally
Section 400.1830. Building Use Limitations. [R.O. 2009 §25-351;
Ord. No. 2739 §§43-50.1 — 43-50.4, 43-51, 5-20-1985]
Section 400.1840. Setback and Building Lines. [R.O. 2009 §25-352;
Ord. No. 2739 §§43-52.1 — 43-52.2, 5-20-1985]
A. No building shall be erected, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally
altered, nor shall any building or land be used which does not comply
with all of the district regulations established by this Chapter for the
district in which the building or land is located.
B. The minimum yards and open spaces required by this Chapter,
including lot area per family requirement, shall not be encroached upon
or considered as fulfilling the yard or open space requirements for any
other building.
C. Every building or complex of buildings erected or structurally altered
after May 20, 1985, shall be located on a lot that meets the
requirements of both this Chapter and Chapter 405. The open space
requirements for the district in which each lot is located must likewise
be met.
D. In any district permitting uses other than single-family dwellings,
single-family dwellings shall not be converted or changed to
accommodate additional dwelling units or another use without first
obtaining a certificate of occupancy as provided in Sections 400.1230
and 400.1240. No application for a building permit and/or a certificate
of occupancy for such a conversion of a single-family residence shall be
approved unless accompanied by a detailed site plan as provided in
Article II, Division 9, including a floor plan, showing full compliance
with all other applicable regulations of this Chapter.
E. Every building constructed or relocated after May 20, 1985, shall be
placed on a lot adjacent to a public street or that has access to an
approved public or private street. All buildings shall be so located as to
provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and
required off-street parking and loading.
A. Purposes of the setback lines provided for in this Chapter are to
establish safe and clear rights-of-way and to provide adequate light, air
and open space in conformity with buildings now in existence.
B. No building or structure shall be located closer to a major street or
highway in the City than provided by the minimum standards specified
below:
Section
400.1830
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1840
AO:601
Section 400.1850. Height of Public Buildings — Towers, Spires, Etc.
[R.O. 2009 §25-353; Ord. No. 2739 §§43-53 — 43-54, 5-20-1985]
Section 400.1860. Existing Lots. [R.O. 2009 §25-354; Ord. No. 2739
§§43-55.1 — 43-55.4, 5-20-1985]
1. Arterial street or highway. Brentwood Boulevard and Manchester
Road.
2. Sixty-five (65) foot setback from the centerline or twenty-five (25)
feet from the right-of-way of the arterial street or highway,
whichever is greater, if no parking zone or area is located in front of
the building or buildings occupying the lot.
C. If the parking area is to be located in front of the building or buildings,
the setback will be a minimum of ninety (90) feet from the centerline of
the right-of-way or fifty (50) foot setback from the present right-of-way
line, whichever is greater.
A. The height of public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals,
institutions, churches or schools shall be governed by the applicable
height regulations of the district in which such building is to be erected.
B. The height of building elements or structures requiring extraordinary
height limitations, such as chimneys, stacks, stage towers or scenery
lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers and spires, radio towers,
cell phone towers, grain elevators or necessary mechanical
appurtenances, may be recommended by the Planning and Zoning
Commission in accordance with the provisions for site plan approval in
Section 400.1060.
A. A single-family residential structure may be constructed on any lot in
the "A", "B" or, "AR" District if the lot is less than the minimum area
required for building lots in the district in which it is located, providing
the following conditions exist or are met:
1. Availability of adjacent vacant land. No structure shall be erected
on any non-conforming lot if the owner of the lot owns or did own
after this Chapter was in effect any adjoining vacant land which
would create a conforming lot if the vacant land were combined
with the lot deficient in area.
2. Side yards. No structure other than a permitted fence, wall or other
similar structure shall be constructed on a non-conforming lot
unless it shall have a minimum side yard of five (5) feet or a
minimum side yard of ten (10) feet where adjacent to any street.
3. Front and rear yards. No structure other than a permitted fence,
wall or other similar structure shall be constructed on a nonconforming
lot unless it shall have front and rear yards conforming
to the minimums required for the residential district in which the
lot is located.
Section
400.1840
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1860
AO:602
Section 400.1870. Yard Requirements. [R.O. 2009 §25-355; Ord. No.
2739 §§43-56.1 — 43-56.4, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 3543 §2, 6-16-1997]
Section 400.1880. Lighting. [R.O. 2009 §25-356; Ord. No. 2739
§§43-57.1 — 43-57.2, 5-20-1985]
B. The minimum lot width of any lot shall be measured along the front yard
setback line as required for the district in which it is located.
C. At all street intersections no obstruction to vision other than an existing
building, post, column, tree or shrubbery shall be erected in an area
defined by the following formula: The triangular area formed by
connecting two (2) points, each forty (40) feet from the street
intersection and located on the front lot line.
D. The area or dimension of any lot, yard, parking area or other space shall
not be reduced to less than the minimum required by this Chapter. If
already less than the minimum required by this Chapter, the area or
dimension may be continued but shall not be further reduced.
A. Every part of a required yard must be open to the sky and unobstructed
except for permitted fences, walls, hedges, signs, off-street parking, the
ordinary projection of sills, belt courses, buttresses or ornamental
features, awnings, canopies, fire escapes, fire-proof outside stairs,
terraces not extending more than three (3) feet above grade level, open
balconies, open porches including screening (but not windows or solid
walls), eaves or cornices, all of which may project up to five (5) feet into
the required setback. No structure used by, or intended to be used by,
persons or pets may be built within the building setback portion of any
required yard if the finished floor level of that structure is more than
three (3) feet above the level of the yard, alley or sidewalk of the
adjoining property without the specific approval of the Board of
Aldermen. The term "structure" in this Section includes, but is not
limited to, room additions, sundecks, patios, children's play structures,
swimming pools, tennis courts or other like structures.
B. Any corner lot shall have a side yard equal in width to the minimum
front yard setback of any adjoining lot fronting on the side street. In any
event, the minimum side yard setback of a corner lot shall be no less
than ten (10) feet.
C. Where the side or rear yard in any residential district "A", "B", "AR" or
"MR" abuts a side or rear yard in any non-residential district, there
shall be provided along such abutting line or lines a side or rear yard at
least equal in depth to that required in the residential district, other
provisions of this Chapter notwithstanding. In no case, however, shall
the abutting side yard be less than twenty (20) feet and the abutting
rear yard be less than twenty (20) feet.
D. Parking within the front or side yard shall be subject to the
requirements of Section 400.1840.
Section
400.1860
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1880
AO:603
Section 400.1890. Temporary Buildings. [R.O. 2009 §25-357; Ord.
No. 2739 §§43-59.1 — 43-59.3, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 3033 §16,
10-16-1989]
Temporary buildings that are used in conjunction with construction work
only may be permitted in any district during the period that the building
is being constructed, but such temporary buildings shall be removed upon
completion of the construction work as determined by the Director of
Planning and Development and in no case to exceed sixty (60) days after the
last certificate of occupancy is issued.
Section 400.1900. Dedication of Public Parks. [R.O. 2009 §25-358;
Ord. No. 2739 §43-61, 5-20-1985]
The Board of Aldermen is specifically empowered to either accept or reject
any portion of the property in any zoning district which the developers
thereof may voluntarily desire to dedicate to the City as a public park.
If any portion of such district is so voluntarily dedicated, such portion of
the property must be shown on the approved site plan, all subject to the
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the approval
of the Board of Aldermen.
A. The following standards shall apply to all exterior light fixtures within
the City:
1. The light from any luminaire, the light source and its enclosure
including any reflectors or other devices for the control of light, but
excluding bracket arms or posts for support or mounting, shall be
shaded, shielded or directed to prevent direct light from being cast
upon any adjacent property and to prevent glare or other
objectionable problems to surrounding areas.
2. Lighting fixtures shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height, unless
specifically permitted by site plan approval in accordance with
Article II, Division 9.
3. No luminaire shall have any blinking, flashing or fluttering lights or
other illuminating device which has a changing light intensity,
brightness or color, nor will any beacon lights be permitted.
4. Neither the direct nor reflected light from any luminaire shall
create a disabling glare causing traffic hazards to motor vehicle
operators on public thoroughfares.
B. Lighting systems and standard for major outdoor recreation facilities as
determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission, such as athletic
fields, stadiums, tennis courts or swimming pools, shall require
approval of conditional use permit in accordance with Article II,
Division 6.
Section
400.1880
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1910
AO:604
Section 400.1910. Underground Wiring. [R.O. 2009 §25-359; Ord.
No. 2739 §43-62, 5-20-1985]
All electrical, cable television and telephone distribution lines primarily
intended for the use of buildings and structures constructed after May
5, 1985 and other than detached single-family residences located within
the City shall be installed underground. Cable switching enclosures, padmounted
transformers and service pedestals may, however, be installed
above ground and may be installed as part of the street lighting standards
where recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved
by the Board of Aldermen.
Section 400.1920. Private Usable Open Space. [R.O. 2009 §25-360;
Ord. No. 2739 §43-63, 5-20-1985]
Section 400.1930. Trash Disposal and Storage. [Ord. No. 3662 §3,
7-19-1999]
All developments in the "RSC", "GC", "PD", "LID" and "UD" districts shall
make adequate provisions for the temporary on-site storage of trash that
is generated in conjunction with the use of the property. Trash disposal
equipment, whether accomplished by trash cans, trash dumpsters of any
size or trash compactor units shall be stored within a solid brick, stone
or wood enclosure with sight-proof gates located in such a position as to
minimize visibility of the disposal site by the general public.
Section 400.1940. Zoning and Police Power Regulations. [Ord. No.
4089 §4, 10-15-2007]
A. Where required elsewhere in this Chapter, a minimum of twenty
percent (20%) of the net multi-family residential acreage shall be
devoted to private usable open space. This is defined as space on a lot
that is:
1. Unoccupied by principal or accessory buildings above the finished
lot grade;
2. Unobstructed to the sky;
3. Not devoted to service driveways or off-street parking or loading;
4. Devoted to landscaping, paved common patios, tennis courts,
swimming pools, recreation space, buffer areas and other like uses;
5. Available in the same proportion to all occupants of the building or
buildings within the immediate vicinity of a multi-family residential
building or development.
A. Definitions. The following terms shall have the following meanings
unless otherwise defined by context:
Section
400.1910
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1940
AO:605
DIRECTOR — The City's Director of Planning and Development or such
other person designated to administer and enforce this Section and
Chapters 515 and 615 of this Code.
FACILITIES — A network or system, or any part thereof, used for
providing or delivering a service and consisting of one (1) or more
lines, pipes, irrigation systems, wires, cables, fibers, conduit facilities,
cabinets, poles, vaults, pedestals, boxes, appliances, antennas,
transmitters, radios, towers, gates, meters, appurtenances, or other
equipment.
FACILITIES PERMIT — A permit granted by the City for placement of
facilities on private property.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, limited liability corporation or
partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, organization,
corporation, or other entity, or any lawful successor thereto or
transferee thereof.
SERVICE — Providing or delivering an economic good or an article
of commerce, including, but not limited to, gas, telephone, cable
television, Internet, open video systems, video services, alarm systems,
steam, electricity, water, telegraph, data transmission, petroleum
pipelines, sanitary or storm water sewerage or any similar or related
service, to one (1) or more persons located within or outside of the City
using facilities located within the City.
B. Facilities Permits.
1. Any person desiring to place facilities on private property must first
apply for and obtain a facilities permit, in addition to any other
building permit, license, easement, franchise, or authorization
required by law. The Director may design and make available
standard forms for such applications, requiring such information as
allowed by law and as the Director determines in his or her
discretion to be necessary and consistent with the provisions of this
Section and Chapter 615 of this Code, and to accomplish the
purposes of this Section and Chapter 615 of this Code. Each
application shall at minimum contain the following information,
unless otherwise waived by the Director:
a. The name of the person on whose behalf the facilities are to be
installed and the name, address, and telephone number of a
representative whom the City may notify or contact at any time
(i.e., twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week)
concerning the facilities;
b. A description of the proposed work, including a site plan and
such plans or technical drawings or depictions showing the
nature, dimensions, and description of the facilities, their
location, and their proximity to other facilities that may be
affected by their installation.
Section
400.1940
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1940
AO:606
2. Each such application shall be accompanied by an application fee
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to cover the cost of processing the
application.
3. Application review and determination.
a. The Director shall promptly review each application and shall
grant or deny the application within thirty-one (31) days.
Unless the application is denied pursuant to paragraph (d)
hereof, the Director shall issue a facilities permit upon
determining that the applicant:
(1) Has submitted all necessary information,
(2) Has paid the appropriate fees, and
(3) Is in full compliance with this Section and Chapter 615 of
this Code and all other City ordinances.
The Director may establish procedures for bulk
processing of applications and periodic
payment of fees to avoid excessive processing
and accounting costs.
b. It is the intention of the City that proposed facilities will not
impair public safety, harm property values or significant sight
lines, or degrade the aesthetics of the adjoining properties or
neighborhood, and that the placement and appearance of
facilities on private property should be minimized and limited
in scope to the extent allowed by law to achieve the purposes of
this Section. To accomplish such purposes the Director may
impose conditions on facilities permits, including alternative
landscaping, designs, or locations, provided that such
conditions are reasonable and necessary, shall not result in a
decline of service quality, and are competitively neutral and
non-discriminatory.
c. An applicant receiving a facilities permit shall promptly notify
the Director of any material changes in the information
submitted in the application or included in the permit. The
Director may issue a revised facilities permit or require that
the applicant reapply for a facilities permit.
d. The Director may deny an application, if denial is deemed to be
in the public interest, for the following reasons:
(1) Delinquent fees, costs or expenses owed by the applicant;
(2) Failure to provide required information;
(3) The applicant being in violation of the provisions of this
Section and Chapter 615 of this Code or other City
ordinances;
Section
400.1940
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1940
AO:607
(4) For reasons of environmental, historic or cultural
sensitivity, as defined by applicable Federal, State or local
law;
(5) For the applicant's refusal to comply with reasonable
conditions required by the Director; and
(6) For any other reason to protect the public health, safety
and welfare, provided that such denial does not fall within
the exclusive authority of the Missouri Public Service
Commission and is imposed on a competitively neutral and
non-discriminatory basis.
4. Permit revocation and ordinance violations.
a. The Director may revoke a facilities permit without fee refund
after notice and an opportunity to cure, but only in the event of
a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of the permit
or this Section and Chapter 615 of this Code. Prior to
revocation the Director shall provide written notice to the
responsible person identifying any substantial breach and
allowing a reasonable period of time not longer than thirty (30)
days to cure the problem, which cure period may be immediate
if certain activities must be stopped to protect the public
safety. The cure period shall be extended by the Director on
good cause shown. A substantial breach includes, but is not
limited to, the following:
(1) A material violation of the facilities permit or this Chapter
and Chapter 615 of this Code;
(2) An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of
the permit or this Section and Chapter 615 of this Code, or
the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or
deceit upon the City or its residents;
(3) A material misrepresentation of fact in the permit
application;
(4) A failure to complete facilities installation by the date
specified in the permit, unless an extension is obtained or
unless the failure to complete the work is due to reasons
beyond the applicant's control; and
(5) A failure to correct, upon reasonable notice and
opportunity to cure as specified by the Director, work that
does not conform to applicable national safety ordinances,
industry construction standards, or the City's pertinent
and applicable ordinances, including, but not limited to,
this Section and Chapter 615 of this Code, provided that
City standards are no more stringent than those of a
national safety ordinance.
Section
400.1940
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1940
AO:608
b. Any breach of the terms and conditions of a facilities permit
shall also be deemed a violation of this Section and Chapter
615 of this Code, and in lieu of revocation the Director may
initiate prosecution of the applicant or the facilities owner for
such violation.
5. Appeals and alternative dispute resolution.
a. Any person aggrieved by a final determination of the Director
may appeal in writing to the City Administrator within five
business (5) days thereof. The appeal shall assert specific
grounds for review, and the City Administrator shall render a
decision on the appeal within fifteen (15) business days of its
receipt affirming, reversing or modifying the determination of
the Director. The City Administrator may extend this time
period for the purpose of any investigation or hearing deemed
necessary. A decision affirming the Director's determination
shall be in writing and supported by findings establishing the
reasonableness of the decision. Any person aggrieved by the
final determination of the City Administrator may file a petition
for review pursuant to Chapter 536, RSMo., as amended, in the
Circuit Court of the County of St. Louis. Such petition shall be
filed within thirty (30) days after the City Administrator's final
determination.
b. On agreement of the parties and in addition to any other
remedies, any final decision of the City Administrator may be
submitted to mediation or binding arbitration.
(1) In the event of mediation, the City Administrator and the
applicant shall agree to a mediator. The costs and fees of
the mediator shall be borne equally by the parties, and
each party shall pay its own costs, disbursements and
attorney fees.
(2) In the event of arbitration, the City Administrator and the
applicant shall agree to a single arbitrator. The costs and
fees of the arbitrator shall be borne equally by the parties.
If the parties cannot agree on an arbitrator, the matter
shall be resolved by a three (3) person arbitration panel
consisting of one (1) arbitrator selected by the City
Administrator, one (1) arbitrator selected by the applicant
or facilities owner, and one (1) person selected by the
other two (2) arbitrators, in which case each party shall
bear the expense of its own arbitrator and shall jointly and
equally bear with the other party the expense of the third
(3rd) arbitrator and of the arbitration. Each party shall
also pay its own costs, disbursements and attorney fees.
C. Facilities Regulations.
Section
400.1940
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1940
AO:609
1. The following general regulations apply to the placement and
appearance of facilities:
a. Facilities shall be placed underground, except when other
similar facilities exist above ground or when conditions are
such that underground construction is impossible, impractical
or economically unfeasible, as determined by the City, and
when in the City's judgment the above ground construction has
minimal aesthetic impact on the area where the construction is
proposed. Facilities shall not be located so as to interfere, or be
likely to interfere, with any public facilities or use of public
property.
b. Facilities shall be located in such a manner as to reduce or
eliminate their visibility. Non-residential zoning districts are
preferred to residential zoning districts. Preferred locations in
order of priority in both type districts are:
(1) Thoroughfare landscape easements,
(2) Rear yards, and
(3) Street side yards on a corner lot behind the front yard
setback.
Placements within side yards not bordered by a
street or within front yards are discouraged.
c. Facilities shall be a neutral color and shall not be bright,
reflective, or metallic. Black, gray and tan shall be considered
neutral colors, as shall any color that blends with the
surrounding dominant color and helps to camouflage the
facilities. Sight-proof screening, landscape or otherwise, may
be required for facilities taller than three (3) feet in height or
covering in excess of four (4) square feet in size. Such
screening shall be sufficient to reasonably conceal the facility.
A landscape plan identifying the size and species of
landscaping materials shall be approved by the Director prior
to installation of any facility requiring landscape screening.
The person responsible for the facilities shall be responsible
for the installation, repair, or replacement of screening
materials. Alternative concealment may be approved by the
Director to the extent it meets or exceeds the purposes of these
requirements.
d. Facilities shall be constructed and maintained in a safe manner
and so as to not emit any unnecessary or intrusive noise and in
accordance with all applicable provisions of the Occupational
Safety and Health Act of 1970, the National Electrical Safety
Code, and all other applicable Federal, State, or local laws and
regulations.
Section
400.1940
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1940
AO:610
e. No person shall place or cause to be placed any sort of signs,
advertisements, or other extraneous markings on the facilities,
except such necessary minimal markings approved by the City
as necessary to identify the facilities for service, repair,
maintenance or emergency purposes or as may be otherwise
required to be affixed by applicable law or regulation.
f. If the application of this Subsection excludes locations for
facilities to the extent that the exclusion conflicts with the
reasonable requirements of the applicant, the Director shall
cooperate in good faith with the applicant to attempt to find
suitable alternatives, but the City shall not be required to incur
any financial cost or to acquire new locations for the applicant.
2. Any person installing, repairing, maintaining, removing, or
operating facilities, and the person on whose behalf the work is
being done, shall protect from damage any and all existing
structures and property belonging to the City and any other person.
Any and all rights-of-way, public property, or private property
disturbed or damaged during the work shall be repaired or
replaced, and the responsible person shall immediately notify the
owner of the fact of the damaged property. Such repair or
replacement shall be completed within a reasonable time specified
by the Director and to the Director's satisfaction.
3. The applicant shall provide written notice to all property owners
within one hundred eighty-five (185) feet of the site at least fortyeight
(48) hours prior to any installation, replacement or expansion
of its facilities. Notice shall include a reasonably detailed
description of work to be done, the location of work, and the time
and duration of the work.
4. At the City's direction, a person owning or controlling facilities
shall protect, support, disconnect, relocate, or remove facilities, at
its own cost and expense, when necessary to accommodate the
construction, improvement, expansion, relocation, or maintenance
of streets or other public works or to protect the ROW or the public
health, safety, or welfare.
5. If a person installs facilities without having complied with the
requirements of this Section and Chapter 615 of this Code, or
abandons the facilities, said person shall remove the facilities, and
if the person fails to remove the facilities within a reasonable
period of time, the City may, to the extent permitted by law, have
the removal done at the person's expense.
6. Facilities shall be subject to all other applicable regulations and
standards as established as part of the City Code, including, but not
limited to, building codes, zoning requirements and rights-of-way
management regulations in addition to the regulations provided
herein.
Section
400.1940
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1950
AO:611
Section 400.1950. Temporary Storage Containers And Trailers.
[Ord. No. 4792 § 2, 8-2-2017]
A. Storage containers and trailers utilized for short-term storage of
materials or merchandise are permitted in any commercial or industrial
zoning district provided that such storage containers and trailers
receive a Special Use Permit approved by the Board of Aldermen, and:
1. All temporary storage containers and trailers shall be placed as
close to the building as possible and located in the rear of the
building, unless the applicant can demonstrate that the storage
containers or trailers will not fit in the rear of the lot, or the City
Fire Department determines the location not acceptable to protect
life and property. In all cases, storage containers and trailers shall
be located and/or screened in a manner that minimizes their
visibility from all public rights-of-way.
2. The location of any temporary storage containers or trailers shall
be reviewed and approved by the Fire Chief or his/her designee,
prior to authorization of a Special Use Permit.
3. No temporary storage containers or trailers shall encroach upon
any drive aisles or required parking spaces, except as authorized in
the Special Use Permit.
4. No temporary storage containers or trailers shall block access to
utilities or public services (e.g., manholes, meters, fire hydrants,
fire lanes, etc.).
5. Temporary storage containers and trailers shall be located on a
hardened surface (e.g., concrete, asphalt).
6. Temporary storage containers and trailers may not be stacked atop
one another.
7. Temporary storage containers and trailers shall be maintained as
follows:
a. Storage container and trailer exteriors shall be clean and
painted;
b. Storage container and trailer exteriors shall be free of rust and
corrosion;
c. When storage containers and trailers exhibit more than normal
wear and tear, they shall be removed from the property.
8. Temporary storage containers and trailers shall be prohibited from
hooking up to or utilizing any utility services or from connecting to
peripheral devices such as, but not limited to, air compressors,
refrigeration/heating units, generators, etc.
Section
400.1950
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.1950
AO:612
Section 400.1960. through Section 400.1970. (Reserved)
9. Temporary ·Storage containers and trailers may not be used for
storing perishable goods.
10. Temporary storage containers and trailers shall not be used for
storing hazardous or dangerous materials (e.g., chemicals,
solvents, propane, explosives, etc.), except when the applicant
provides documentation from the appropriate governing
authorities (e.g., Building Department, Fire, Police, EPA, MoDNR,
etc.) that all of the required safety and security requirements have
been met.
11. Temporary storage containers and trailers shall be limited in
number as authorized in the Special Use Permit.
12. Temporary storage containers and trailers shall be limited in
duration as authorized in the Special Use Permit and shall be
removed from the property within twenty-four (24) hours of the
permit expiration date.
13. Temporary storage containers and trailers shall comply with any
other conditions associated with Special Use Permit approval and
all licensing, registration and any other conditions or requirement
as required by law.
14. Failure to comply with any of the conditions of the Special Use
Permit shall be considered a separate misdemeanor offense for
each storage container or trailer in violation and is punishable by a
fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250 00) per offense. Each day
that the offense(s) shall continue shall be considered a separate
violation.
Section
400.1950
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.1960
AO:613

DIVISION 2
Home Occupations
Section 400.1980. Definition. [R.O. 2009 §25-371; Ord. No. 2739
§43-40.2, 5-20-1985]
A "home occupation" is a business, profession, occupation or trade
conducted for the personal gain or support of the residential occupant and
conducted entirely within a residential building or accessory structure to a
residential use.
Section 400.1990. Authorization. [R.O. 2009 §25-372; Ord. No. 2739
§43-40.1, 5-20-1985]
Any home occupation that is customarily incidental to the principal use of a
dwelling unit shall be permitted in any such dwelling unit.
Section 400.2000. Use Limitations. [R.O. 2009 §25-373; Ord. No.
2739 §43-40.3, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 4264 §1, 12-6-2010]
A. In addition to any other use limitations applicable to the district in
which the home occupation is located, no home occupation shall be
permitted unless it complies with the following provisions:
1. No persons other than members of the family residing on the
premises shall be employed on the premises.
2. No alteration of a principal residential structure shall be made
which changes the nature of its appearance as a residence.
3. No mechanical equipment or process shall be used which creates
noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses outside the residence.
4. There shall be no exterior displays or signs other than a small name
plate not exceeding one (1) square foot which shall be placed on
the surface of the building.
5. There shall be no goods, materials or commodities inventoried,
stored or displayed for sale at wholesale or retail from such
inventory on the premises, however, catalogues and samples may
be kept and displayed on the premises.
6. There shall be no regular steady visitation or concentrated coming
and going of clients or customers to or from the premises.
7. There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or material used in
connection with the home occupation.
8. The hours of operation for home occupations shall be between 7:00
A.M. and 9:00 P.M.
Section
400.1980
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2010
AO:615
Section 400.2010. Permitted Home Occupations. [R.O. 2009
§25-374; Ord. No. 2739 §43-40.4, 5-20-1985]
Section 400.2020. Prohibited Home Occupations. [R.O. 2009
§25-375; Ord. No. 2739 §43-40.5, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 4264 §1,
12-6-2010]
A. Customary home occupations include, but are not limited to, the
following list of occupations with the approval of the Board of
Aldermen. Others judged similar or identical thereto by the Zoning
Administrator may be added to this list from time to time with approval
of the Board of Aldermen. Each occupation listed shall, in any event, be
subject to the limitations of the environmental performance standards
provided in Division 6 of this Article.
1. Dressmakers, seamstresses, tailors;
2. Music teachers, provided that instructions shall be limited to one
(1) pupil at a time, except for occasional groups;
3. Artists, sculptors, authors, composers;
4. Architects, engineers, lawyers, insurance agents, brokers and
members of similar professions;
5. Ministers, rabbis and priests;
6. Salesmen, sales representatives or manufacturers' representatives,
only when no retail or wholesale sales are made or transacted on
the premises for goods, products or materials displayed,
warehoused or stored on premises. Catalogue sales for goods,
products or materials not inventoried, warehoused or stored on the
premises are permissible;
7. Home crafts such as model making, rug weaving, lapidary work,
cabinet making, etc., provided that no machinery or equipment be
used or employed other than that which customarily is found in the
home shop in connection with a hobby or a vocation not conducted
for gain or profit;
8. Babysitting not more than three (3) children in addition to the
children of the resident household.
A. Permitted home occupations shall not in any event be deemed to
include:
1. Dancing schools;
2. Funeral homes;
3. Nursery schools and day care centers;
4. Restaurants or other food services;
Section
400.2010
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2020
AO:616
Section 400.2030. Certification. [R.O. 2009 §25-376; Ord. No. 2739
§43-40.6, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 4264 §1, 12-6-2010]
Section 400.2040. through Section 400.2080. (Reserved)
5. Stables, kennels or animal hospitals;
6. Medical or dental offices or clinics involving the treatment or
counseling or visitation of patients on site, including chiropractors,
veterinarians, podiatrists, etc.;
7. Tourist home;
8. Bed and board facilities;
9. Motor vehicle repair or service;
10. Beauty shop, barbershop.
11. Massage therapy business.
A. Each person desirous of maintaining a permitted home occupation in
accordance with the above shall file an application with the Department
of Planning and Development. The application for home occupation
shall contain the following information as well as such additional
information as needed to complete the City's review:
1. Description of the nature of the home occupation;
2. Floor area to be occupied for this use;
3. Total gross floor area of the residential dwelling unit including attic
and basement areas and any accessory buildings occupying the
same lot or site; and
4. The nature of any equipment to be used in performing the home
occupation.
Section
400.2020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2040
AO:617

DIVISION 3
Accessory Use and Structures
Section 400.2090. Permitted With Principal Use. [R.O. 2009
§25-386; Ord. No. 2739 §43-41.1, 5-20-1985]
Accessory uses are permitted in any zoning district in connection with any
principal use which is permitted within such district.
Section 400.2100. Permitted Uses. [R.O. 2009 §25-387; Ord. No.
2739 §43-41.2, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 2786 §1, 3-17-1986; Ord. No.
4275 §1, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 4448 §2, 7-15-2013]
A. A "permitted accessory use" is any use or structure that complies with
the definitions in this Chapter including, but not limited to, the
following typical uses:
1. Private garages or carports;
2. Off-street parking for permitted motor vehicles and loading spaces
as required by Article IV of this Chapter and any additional offstreet
parking or loading spaces which are devoted exclusively to
the principal use or activity subject to other limitations and
regulations of this Chapter;
3. Private parking or storage of any recreational vehicle;
4. Parking of commercial vehicles during the actual performance of a
service at the premises on which it is parked;
5. A structure for storage incidental to a permitted use, provided no
such freestanding structure that is accessory to a single-family
dwelling shall exceed two hundred (200) square feet in gross floor
area and fourteen (14) feet in height. The number of said
freestanding structures is limited to one (1) per primary structure
and shall be located a minimum distance of ten (10) feet from the
primary structure;
6. A child's playhouse;
7. Private parks, etc.
a. Swimming pools, including adjoining paved walk or deck area,
and tennis courts, provided that such facilities are set back at
least ten (10) feet from any lot line and screened from adjacent
residential property with a solid fence at least four (4) and not
more than six (6) feet in height (see Division 5 of this Article);
b. Tennis courts located in any residential district shall require
separate submission and approval of a site plan in accordance
with Article II, Division 9, until such time that further
regulations are adopted by the City.
Section
400.2090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2100
AO:619
8. Convenience/service retail uses.
a. Convenience/service retail uses may be provided as an
accessory use to a permitted use in any non-residential district
provided that:
(1) There are no window displays or advertisements;
(2) There is no sign advertising such shop or service that shall
be visible from outside the building, except that a small
name plate not exceeding two (2) square feet may be
located on the building at its entrance.
b. Such strictly incidental convenience retail uses in nonresidential
districts, that is, any district other than "A", "B",
"AR" or "MR", may include personal services such as
barbershops, beauty parlors, photographic studios or drycleaning
and laundry pickup or self-service facilities and
restaurants, cafes or soda fountains, provided the area used for
all such uses does not exceed an amount equal to five percent
(5%) of the gross residential or other non-retail commercial
floor area of the building or project, exclusive of maintenance
and parking areas, in which the same are contained;
c. Because of its incidental, internal and accessory character, the
floor space occupied by the accessory convenience/service
retail use need not be included in the calculation of parking
requirements for a given building or project.
9. Non-commercial greenhouse, nursery or garden;
10. Statuary, arbors, trellises, barbecue stoves, doghouses, flagpoles,
fences, walls, hedges and gazebos, provided these elements are in
compliance with other regulations of this Chapter such as those
relating to fences in Division 5 of this Article;
11. Auditoriums and other public assembly halls clearly accessory to
any permitted use in a multi-family or non-residential district;
12. Health clubs, including baths and gymnasiums clearly accessory to
a multi-family or non-residential district;
13. Fallout shelters;
14. Mechanical equipment or utility facilities which are specifically
related to and required by a permitted use;
15. Solar collectors;
16. Outdoor lighting, provided these are in conformance with the
standards and regulations specified in Section 400.1880. In any
event, lights for major outdoor recreation and entertainment
Section
400.2100
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2100
AO:620
facilities shall require approval of a site plan in accordance with
Article II, Division 9;
17. Accessory basement storage or inventory use. The Planning and
Zoning Commission may recommend by site plan approval, the
utilization for inventory, storage and equipment repair of all or a
portion of the basement level of a building which is occupied on the
ground level by a primary retail use, provided that the following
conditions are satisfied:
a. The occupancy and use of such basement space shall only be in
support of and operated by the user of the primary retail
activity.
b. The primary retail use shall be one requiring large amounts of
inventory space relative to sales and low customer sales
activity.
c. No personnel shall be permanently stationed, no offices shall
be located, no sales shall be transacted and no goods shall be
displayed for customer inspection within the accessory
basement space.
d. The City may include the conditions imposed upon the user due
to basement space utilization in the business license issued to
the user.
18. Satellite dish receiving antennas located within all zoning districts,
provided they are in conformance with the following regulations:
a. General.
(1) No satellite dish receiving antenna shall be constructed in
any front or side yard, but shall be constructed to the rear
of the residence or main structure. In the case of a corner
lot, the antenna shall be placed along the common lot line,
rather than the streetside of the lot, and shall be so placed
to maximize screening from the street.
(2) No satellite dish receiving antenna, including its concrete
base slab or other substructure, shall be constructed less
than twelve (12) feet from any property line.
(3) No ground-mounted satellite dish receiving antenna shall
be constructed without appropriate evergreen
landscaping to reasonably conceal the antenna from view.
The proposed planting shall be in place and completed
before any final approval is granted by the Director of
Planning and Development.
(4) All structural supports shall be of galvanized metal.
Section
400.2100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2100
AO:621
(5) Wiring between the satellite dish receiving antenna and a
receiver shall be placed at least four (4) inches beneath
the surface of the ground within rigid conduit.
(6) All satellite dish receiving antennas shall be designed to
withstand a wind force of seventy-five (75) miles per hour
without the use of supporting guy wires.
(7) Any driving motor shall be limited to one hundred ten
(110) volts maximum power design and be encased in
protective guards.
(8) All satellite receiving antennas shall be bonded to a
grounding rod.
(9) Antennas and screening shall be removed at the owner's
expense upon termination or revocation of the required
antenna permit.
(10) Maximum heights and diameters according to singlefamily
lot size and zoning district are as follows:
District/Lot Size
Maximum
Diameter
Maximum
Height Above
Ground Level
Up to 5,000 square feet 8 feet 8 feet
Over 5,000 square feet 8 feet 10 feet
(AR) Attached
Residential District
6 feet 8 feet
(MR) Multi-family 11 feet 13 feet
(RSC) Retail/Service 11 feet 13 feet
(GC) General
Commercial
11 feet 13 feet
(LID) Light Industrial 11 feet 13 feet
(PD) Planned Development — For each use as they would
fall under the standard categories above.
b. Residential districts.
(1) A maximum of one (1) satellite dish receiving antenna shall
be permitted per lot and shall be permitted for the private,
non-commercial use of that property owner only and shall
not be attached to receiving stations on any other lot.
(2) The highest portion of a satellite dish receiving antenna
may not exceed a grade height of twelve (12) feet above
the ground and in no case may be mounted upon the roof
of any structure.
Section
400.2100
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2100
AO:622
Section 400.2110. Specifically Prohibited Uses. [R.O. 2009 §25-388;
Ord. No. 2739 §43-41.3, 5-20-1985]
(3) In the case of the "MR" Multi-Family Residential District,
one (1) master satellite dish receiving antenna may be
permitted to service the entire development, subject to
approval of the Board of Aldermen.
c. Commercial districts.
(1) Roof mounting of satellite dish receiving antennas shall be
permitted upon commercial and industrial buildings within
the "RSC" Retail-Service Commercial District, the "GC"
General Commercial District, the "PD" Planned
Development District and the "LID" Light Industrial
District, provided that the antenna is placed in such a
fashion as to not be visible from surrounding properties or
the public street, subject to the following criteria:
(a) No satellite dish receiving antennas shall be mounted
upon appurtenances such as chimneys, towers, trees,
poles or spires.
(b) The satellite dish receiving antenna shall be designed
to withstand a wind force of eighty-five (85) miles per
hour.
(2) More than one (1) satellite dish receiving antenna may be
permitted per commercial or industrial lot in the "RSC",
"GC", "PD" or "LID" districts.
d. Application for an antenna permit for a satellite dish receiving
antenna shall be required and shall include the following:
(1) A site plan showing the adjacent properties, antenna
location including distances from the main structure of the
lot and adjoining property lines and proposed screening
features;
(2) A drawing or picture of the antenna with all pertinent
dimensions;
(3) A drawing of the method of installation, including footings
and base supports.
e. In addition to the aforementioned construction performance
standards outlined, construction and installation of the
satellite dish receiving antenna shall conform to all
requirements of the City's adopted building and electrical
codes.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or use any land, building or
part thereof for any of the following accessory uses:
Section
400.2100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2110
AO:623
Section 400.2120. Development Standards. [R.O. 2009 §25-389;
Ord. No. 2739 §43-41.4, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 3543 §3, 6-16-1997]
Section 400.2130. through Section 400.2170. (Reserved)
1. Repair or service of any motor vehicle in any residential zoning
district unless the activities are confined within a completely
enclosed building or unless the repairs are limited to minor motor
vehicle repairs and are fully completed within a period of twentyfour
(24) hours or less; provided that all such repairs shall be
limited to the vehicles of the residents living within the principal
building;
2. Storage or occupancy of a mobile home, camper or trailer camper,
except those in compliance with Section 400.2100, Subsection (3);
3. The use of recreational equipment for living, sleeping or
housekeeping purposes when parked or stored;
4. Outdoor storage of major recreational equipment in residential
zoning districts, unless the equipment is in condition for safe and
effective performance of the function for which it is intended and
unless it is properly located and screened.
A. Accessory structures and uses shall be set back at least five (5) feet
from the rear lot line.
B. Accessory structures and uses shall maintain the same side yard as is
required for the principal structure located on the zoning lot, except
that unenclosed off-street parking, fences, walls and hedges may be
located within the required side yard areas.
C. Accessory structures in any residential district shall not exceed sixteen
(16) feet in height with the exception of walls, fences or hedges located
within the required side, rear or front yard setback which shall not
exceed six (6) feet in height.
D. Accessory structures and uses shall otherwise comply with the
development standards applicable to the zoning district in which they
are located.
E. No structure used by, or intended to be used by, persons or pets may be
built within the building setback portion of any required yard that has
the finished floor level more than three (3) feet above the level of the
yard, alley or sidewalk of the adjoining property without the specific
approval of the Board of Aldermen. The term "structure" in this case
includes, but is not limited to, room additions, sundecks, patios,
children's play structures, swimming pools, tennis courts or other like
structures.
Section
400.2110
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2130
AO:624
DIVISION 4
Motor Vehicle Service Stations
Section 400.2180. Development Standards Generally. [R.O. 2009
§25-401; Ord. No. 2739 §43-42, 5-20-1985]
The specific development standards in this Division shall be met before a
conditional use permit may be issued for a motor vehicle service station
in accordance with Article II, Division 6, so as to control the mode of
development, method of operation and to ensure that the location does not
adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the community, especially
from the traffic point of view.
Section 400.2190. Site Size. [R.O. 2009 §25-402; Ord. No. 2739
§43-42.1, 5-20-1985]
Service station sites should contain a minimum area of fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet, a minimum lot frontage of one hundred (100) feet or
more and a minimum of twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet for each
pump.
Section 400.2200. Setbacks. [R.O. 2009 §25-403; Ord. No. 2739
§43-42.2, 5-20-1985]
Buildings shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from the street right-of-way
line and at least ten (10) feet from any other property line.
Section 400.2210. Service Bays. [R.O. 2009 §25-404; Ord. No. 2739
§43-42.3, 5-20-1985]
Service bays shall be limited to one (1) per five thousand (5,000) square
feet of land area. All service bays are to be contained entirely within the
building. Where adjacent to a residential area, only two (2) service bays
shall be permitted. Entry to these bays shall be on the side away from any
public street.
Section 400.2220. Parking and Access. [R.O. 2009 §25-405; Ord. No.
2739 §43-42.4, 5-20-1985]
In addition to providing parking in accordance with Section 400.1600,
Subsection (C)(6), there should be adequate space on site for motor vehicles
to wait in line for each pump island without conflicting with the safety and
efficiency of traffic flow on abutting streets.
Section 400.2230. Fencing. [R.O. 2009 §25-406; Ord. No. 2739
§43-42.5, 5-20-1985]
The site shall be fenced with a six (6) foot brick or stone masonry wall
or solid fence along each property line which abuts property zoned to any
residential classification "A", "B", "AR" or "MR".
Section
400.2180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2240
AO:625
Section 400.2240. Retail Sales. [R.O. 2009 §25-407; Ord. No. 2739
§43-42.6, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 2829 §1, 9-15-1986; Ord. No. 3033
§17, 10-16-1989]
Section 400.2250. Trash Disposal and Storage. [R.O. 2009 §25-408;
Ord. No. 2739 §43-42.7, 5-20-1985]
All used tires and parts, trash and similar objects shall be stored within a
solid brick, stone or wood enclosure or within a dumpster-type container
located in the rear yard.
Section 400.2260. Major Repairs Prohibited. [R.O. 2009 §25-409;
Ord. No. 2739 §43-42.8, 5-20-1985]
Major engine or transmission dismantling, body and fender work, top and
upholstery work shall not be permitted on the premises of the service
station, unless specifically permitted by a conditional use permit (see Article
II, Division 6).
Section 400.2270. Trailer and Equipment Rental Prohibited. [R.O.
2009 §25-410; Ord. No. 2739 §43-42.9, 5-20-1985]
Trailer and equipment rentals shall not be permitted to operate on the
premises of a service station, unless specifically approved as a conditional
use (per Article II, Division 6) with the service station.
Section 400.2280. Gasoline Deliveries. [R.O. 2009 §25-411; Ord. No.
2739 §43-42.10, 5-20-1985]
No delivery tanker shall park on public rights-of-way during gasoline
delivery, nor shall any hose be permitted on public rights-of-way.
Section 400.2290. Pump Island Location. [R.O. 2009 §25-412; Ord.
No. 2739 §43-42.11, 5-20-1985]
Pump islands located parallel to the street shall observe a twenty-five
(25) foot setback. Pump islands located perpendicular to the street should
observe a thirty-five (35) foot setback.
A. Sales shall be restricted to gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene and other
types of motor fuels, oil, tires, batteries, automotive accessories and
prepackaged snack-food items. Restaurants and the sale of alcoholic
beverages are prohibited.
B. All sales of motor vehicles, retail or wholesale, directly or indirectly, by
consignment or otherwise, are expressly prohibited.
Section
400.2240
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2300
AO:626
Section 400.2300. Landscaping and Buffering. [R.O. 2009 §25-413;
Ord. No. 2739 §43-42.12, 5-20-1985]
A landscaped buffer not less than ten (10) feet in width in accordance with a
landscape plan approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission should be
provided at the property line along all street sides, except for entranceways.
Section 400.2310. Sight Lines. [R.O. 2009 §25-415; Ord. No. 2739
§43-42.14, 5-20-1985]
In order to preserve the sight distance advantage offered by the corner
service station, that area defined by a straight line drawn between curb cuts
should be landscaped with low profile, low maintenance plants.
Section 400.2320. Signs. [R.O. 2009 §25-416; Ord. No. 2739
§43-42.15, 5-20-1985]
See Chapter 410.
Section 400.2330. through Section 400.2370. (Reserved)
Section
400.2300
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2330
AO:627

DIVISION 5
Fences
Section 400.2380. Height and Material Restrictions. [R.O. 2009
§25-426; Ord. No. 2739 §43-58.1, 5-20-1985]
No division fence or screen, in whole or in part, may be constructed of
cloth, canvas or other similar material, nor shall any solid division fence or
screen of approved material exceed six (6) feet in height; provided however,
a wooden or metal fence or screen not exceeding eight (8) feet in height
may be erected in any area if such topmost two (2) feet of fence or screen
is penetrated with openings at regular intervals or latticed so that the
combined area of the openings shall be at least fifty percent (50%) of the
actual surface of such fence or screen, but no division fence, fence wall or
screen, no matter how built or of what material constructed, shall exceed
ten (10) feet in height. Any solid division fence of the stockade type, no
matter what height, must be constructed so that the horizontal and vertical
support posts are hidden from both the neighbor's and general public view.
No barbed wire will be permitted on or in any fence. Electrified fences are
prohibited within the City.
Section 400.2390. Locations. [R.O. 2009 §25-427; Ord. No. 2739
§43-58.2, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 3033 §18, 10-16-1989]
Section 400.2400. Special Fences. [R.O. 2009 §25-428; Ord. No.
2739 §43-58.3, 5-20-1985]
A. No fence or screen except those allowed under Section 400.2400,
Subsection (D) shall be erected, constructed or maintained within a
front yard in any dwelling district, except those fences already in
existence on May 20, 1985.
B. No fence, screen, structure or planting higher than three (3) feet above
the street grade shall be maintained within ten (10) feet of any street
intersection. In the case of a corner lot, no fence screen shall be built
along the side street within the right-of-way line or within five (5) feet
from the curb line, whichever is greater. No fence or screen shall be
extended beyond the front yard building line.
C. Solid or open fences not exceeding ten (10) feet in height may be
erected along the common line between properties zoned residential
and commercial or industrial or a railroad right-of-way.
A. Swimming pool fences enclosing outdoor swimming pools shall be a
minimum of four (4) feet in height but not more than six (6) feet high.
Where such swimming pool is located within ten (10) feet of a side or
rear lot line, such fence may be located on the side or rear lot line. All
gates or doors providing access to such pool shall be self-closing and
self-latching with the latches placed at the highest practical point of the
fence.
Section
400.2380
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2400
AO:629
Section 400.2410. Screening Devices. [R.O. 2009 §25-429; Ord. No.
2739 §43-58.4, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 3033 §§19 — 20, 10-16-1989;
Ord. No. 3599 §§1 — 2, 4-20-1998]
B. Tennis court fences surrounding tennis courts shall be open mesh
fences and shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height.
C. Fences enclosing an institution, a public park, public playground,
elementary, high school or junior college site may be eight (8) feet high
providing such fence or screen is at least fifty percent (50%) open.
D. No fences shall be constructed within any required front yard as set
forth elsewhere in this Chapter, except that ornamental type fences
meeting the general standards hereafter set forth may be erected upon
application for a permit.
1. Such ornamental fence shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in
height, including height of any columns or imbedded vertical
support, and at least fifty percent (50%) of its surface shall be open
as viewed on any line perpendicular to the vertical plane of the
fence for the entire thickness of the fence.
2. Its primary purpose is aesthetic and not as a barrier.
3. Wood posts, pickets, boards and lumber shall be painted so as to be
compatible with their surroundings.
4. All wood, steel, concrete and masonry columns or imbedded
vertical supports shall be securely anchored so that they cannot be
moved out of position.
5. Crossbars, railings and ties shall be of sturdy materials compatible
for use in the area in which erected and shall be preserved,
painted, repaired and maintained at all times.
6. Columns and imbedded vertical supports shall not be set closer
together than six (6) feet.
7. All exposed steel and chain used in construction of ornamental
fences shall be preserved against rust and corrosion.
8. No wire or steel mesh or wire fencing may be used in any manner
as part of the ornamental fence, but steel or wire mesh fencing may
be used as a temporary protection around shrubs in the required
front yard, but in no case shall such steel or wire mesh fencing
exceed eighteen (18) inches in height.
A. After May 20, 1985, upon the change in ownership of any commercially
or industrially zoned property, a screening device shall be constructed
along the property line adjoining or contiguous to property that is
classified by the Zoning Code as a residential district and no building or
occupancy permit shall be issued unless there is full compliance with
the terms and provisions of this Chapter. Plans for such screening
Section
400.2400
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2410
AO:630
Section 400.2420. Maintenance. [R.O. 2009 §25-430; Ord. No. 2739
§43-58.5, 5-20-1985]
All fences shall be erected and continuously maintained in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 500 and acceptable standard property
maintenance practices.
devices shall be submitted simultaneously with construction plans for
buildings or construction of parking lots to be placed on such property
or at such times as the application for occupancy is made.
1. Fences. All fences between residential and commercial areas shall
be of a minimum height of six (6) feet and shall be sight-proof.
Fence material shall consist of solid wood or vinyl. No occupancy
permit will be issued until the above conditions are met.
2. Walls. All walls used shall be constructed of brick, concrete or
masonry block and shall be constructed of sufficient height to
effectively screen commercial or industrial property from
residential property taking into consideration elevation differences
between commercial or industrial property and residential
property.
3. Trees. If there are existing trees between the property reclassified
in this Chapter and the adjoining residential property, such trees
should be retained if practical and supplemented by the planting of
new trees to create an effective screening device. New trees shall
be durable and of such variety as Sugar Maple, Pin Oak or other
hardy species. Such new trees shall have a minimum caliper of
three (3) inches. If evergreens are utilized, they shall have a
minimum height of eight (8) feet.
4. Shrubbery. Shrubbery in combination with trees or grade changes
may be utilized, provided an effective screening device equal to the
screening devices referred to in this Section will be created.
5. Grade changes. Retaining walls in combination with grade changes
and planting of shrubbery may be constructed of railroad ties,
stone, brick, concrete or masonry. Additionally, sloping terraces
and earth mounds may be constructed in combination with planting
of shrubbery. Use of such changes and shrubbery in combination
must provide an effective screening equal to the other screening
devices referred to in this Section.
6. Screening device maintenance. Any screening device, fence or
masonry wall shall be kept in a good state of repair; and all wood,
metal and/or approved material shall be protected from the
elements against decay, rot or rust by paint or other approved
coating applied in a workmanlike manner. Screening areas with
trees, shrubs and/or decorative plantings shall be kept trimmed
and free from weeds, trash and debris.
Section
400.2410
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2430
AO:631
Section 400.2430. Permit Required. [R.O. 2009 §25-431; Ord. No.
2739 §43-58.6, 5-20-1985]
No fence, screen, wall or other exterior partition in the City shall be
erected, altered, modified or changed in any manner without first filing an
application with and receiving a permit from the Department of Planning
and Development for such fence, screen or wall. Such application shall be
filed upon forms provided by the Department of Planning and Development
and shall clearly show the type of fence, screen or wall proposed to be
erected, altered, modified or changed, the material which is to be used and
the location where it is to be placed.
Section 400.2440. Permit Fee. [R.O. 2009 §25-432; Ord. No. 2739
§43-58.7, 5-20-1985]
An application for a permit under the provisions of this Article shall be
accompanied by a fee as established by the Board of Aldermen and on file in
the office of the City Clerk/Administrator and Department of Planning and
Development to cover the cost of the permit and inspection of the fence,
screen, wall or exterior partition.
Section 400.2450. through Section 400.2500. (Reserved)
Section
400.2430
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2450
AO:632
DIVISION 6
Environmental Performance Standards
Section 400.2510. Performance Standards Generally. [R.O. 2009
§25-451; Ord. No. 2739 §43-60, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 4396 §1,
12-17-2012]
Every use, activity, process or operation located or occurring in the City
shall comply with the environmental performance standards prescribed in
this Division, and no such existing use, activity, process or operation shall
be altered or modified so as to conflict with, or further conflict with, such
environmental performance standards.
Section 400.2520. Administration and Enforcement. [R.O. 2009
§25-452; Ord. No. 2739 §43-60.1, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 4396 §1,
12-17-2012]
A. Whenever, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, there is a
reasonable probability that any use or occupancy violates these
environmental performance standards, he or she shall give written
notice of at least seven (7) days duration that the use or occupancy
must be corrected. In case of an emergency he may take immediate
action deemed appropriate to correct the violations. He or she is hereby
authorized to employ a qualified technician or technicians to perform
whatever investigations and analyses as are necessary to determine
whether or not they are in fact being violated.
B. If a violation is found to exist, the violator shall be liable for the
reasonable fee of the technicians employed to perform such
investigations and analyses. Such fees may be recovered as a penalty in
the same manner as, and in addition to, the penalties specified for
violation of this Chapter.
C. If a complaint is received regarding an alleged violation of any of the
provisions of this Division and the Zoning Administrator does not
believe that there is a reasonable probability that such a violation
actually exists, the Zoning Administrator may, as a condition precedent
to further investigation, require that the complainant post an escrow
deposit in the amount sufficient to defray the cost of employing a
qualified technician to perform such investigations and analyses as may
be necessary to determine whether or not such violation exists.
1. If the complaint is substantiated, the escrow deposit shall be
refunded to the depositor, and the reasonable fees associated with
the investigations and analyses shall be recovered in the manner
provided above.
2. If the complaint proves unfounded, such fee shall be paid from the
complainant's escrow deposit. Any remainder of such deposit shall
be refunded to the complainant upon completion of the
investigation.
Section
400.2510
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2520
AO:633
Section 400.2525. Definitions. [Ord. No. 4396 §1, 12-17-2012]
D. Any violation of this Division shall hereby be considered as creating a
public nuisance. Therefore, in addition to the enforcement procedures
specified in Sections of this Division, the regulations of Chapter 220 and
any other applicable ordinance shall apply.
A. For purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases are
herein defined:
A-WEIGHTED SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — A weighted sound
pressure level as measured with the A-weighting network of a sound
level meter. The unit of measurement is dB(A).
AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL — The A-weighted sound pressure level of
all the encompassing noise associated with a given environment, being
usually a composite of sounds from many sources.
A.N.S.I — The American National Standards Institute or its successor
bodies.
BOUNDARY — The line of demarcation which separates the real
property owned by one person from that owned by another person.
COMMERCIAL LAND USE CATEGORY — Any activity which exists on
or is applied to land or structures on the land wherein goods, services
or commodities are provided, exchanged or purchased and sold at
wholesale or retail. The commercial land use category shall include
facilities for the repair or servicing of new and used automobiles,
trucks, trailers, construction equipment, agricultural equipment and
boats, and public or private utility facilities.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any or all activity necessary or
incidental to the erection, demolition, assembling, repairing, altering,
installing or equipping of public or private buildings, private or public
parks, premises, utility lines, and private or public highways, roads or
streets, including land clearing, grading, excavating and filling.
CONSTRUCTION DEVICE — Any device used in construction including,
but not limited to, any air compressor, pile driver, manual tool,
bulldozer, pneumatic hammer, steam shovel, derrick, crane, steam or
electric hoist.
DAYTIME HOURS — 7:00 o'clock a.m. to 10:00 o'clock p.m., prevailing
local time.
DISCRETE TONE — A noise measured on a one-third octave band
analyzer which is ten (10) decibels greater than each of the adjacent
one-third octave bands.
EMERGENCY WORK — Work necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect
person or property from an imminent exposure to danger.
EMERGENCY SIGNAL DEVICE — Any gong, siren, whistle or any air
horn or similar device when used on any vehicle designated as an
Section
400.2520
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2525
AO:634
emergency vehicle by ordinance or by Missouri statute, or used in
connection with an emergency warning system, or used in connection
with a warning system intended to produce a sound signal upon
unauthorized entrance by a person into a building or motor vehicle.
IMPULSIVE NOISE — A noise, containing excursions usually of no
more than one second, the A-weighted sound pressure level of which
exceeds the ambient noise level by more than twenty (20) dB(A), when
measured by the fast meter characteristic of a sound level meter.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively
on rails.
PERCEPTION THRESHOLD — The minimum vibrational motion
necessary to cause awareness of the existence of the vibration by
direct means, including, but not limited to, sensation by touch or visual
observations. Any vibration which produces more than five-tenths (0.5)
inch/second root mean square vertical velocity shall be deemed
sufficient to cause the awareness of the existence of the vibration by
direct means.
PERIOD OF MEASUREMENT — Any continuous sixty-minute period
during which observations of stationary noise sources are made and
measurements of noise levels are taken.
PERSON — Any human being, firm, association, organization,
partnership, business, trust, corporation, company, contractor, supplier,
installer, user, owner, or operator and shall include any municipal
corporation or its officers or employees.
SOUND — An audible oscillation of pressure in air.
SOUND LEVEL METER — Any instrument including a microphone, an
amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighting networks for the
measurement of sound pressure levels in a specified manner which
complies with Type 2 or better standards established in the A.N.S.I.
S1.4-1971 "Specification for Sound Level Meters".
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — Twenty times the logarithm to the base
10 of the ratio of the root mean square pressure of a sound to the
standard reference pressure which is twenty (20) micropascals. The
unit of measurement is the decibel (dB).
STATIONARY NOISE SOURCE — Any equipment, motor vehicle,
aircraft, or facility, fixed or movable, capable of emitting audible sound.
VEHICULAR WAY — A paved or unpaved area used by motor vehicles
including, but not limited to, roads, streets, highways, alleys and
parking lots.
VIBRATION — A spatial oscillation of displacement, velocity or
acceleration in a solid material.
B. Applicability Of Standards Established By A.N.S.I. The acoustical
terminology, the reference pressure, instrument specifications, and
calibrations and methods for measurement of sound pressure levels
Section
400.2525
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2525
AO:635
Section 400.2530. Noise. [R.O. 2009 §25-453; Ord. No. 2739
§43-60.2, 5-20-1985; Ord. No. 4396 §1, 12-17-2012]
shall be in conformance with the definitions and provisions contained in
the documents designated as A.N.S.I. S1.1-1971, S.4-1971, S1.11-1966
(R 1971) and S1.13-1971, of which one copy of each document is filed in
the office of the city clerk/ administrator and Brentwood public library.
A. No person shall operate or permit to be operated any stationary noise
source which emits noise in such a manner that the level of the noise
emitted, when measured at any point outside the boundary of the
property upon which the stationary noise source is located using the
slow meter characteristic and the A-weighting network of the sound
level meter, exceeds the levels set forth in Table below.
B. If the stationary noise source emits noise containing a discrete tone, the
permissible levels shall be 5dB lower than the applicable levels of Table.
C. If the stationary noise source emits impulsive noise, the levels of Table
shall be lowered by 5dB. A violation of this Code shall exist if the level of
the impulsive noise emitted exceeds the applicable levels of Table, as
modified by this Subsection, when the measurement is made using the
fast meter characteristic and the A-weighting network of the sound
level meter or if the level of the impulsive noise emitted exceeds the
limit set forth in Table.
D. In the event the stationary noise source emits impulsive noise
containing a discrete tone, the modifications of Table set forth in
Subsections (B) and (C) herein shall be cumulative.
E. If the ambient noise level exceeds the level of the noise emitted from
the stationary noise source for one or more periods of time during the
period of measurement, then for any such period of time the level of the
noise emitted from the stationary noise source shall be deemed to be
lower than the level which is permitted for sixty (60) minutes during the
period of measurement.
F. If, during the period of measurement, noise shall be emitted from a
stationary noise source for periods of time at two (2) or more different
levels, a violation of this Code shall exist if the sum of the following
fractions C1/T1 + C2/T2 + Cn/Tn exceeds the unit number 1. For
purposes of this calculation Cn shall equal the actual time period that
noise is emitted at each measured noise level and Tn shall equal the
period of time that noise is permitted under Table to be emitted at each
measured noise level. Provided however, if:
1. The ambient noise level exceeds the level of noise emitted from the
stationary noise source for one or more periods of time during the
period of measurement; or
2. The level of the noise emitted from the stationary noise source is
lower than the level of noise which is permitted in Table for sixty
Section
400.2525
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2530
AO:636
(60) minutes during the period of measurement in the applicable
land use category and for the applicable time of day for one or
more periods of time during the period of measurement, then for
the purpose of the calculation set forth in this Subsection, for each
such period of time, the term Cn shall be deemed to be zero (0) and
the fraction ;frax;Cn;Tn; shall be zero (0).
ALL PROPERTY CATEGORIES — DAYTIME HOURS
Tn* (Time) (dB(A))**
60 55 or less
30 56 — 58
15 59 — 61
8 62 — 64
4 65 — 67
2 68 — 70
0 71 or greater
ALL PROPERTY CATEGORIES — NIGHTIME HOURS
Tn* (Time) (dB(A))**
60 50
30 51 — 53
15 54 — 56
8 57 — 59
4 60 — 62
2 63 — 65
0 66 or greater
G. Exceptions. To the extent provided in this Section, the provisions of this
Chapter shall not apply to:
1. The operation of construction devices, with sound control devices
equivalent to or better than the original equipment, used in
construction activities during daytime hours.
2. The repair, maintenance or construction of public facilities of the
State, County or municipal governments, or such public or quasipublic
municipal corporations as may be established under the
Constitution or laws of the State of Missouri.
3. Emergency work to repair or maintain private utility facilities.
4. Emergency work to repair equipment or facilities damaged or
rendered inoperable as a direct result of unavoidable upset
conditions providing such occurrence is reported to the Director
within twenty-four (24) hours after the occurrence.
Section
400.2530
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2530
AO:637
Section 400.2540. Vibration. [R.O. 2009 §25-454; Ord. No. 2739
§43-60.3, 5-20-1985]
Section 400.2550. Toxic Matter. [R.O. 2009 §25-455; Ord. No. 2739
§43-60.4, 5-20-1985]
No use shall discharge or store within or beyond its lot or site boundaries
any toxic matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger
the public health, safety, comfort or welfare or cause injury or damage to
property or business.
Section 400.2560. Glare and Heat. [R.O. 2009 §25-457; Ord. No.
2739 §43-60.6, 5-20-1985]
Any operation producing glare or heat shall be performed within a
completely enclosed building in such manner as not to create a public
5. The operation of motor vehicles on a vehicular way with such
control devices equivalent to or better than the original equipment.
6. The operation of railway equipment and vehicles operated
exclusively on rails.
7. The necessary operation of emergency signal devices.
8. Electric power distribution transformers within a distance of fifty
(50) feet from the base of the support pole or from the fence line.
9. The operation of lawn care maintenance equipment with sound
control devices equivalent to or better than original equipment
from 7:00 A.M. prevailing local time to sunset on weekdays and
8:00 A.M. prevailing local time to sunset on weekends.
A. Any use, process, operation or activity which shall cause at any time
and at any point beyond the boundaries of the lot, earthborn vibrations,
other than background vibrations produced by some source not under
control of this Division, such as the operation of motor vehicles or other
transportation facilities, in excess of the limits set forth in the following
table is prohibited. Vibration shall be expressed as displacement in
inches and shall be measured with a three (3) component measuring
system approved by the Building Official.
Frequency in Cycles per
Second
Displacement in Inches
0 to 10 .0004
10 to 20 .0002
Over 20 .0001
B. Impact vibrations which are discreet pulses that do not exceed one
hundred (100) impulses per minute shall be permitted twice the
displacements shown above.
Section
400.2530
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2560
AO:638
nuisance or hazard beyond the boundaries of the lot on which such building
is located.
Section 400.2570. through Section 700.2620. (Reserved)
Section
400.2560
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2570
AO:639

DIVISION 7
Storm Water Management, Grading and Erosion Control
Section 400.2630. Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §25-461; Ord. No. 3931 §3,
4-19-2004]
Section 400.2640. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §25-462; Ord. No. 3931
§3, 4-19-2004]
For the purposes of this Code, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs — Practices, procedures or a
schedule of activities to reduce the amount of sediment and other pollutants
in storm water discharges associated with construction and land
disturbance activities.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
CONSTRUCTION OR LAND DISTURBANCE SITE or SITE — A parcel of
land or a contiguous combination thereof where grading work is performed
as part of a single unified plan of development.
DRAINAGE WAY — Any channel that conveys surface runoff through a site.
EROSION — The wearing away of land surface through the action of wind
or water.
EROSION CONTROL — Any BMP that prevents or minimizes erosion.
GRADING — Reshaping the ground surface through excavation and/or fill of
material, including the resulting conditions.
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES — Any activity such as clearing, grading
or any other action which results in removal of the natural site vegetation
and destruction of the root zone or otherwise results in leaving the ground
surface exposed to soil erosion through the action of wind or water.
A. During the construction process, soil is highly vulnerable to erosion by
wind and water. Eroded soil endangers water resources by reducing
water quality and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and
other desirable species. Deposits of eroded soil also necessitate
maintenance of sewers and ditches and the dredging of lakes. In
addition, clearing and grading during construction cause the loss of
native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat.
Construction activities also utilize materials and generate wastes
which, if not properly controlled, can pollute receiving waters.
B. The purpose of this Code Section is to safeguard persons, protect
property and prevent damage to the environment in Brentwood. This
Division will also promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating and
controlling the design, construction, use and maintenance of any
significant development or other activity that disturbs or breaks the
topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land in Brentwood.
Section
400.2630
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2640
AO:641
MSD — The Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District.
PERIMETER CONTROL — A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a
site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or
basin.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the
stabilization of each phase substantially completed before the clearing of
the next.
RUNOFF COEFFICIENT — The fraction of total rainfall that will appear at
the outfalls from a site.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Any BMP that prevents eroded sediment from
leaving a site.
SITE DISTURBANCE PERMIT — A permit issued by the municipality
authorizing disturbance of the land at a specific site subject to conditions
stated in the permit.
STABILIZATION — The use of BMPs that prevent exposed soil from eroding
including improvements and structures for the control of erosion, runoff and
grading.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The first land disturbing activity associated
with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading
and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements,
footings, piers or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation
of accessory buildings such as garages.
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A
management plan, the purpose of which is to ensure the design,
implementation, management and maintenance of BMPs in order to reduce
the amount of sediment and other pollutants in storm water discharges
associated with land disturbance activities, comply with the standards of
Sections 400.2670 and 400.2680 of the Brentwood City Code and ensure
compliance with the terms and conditions of the applicable State permits,
including adherence to the land disturbance program contained in the
Missouri DNR issued MS4 NPDES permit.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel or body of water
including, but not limited to, lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, ditches and other
open conveyances that carry surface runoff water either continuously or
intermittently.
Section 400.2650. Permits. [R.O. 2009 §25-463; Ord. No. 3931 §3,
4-19-2004]
A. Any person who intends to conduct any land disturbance activity that
will disturb forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet
or more must obtain a site disturbance permit from both the State and
the City.
B. Any person who buys a lot for construction from a person who has been
issued a permit under Subsection (A) above (unless purchased for the
Section
400.2640
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2650
AO:642
Section 400.2660. Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP).
[R.O. 2009 §25-464; Ord. No. 3931 §3, 4-19-2004]
purpose of building their own private residence) must obtain a separate
site disturbance permit from Brentwood unless the original permittee
retains responsibility for the land disturbance activities on the sold lot.
C. Site disturbance permits are not required for the following activities:
1. Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property or natural resources.
2. Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a
permitted main or accessory use.
D. Each permit application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the
owner or developer of the site and of any consulting firm retained by
the applicant together with the name of the applicant's principal
contact at such firm and shall be accompanied by a filing fee.
E. Each permit application shall be accompanied by a storm water
pollution prevention plan prepared for the specific site by or under the
direction of a qualified professional and a statement that any land
clearing, construction or development involving the movement of earth
shall be in accordance with the storm water pollution prevention plan.
F. The permit applicant will be required to file with Brentwood a faithful
performance bond, letter of credit or, other improvement security in an
amount deemed sufficient by Brentwood to cover all costs of
improvements, landscaping, maintenance of improvements for such
period as specified by Brentwood and engineering and inspection costs
to cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the
site.
G. The permit applicant will be required to obtain a land disturbance
permit issued by the Missouri Department of Natural Resources for any
site where one (1) acre or more of land will be disturbed, before
beginning any site work authorized by a City permit. This requirement
applies to sites of less than one (1) acre that are part of a larger
common plan that will ultimately disturb one (1) acre or more.
A. The design requirements in Sections 400.2670 and 400.2680 shall be
taken into consideration when developing the storm water pollution
prevention plan and the plan shall include the following:
1. Name, address and telephone number of the site owner and the
name, address and telephone number of the individual who will be
in overall responsible charge of construction/development
activities at the site.
2. Site address or location description.
Section
400.2650
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2660
AO:643
3. A site map showing the outlines of the total project area, the areas
to be disturbed, existing land uses, locations and names of surface
water bodies, locations of temporary and permanent BMPs and
such other information as the City Building Department may
require.
4. Existing contours of the site and adjoining strips of off-site property
and proposed contours after completion of the proposed grading
and development, based on United States Geological Survey
datum, with established elevations at buildings, walks, drives,
street and roads and information on necessary clearing and
grubbing, removal of existing structures, excavating, filling,
spreading and compacting.
5. An estimate of the runoff coefficient of the site prior to disturbance
and the runoff coefficient after the construction addressed in the
permit application is completed.
6. Estimated grading quantity.
7. Details of the site drainage pattern both before and after major
grading activities.
8. Construction access to site.
9. Description of BMPs to be utilized to control erosion and
sedimentation during the period of land disturbance.
10. Description of BMPs to be utilized to prevent other potential
pollutants such as construction wastes, toxic or hazardous
substances, petroleum products, pesticides, herbicides, site litter,
sanitary wastes and other pollutants from entering the natural
drainage ways during the period of construction and land
disturbance.
11. Description of BMPs that will be installed during land disturbance
to control pollutants in storm water discharges that will occur after
land disturbance activity has been completed.
12. Location of temporary off-street parking and wash-down area for
related vehicles.
13. Sources of off-site borrow material or spoil sites and all information
relative to haul routes, trucks and equipment.
14. The anticipated sequence of construction and land disturbance
activities, including installation of BMPs, removal of temporary
BMPs, stripping and clearing, rough grading, construction of
utilities, infrastructure and buildings, and final grading and
landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected dates on which
clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared
areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and
Section
400.2660
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2660
AO:644
sediment control measures and establishment of permanent
vegetation.
15. All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the
objectives of this Division throughout all phases of construction and
after completion of site development. Depending upon the
complexity of the project, the drafting of intermediate plans may be
required at the close of each season.
16. Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed
preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and
fertilizer application and kind and quantity of mulching for both
temporary and permanent vegetative control measures.
17. Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including
easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance.
18. Plans for responding to any loss of contained sediment to include
the immediate actions the permittee will take in case of a
containment failure. This plan must include documentation of
actions and mandatory reporting to the Building Department.
19. Schedules and procedures for routine inspections of any structures
provided to prevent pollution of storm water or to remove
pollutants from storm water and of the site in general to ensure all
BMPs are continually implemented and are effective.
B. The permittee shall amend the storm water pollution prevention plan
whenever:
1. Design, operation or maintenance of BMPs is changed;
2. Design of the construction project is changed that could
significantly affect the quality of the storm water discharges;
3. Site operator's inspections indicate deficiencies in the SWPPP or
any BMP;
4. Inspections by the Building Department, MSD or by the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources indicate deficiencies in the
SWPPP or any BMP;
5. The SWPPP is determined to be ineffective in significantly
minimizing or controlling erosion or excessive sediment deposits in
streams or lakes;
6. The SWPPP is determined to be ineffective in preventing pollution
of waterways from construction wastes, chemicals, fueling
facilities, concrete truck washouts, toxic or hazardous materials,
site litter or other substances or wastes likely to have an adverse
impact on water quality;
Section
400.2660
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2660
AO:645
Section 400.2670. General Site Design Requirements. [R.O. 2009
§25-465; Ord. No. 3931 §3, 4-19-2004]
7. Total settleable solids from a storm water outfall exceed one-half
(0.5) ml/L/hr if the discharge is within the prescribed proximity of a
"valuable resource water" as defined by the MDNR;
8. Total settleable solids from a storm water outfall exceeds two and
one-half (2.5) ml/L/hr for any other outfall; or
9. MSD or the Missouri Department of Natural Resources determines
whether violations of water quality standards may occur or have
occurred.
C. The permittee shall:
1. Notify all contractors and other entities (including utility crews,
City employees or their agents) that will perform work at the site of
the existence of the SWPPP and what actions or precautions shall
be taken while on site to minimize the potential for erosion and the
potential for damaging any BMP;
2. Determine the need for and establish training programs to ensure
that all site workers have been trained, as a minimum, in erosion
control, material handling and storage and housekeeping;
3. Provide copies of the SWPPP to all parties who are responsible for
installation, operation or maintenance of any BMP; and
4. Maintain a current copy of the SWPPP on the site at all times.
A. Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices and
watercourse crossings shall be adequate to prevent transportation of
sediment from the site to the satisfaction of the Building Department.
B. Cut and fill slopes shall be no greater than 3:1, except as approved by
the Building Department to meet other community or environmental
objectives.
C. Clearing and grading of natural resources, such as forests and
wetlands, shall not be permitted, except when in compliance with all
other provisions of the Brentwood City Code and in compliance with
State and Federal regulations.
D. Clearing techniques that retain existing vegetation to the maximum
extent practicable shall be used and the time period for disturbed areas
to be without vegetative cover shall be minimized to the extent
practical to the satisfaction of the Building Department.
E. Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices,
shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed
and have been stabilized.
Section
400.2660
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2670
AO:646
F. Phasing shall be required on all sites disturbing greater than thirty (30)
acres, with the size of each phase to be established at plan review and
as approved by the Building Department.
G. Erosion control requirements shall include the following:
1. Soil stabilization shall be completed within five (5) days of clearing
or inactivity in construction.
2. If seeding or another vegetative erosion control method is used, it
shall become established within two (2) weeks or the Building
Department may require the site to be reseeded or a nonvegetative
option employed.
3. Techniques shall be employed to ensure stabilization on steep
slopes and in drainage ways.
4. Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered at the end of each
workday.
5. The entire site must be stabilized, using a heavy mulch layer or
another method that does not require germination to control
erosion, at the close of the construction season.
6. Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or
sediment from the site.
7. Techniques shall be employed to divert upland runoff past
disturbed slopes.
H. Sediment control requirements shall include:
1. Settling basins, sediment traps or tanks and perimeter controls.
2. Settling basins shall be provided for each drainage area with ten
(10) or more acres disturbed at one (1) time and shall be sized to
contain one-half (0.5) inch of sediment from the drainage area and
be able to contain a 2-year, 24-hour storm. If the provision of a
basin of this size is impractical, other similarly effective BMPs, as
evaluated and specified in the SWPPP, shall be provided.
3. Settling basins shall be designed in a manner that allows
adaptation to provide long-term storm water management as
required by the Building Department.
4. Settling basins shall have stabilized spillways to minimize the
potential for erosion of the spillway or basin embankment.
5. Protection for adjacent properties by the use of a vegetated buffer
strip in combination with perimeter controls.
I. Watercourse protection requirements shall include:
Section
400.2670
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2670
AO:647
1. Encroachment into or crossings of active watercourses/riparian
areas and wetlands shall be avoided to the maximum extent
practicable. Where applicable, all local, State and Federal permits
and approvals shall be provided to the Building Department prior
to the issuance of a site disturbance permit.
2. Stabilization of any watercourse channels before, during and after
any in-channel work.
3. If a defined watercourse is to be realigned or reconfigured, clearing
and grubbing activities within fifty (50) feet of the watercourse
shall not begin until all materials and equipment necessary to
protect the watercourse and complete the work are on site. Once
started, work shall be completed as soon as possible. Areas within
fifty (50) feet of the watercourse shall be recontoured and
revegetated, seeded or otherwise protected within five (5) working
days after grading has ceased.
4. All storm water conveyances shall be designed according to the
criteria of the Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District (MSD) and the
City and the necessary MSD permits and Brentwood permits
obtained.
5. Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion shall be provided at the
outlets of all pipes and paved channels.
J. Construction site access requirements shall include:
1. A temporary access road provided at all sites including a washdown
area supporting all active sites.
2. Other measures required by the Building Department in order to
ensure that construction vehicles do not track sediment onto public
streets or washed with wash effluent channeled directly into storm
drains.
K. Control requirements for construction materials, construction wastes
and other wastes generated on site shall include provisions, satisfactory
to the Building Department, for:
1. Spill prevention and control facilities for materials such as paint,
solvents, petroleum products, chemicals, toxic or hazardous
substances, substances regulated under the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) or the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act
(CERCLA) and any wastes generated from the use of such materials
and substances, including their containers. Any containment
systems employed to meet this requirement shall be constructed of
materials compatible with the substances contained and shall be
adequate to protect both surface and ground water.
Section
400.2670
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2670
AO:648
Section 400.2680. Storm Water Design Standards. [R.O. 2009
§25-466; Ord. No. 3931 §3, 4-19-2004]
2. Collection and disposal of discarded building materials and other
construction site wastes, including those listed in Subsection (K)(1)
above.
3. Litter control.
4. Control of concrete truck washouts.
5. Assurance that on-site fueling facilities will adhere to applicable
Federal and State regulations concerning storage and dispensers.
6. Provision of sufficient temporary toilet facilities to serve the
number of workers on site.
A. General Standards.
1. The rate of imperviousness shall be determined by ratios of five
percent (5%) to one hundred percent (100%) impervious areas in
accordance with Table A.
2. Differential runoff rates for all categories of projects shall be
evaluated by the rational formula. The 25-year frequency, twenty
(20) minute duration, inlet time runoff coefficients in Table A shall
be used as the upper limit for evaluation.
B. Review Considerations For Detention Facilities. In general, detention
facilities shall be provided with obvious and effective control strategies.
The following shall be considered in determining the effectiveness and
safety of these facilities in relation to the intent and purpose of this
Section:
1. Volume of retention for the total project = Differential runoff rate x
area of project x 30 minutes x 60 seconds/minute;
2. Tributary (Q) peak runoff to basin;
3. Balanced maximum outflow rate from the low-flow structures;
4. Ratios of inflow to outflow rates;
5. Sizing of the overflow facilities;
6. Stability of retention dikes;
7. Safety features;
8. Maintenance features.
Section
400.2670
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2680
AO:649
TABLE A
AVERAGE C.I. FACTORS IN C.F.S. PER ACRE
20-MINUTES INLET TIME*
%
Impervious
C or P
Factor
0.5
Year
1
Year
2
Year
5
Year
10
Year
20
Year
25
Year
50
Year
100
Year
5 .37 0.70 0.92 .15 1.41 1.59 1.78 2.00 2.18 2.37
10 .39 0.74 0.97 1.21 1.49 1.68 1.88 2.11 2.30 2.50
15 .41 0.77 1.02 1.27 1.56 1.76 1.97 2.21 2.42 2.62
20 .435 0.82 1.08 1.35 1.66 1.87 2.09 2.35 2.57 2.78
25 .455 0.86 1.13 1.41 1.73 1.96 2.19 2.46 2.68 2.91
30 .475 0.90 1.18 1.47 1.81 2.04 2.28 2.57 2.80 3.04
35 .495 0.94 1.23 1.53 1.89 2.13 2.38 2.67 2.92 3.17
40 .52 0.98 1.29 1.61 1.98 2.24 2.50 2.81 3.07 3.33
45 .54 1.02 1.34 1.67 2.06 2.32 2.60 2.92 3.19 3.46
50 .56 1.06 1.39 1.74 2.13 2.41 2.69 3.02 3.30 3.58
55 .58 1.10 1.44 1.80 2.21 2.49 2.79 3.13 3.42 3.71
60 .60 1.13 1.49 1.86 2.29 2.58 2.89 3.24 3.54 3.84
65 .625 1.18 1.55 1.94 2.38 2.69 3.01 3.38 3.69 4.00
70 .645 1.22 1.60 2.00 2.46 2.77 3.10 3.48 3.81 4.13
75 .665 1.26 1.65 2.06 2.53 2.86 3.20 3.59 3.92 4.26
80 .685 1.29 1.70 2.12 2.61 2.95 3.29 3.7 4.04 4.38
85 0.705 1.33 1.75 2.19 2.69 3.03 3.39 3.81 4.16 4.51
90 0.73 1.38 1.81 2.26 2.78 3.14 3.51 3.94 4.31 4.67
95 0.75 1.42 1.86 2.33 2.86 3.23 3.61 4.05 4.43 4.8
100 0.77 1.46 1.91 2.39 2.93 3.31 3.7 4.16 4.54 4.93
Rainfall:
In inches
per hour
1.9 2.48 3.1 3.8 4.3 4.8 5.4 5.9 6.4
* From U.S. Weather Bureau technical paper No. 40: "Rainfall Frequency Atlas of the
United States for durations from thirty (30) minutes to twenty-four (24) hours and
return periods from one (1) to one hundred (100) years."
C. Open Dry Reservoirs.
1. Wet weather ponds or dry reservoirs shall be designed with proper
safety, stability and ease of maintenance features and shall not
detain storm water to a depth greater than four (4) feet. Depths
greater than four (4) feet can be detained provided that the
Section
400.2680
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2680
AO:650
reservoir is surrounded by a chain link (or approved equal) fence
and locked gate.
2. Maximum side slopes for grass-edged reservoirs shall not exceed
one (1) foot vertical for two (2) feet horizontal (2:1) unless
adequate measures are included to provide for the stability of these
slopes.
3. In no case shall the limits of maximum ponding elevation be closer
than thirty (30) feet horizontally from any building and less than
two (2) feet vertically below the lowest sill elevation.
4. The entire reservoir area shall be seeded, fertilized and mulched,
sodded or paved prior to release of escrows.
D. Permanent Lakes Used For Detention.
1. Permanent lakes with fluctuating volume controls may be used as
retention areas, provided that the limits of maximum ponding
elevations are no closer than thirty (30) feet horizontally from any
building and less than two (2) feet below the lowest sill elevation of
any building.
2. Maximum fluctuations from permanent pool elevation to maximum
ponding elevation shall be three (3) feet.
3. Special consideration shall be given to measures to ensure the
safety of small children in the design of permanent lakes especially
when located in residential areas.
E. Discharge Systems.
1. The design discharge (Q) for the low-flow orifice shall not exceed
the limits in the following Table B (based on five percent (5%)
imperviousness and twenty (20) minute inlet time).
2. Low-flow pipes shall not be smaller than four (4) inches in diameter
to minimize maintenance and operating problems, except in
parking lot and roof retention where minimum size of opening shall
be designed specifically for each condition.
3. The overflow opening or spillway shall be designed to accept the
total peak runoff of the improved tributary area, with discharge
velocity not to exceed five (5) feet per second unless special
provisions are made.
4. Proper engineering judgment shall be exercised in analysis of
secondary routing of discharge of greater intensity than the design
25-year frequency in order to avoid economic losses or damage
downstream. Review with 25- and 50-year frequency is
recommended.
Section
400.2680
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2680
AO:651
Section 400.2690. Construction and Maintenance of Storm Water
and Erosion Control Facilities. [R.O. 2009 §25-467; Ord. No. 3931
§3, 4-19-2004]
TABLE B
Storm Frequency
Years
Max. Discharge Rate
in Cubic Feet Per second (CFS) Per
Acre
0.5 0.7
1 0.92
2 1.15
5 1.41
10 1.59
20 1.78
25 2
The maximum discharge shall be designated to take place
under total anticipated design-head conditions.
5. Sizing of the system below the control structure shall be for the
total improved peak runoff tributary to the structure with no
allowance for retention, with discharge velocity not to exceed five
(5) feet per second unless special provisions are made.
6. Table B shall be used in determining the proper size of discharge
facilities.
7. All storm water discharge pipes shall be computed on a 25-year
rainfall frequency at a minimum.
A. Detention facilities, when mandatory, are to be built in conjunction with
the storm sewer installation and/or grading. Since these facilities are
intended to control increased runoff, they must be partially or fully
operational soon after the clearing of the vegetation.
B. Silt and debris connected both with early construction and with general
erosion from the site and elsewhere in the watershed after construction
shall be removed periodically from the detention area and control
structure in order to maintain close to full storage capacity.
C. The responsibility of maintenance of the detention facilities in
subdivision projects shall remain with the developer until such times as
applicable escrows are released. Upon release of escrows the
maintenance responsibility shall be vested in the trustees of the
subdivision by virtue of the trust indenture. The indenture of the trust
shall clearly indicate resident responsibility for maintenance in cases of
projects without common ground.
Section
400.2680
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2690
AO:652
Section 400.2700. Inspections. [R.O. 2009 §25-468; Ord. No. 3931
§3, 4-19-2004]
D. The responsibility of maintenance of the detention facilities in single
owner development projects shall remain with the general contractor
until final inspection of the development is performed and approved
and a legal certificate of occupancy is issued. After legal occupancy of
the project, the maintenance of detention facilities shall be vested with
the owner of the project.
A. The Building Department shall make inspections as hereinafter
required and either shall approve that portion of the work completed or
shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the
grading, erosion and sediment control plan as approved. Plans for
grading, stripping, excavating and filling work bearing the stamp of
approval of the Building Department of Brentwood shall be maintained
at the site during the progress of the work. To obtain inspections, the
permittee shall notify the Building Department of Brentwood at least
one (1) working day before the following:
1. Start of construction;
2. Installation of sediment and erosion measures;
3. Completion of site clearing;
4. Completion of rough grading;
5. Completion of final grading;
6. Close of the construction season;
7. Completion of final landscaping.
B. The permittee or his/her agent shall make regular inspections of the
land disturbance site, including all erosion and sediment and other
pollutant control measures, outfalls and off-site receiving waters, in
accordance with the inspection schedule outlined in the approved
SWPPP. Inspections must be scheduled at least once per week and no
later than seventy-two (72) hours after heavy rain. The purpose of such
inspections will be to ensure proper installation, operation and
maintenance of BMPs and to determine the overall effectiveness of the
SWPPP and the need for additional control measures. All inspections
shall be documented in written form on weekly reports with copies
submitted to the Building Department of Brentwood at the time interval
specified in the permit. The inspection reports are to include the
following minimum information:
1. Inspector's name and signature;
2. Date of inspection;
3. Observations relative to the effectiveness of the BMPs;
Section
400.2690
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2700
AO:653
Section 400.2710. Enforcement. [R.O. 2009 §25-469; Ord. No. 3931
§3, 4-19-2004]
4. Actions taken or necessary to correct deficiencies; and
5. A listing of areas where land disturbance operations have
permanently or temporarily stopped.
In addition, the permittee shall notify the site contractors
responsible for any deficiencies identified so that deficiencies
can be corrected within seven (7) calendar days of the weekly
inspection report.
C. The Building Department shall make inspections as deemed necessary
to ensure the validity of the reports filed under Subsection (B) or to
otherwise ensure proper installation, operation and maintenance of
storm water BMPs and to determine the overall effectiveness of the
SWPPP and the need for additional control measures.
A. Stop Work Order, Revocation Of Permit. In the event that any person
holding a site disturbance permit pursuant to this Division violates the
terms of the permit or implements site development in such a manner
as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare or safety of persons
residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be
materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or
improvements in the neighborhood, the Building Department may
suspend or revoke the site disturbance permit.
B. Violation And Penalties. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair
or maintain any grading, excavation or fill or, cause the same to be
done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this Division. Any
person violating any of the provisions of this Division shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and each day during which any violation of any
of the provisions of this Division is committed, continued or permitted,
shall constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such
violation, such person, partnership or corporation shall be punished in
accordance with Chapter 100, Section 100.080 of the Brentwood City
Code for each offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by
this Section, any person, partnership or corporation convicted of
violating any of the provisions of this Division shall be required to bear
the expense of such restoration.
C. Project Closure Requirements. Any site development escrows or bonds
will be not be fully released to the site operator or permittee until all of
the following have been completed:
1. All temporary storm water control BMPs have been removed and
the site has been fully stabilized.
2. All permanent storm water control BMPs have been completed.
Section
400.2700
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2710
AO:654
Section 400.2720. through Section 400.2760. (Reserved)
3. All final inspections/certifications have been completed by each of
the government jurisdictions involved in authorizing the project.
Section
400.2710
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2720
AO:655

DIVISION 8
Flood Hazard Control
Section 400.2770. Statutory Authorization. [R.O. 2009 §25-476;
Ord. No. 3859 §1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002]
The legislature of the State of Missouri has in Section 89.020, RSMo.,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt flood
plain management regulations designed to protect the health, safety and
general welfare. Therefore, the Board of Aldermen of the City of Brentwood,
Missouri, has adopted this Division as the flood hazard regulations of the
City of Brentwood.
Section 400.2780. Findings of Fact. [R.O. 2009 §25-477; Ord. No.
3859 §1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002; Ord. No. 4542 §1, 6-16-2014]
A. Flood Losses Resulting From Periodic Inundation. The special flood
hazard areas of the City of Brentwood, Missouri, are subject to
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
B. General Causes Of The Flood Losses. These flood losses are caused by:
1. The cumulative effect of development in any delineated flood plain
causing increases in flood heights and velocities; and
2. The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods,
hazardous to others, inadequately elevated or otherwise
unprotected from flood damages.
C. Methods Used To Analyze Flood Hazards. The Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) that is the basis of this Division uses a standard engineering
method of analyzing flood hazards which consist of a series of
interrelated steps: [Ord. No. 4543 §1, 6-16-2014]
1. Selection of a base flood that is based upon engineering
calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors as
its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated, and the
depth of inundation. The base flood selected for this ordinance is
representative of large floods which are characteristic of what can
be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this
ordinance. It is in the general order of a flood which could be
expected to have a one percent chance of occurrence in any one
year as delineated on the Federal Insurance Administrator's FIS,
and illustrative materials for St. Louis County dated August 2, 1995
and August 23, 2000 as amended, and any future revisions thereto.
Section
400.2770
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2780
AO:657
Section 400.2790. Statement of Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §25-478; Ord.
No. 3859 §1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002]
Section 400.2800. Lands to Which Division Applies. [R.O. 2009
§25-479; Ord. No. 3859 §1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002; Ord. No. 4542 §2,
6-16-2014; Ord. No. 4543 §2, 6-16-2014]
This Division shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City
of Brentwood identified as numbered and unnumbered A zones and AE
zones, on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for St. Louis County,
Missouri on Map Panels 29189C0188H, 29189C0189H, 29189CO301H, and
29189CO302H, dated August 2, 1995, as amended, and any future revisions
thereto. In all areas covered by this Division, no development shall be
permitted except through the issuance of a floodplain development permit,
granted by the Board of Aldermen or its duly designated representative
under such safeguards and restrictions as the Board of Aldermen or the
designated representative may reasonably impose for the promotion and
maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the
2. Calculation of water surface profiles are based on a standard
hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream
channel and overbank areas to convey the regulatory flood.
3. Computation of a floodway required to convey this flood without
increasing flood heights more than one (1) foot at any point.
4. Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no
development is permitted that would cause any increase in flood
height.
5. Delineation of flood fringe, i.e., that area outside the floodway
encroachment lines, but still subject to inundation by the base
flood.
A. It is the purpose of this Division to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare; to minimize those losses described in Subsection
400.2780(A); to establish or maintain the community's eligibility for
participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) as
defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 59.22(a)(3); and to
meet the requirements of 44 CFR 60.3(d) by applying the provisions of
this Division to:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood
heights or velocities;
2. Require uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities that
serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of
initial construction; and
3. Protect individuals from buying lands that are unsuited for the
intended development purposes due to the flood hazard.
Section
400.2780
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2800
AO:658
community, and as specifically noted in Sections 400.2890, 400.2900,
400.2910, 400.2920 and 400.2930.
Section 400.2810. Flood Plain Administrator. [R.O. 2009 §25-480;
Ord. No. 3859 §1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002]
The Director of Planning and Development or his/her designee is hereby
designated as the Flood Plain Administrator under this Division.
Section 400.2820. Compliance. [R.O. 2009 §25-481; Ord. No. 3859
§1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002]
No development located within the special flood hazard areas of this
community shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered
without full compliance with the terms of this Division and other applicable
regulations.
Section 400.2830. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [R.O. 2009
§25-482; Ord. No. 3859 §1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002]
It is not intended by this Division to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this Division
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Division shall prevail. All
other ordinances inconsistent with this Division are hereby repealed to the
extent of the inconsistency only.
Section 400.2840. Interpretation. [R.O. 2009 §25-483; Ord. No.
3859 §1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002]
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Division shall
be held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor
of the Governing Body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other powers granted by State Statutes.
Section 400.2850. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [R.O. 2009
§25-484; Ord. No. 3859 §1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002]
The degree of flood protection required by this Division is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and
scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or
the flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This Division does
not imply that areas outside the floodway and flood fringe or land uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage.
This Division shall not create a liability on the part the City of Brentwood
or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that may result
from reliance on this Division or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
Section
400.2800
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2860
AO:659
Section 400.2860. Flood Plain Development Permit (Required).
[R.O. 2009 §25-486; Ord. No. 3859 §1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002]
A flood plain development permit shall be required for all proposed
construction or other development, including the placement of
manufactured homes, in the areas described in Section 400.2800. No
person, firm, corporation or unit of government shall initiate any
development or substantial improvement or cause the same to be done
without first obtaining a separate flood plain development permit for each
structure or other development.
Section 400.2870. Duties and Responsibilities of Flood Plain
Administrator. [R.O. 2009 §25-488; Ord. No. 3859 §1(Exh. A),
12-16-2002]
A. Duties of the Flood Plain Administrator shall include, but not be limited
to:
1. Review of all applications for flood plain development permits to
assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding and that the
flood plain development permit requirements of this Division have
been satisfied;
2. Review of all applications for flood plain development permits for
proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have
been obtained from Federal, State or local governmental agencies
from which prior approval is required by Federal, State or local
law;
3. Review all subdivision proposals and other proposed new
development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions,
to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from
flooding;
4. Issue flood plain development permits for all approved
applications;
5. Notify adjacent communities and the State Emergency
Management Agency prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA);
6. Assure that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished and shall
be maintained within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse;
7. Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new
or substantially improved structures;
Section
400.2860
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2870
AO:660
Section 400.2880. Application for Flood Plain Development Permit.
[R.O. 2009 §25-489; Ord. No. 3859 §1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002]
Section 400.2890. General Standards. [R.O. 2009 §25-490; Ord. No.
3859 §1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002]
8. Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) that the new or substantially improved nonresidential
structures have been floodproofed;
9. When floodproofing techniques are utilized for a particular nonresidential
structure, the Flood Plain Administrator shall require
certification from a registered professional engineer or architect.
A. To obtain a flood plain development permit, the applicant shall first file
an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every
flood plain development permit application shall:
1. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot,
block and tract, house and street address or similar description
that will readily identify and specifically locate the proposed
structure or work;
2. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the flood plain
development permit;
3. Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended;
4. Indicate the assessed value of the structure and the fair market
value of the improvement;
5. Specify whether development is located in designated flood fringe
or floodway;
6. Identify the existing base flood elevation and the elevation of the
proposed development;
7. Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the
Flood Plain Administrator;
8. Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed
construction; and
9. Be signed by the permittee or his/her authorized agent who may be
required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.
A. Conditions. No permit for flood plain development shall be granted for
new construction, substantial improvements and other improvements,
including the placement of manufactured homes, within any numbered
or unnumbered A Zones and AE Zones, unless the conditions of this
Section are satisfied.
Section
400.2870
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2890
AO:661
B. Unnumbered A Zones. All areas identified as unnumbered A Zones on
the FIRM are subject to inundation of the 100-year flood; however, the
base flood elevation is not provided. Development within unnumbered A
Zones is subject to all provisions of this Division. If Flood Insurance
Study data is not available, the community shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently
available from Federal, State or other sources.
C. Floodway Designation. Until a floodway is designated, no new
construction, substantial improvements or other development,
including fill, shall be permitted within any numbered A Zone or AE
Zone on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect
of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the
community.
D. Requirements. All new construction, subdivision proposals, substantial
improvements, prefabricated structures, placement of manufactured
homes and other developments shall require:
1. Design or adequate anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. Construction with materials resistant to flood damage;
3. Utilization of methods and practices that minimize flood damages;
4. All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities be designed and/or located
so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;
5. New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage
systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into
floodwaters and on-site waste disposal systems be located so as to
avoid impairment or contamination; and
6. Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, located within
special flood hazard areas are required to assure that:
a. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage;
b. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage;
c. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards; and
Section
400.2890
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2890
AO:662
Section 400.2900. Specific Standards. [R.O. 2009 §25-491; Ord. No.
3859 §1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002]
d. All proposals for development, including proposals for
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, of five (5) acres or
fifty (50) lots, whichever is lesser, include within such
proposals base flood elevation data.
E. Storage, Material And Equipment.
1. The storage or processing of materials within the special flood
hazard area that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable,
explosive or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life is
prohibited.
2. Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not
subject to major damage by floods, if firmly anchored to prevent
flotation, or if readily removable from the area within the time
available after a flood warning.
F. Accessory Structures. Structures used solely for parking and limited
storage purposes, not attached to any other structure on the site, of
limited investment value and not larger than four hundred (400) square
feet may be constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed provided there
is no human habitation or occupancy of the structure, the structure is of
single-wall design, a variance has been granted from the standard flood
plain management requirements of this Division, and a flood plain
development permit has been issued.
A. In all areas identified as numbered and unnumbered A Zones and AE
Zones, where base flood elevation data have been provided as set forth
in Section 400.2890(B), the following provisions are required:
1. Residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structures, including manufactured
homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to
at least one (1) foot above base flood elevation.
2. Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other non-residential
structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to at least one (1) foot above the
base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be floodproofed so that below the base flood elevation the
structure is water-tight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect
shall certify that the standards of this Subsection are satisfied.
Such certification shall be provided to the Flood Plain
Administrator as set forth in Section 400.2870(9).
Section
400.2890
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2900
AO:663
Section 400.2910. Manufactured Homes. [R.O. 2009 §25-492; Ord.
No. 3859 §1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002]
3. Require, for all new construction and substantial improvements,
that fully enclosed areas below lowest floor used solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and that are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
a. A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not
less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided; and
b. The bottom of all opening shall be no higher than one (1) foot
above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit
the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. All manufactured homes to be placed within all unnumbered and
numbered A Zones and AE Zones on the community's FIRM shall be
required to be installed using methods and practices that minimize
flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured
homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
B. Require manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved
within unnumbered or numbered A Zones and AE Zones on the
community's FIRM on sites:
1. Outside of manufactured home park or subdivision;
2. In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
3. In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or
4. In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result
of a flood,
be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest
floor of the manufactured home is elevated to at least one (1)
foot above the base flood elevation and be securely attached to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement.
Section
400.2900
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2910
AO:664
Section 400.2920. Floodway. [R.O. 2009 §25-493; Ord. No. 3859
§1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002]
Section 400.2930. Recreational Vehicles. [R.O. 2009 §25-494; Ord.
No. 3859 §1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002; Ord. No. 4542 §3, 6-16-2014; Ord.
No. 4543 §3, 6-16-2014]
C. Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
within all unnumbered and numbered A Zones and AE Zones on the
community's FIRM, that are not subject to the provisions of Section
400.2910(B) of this Division, be elevated so that either:
1. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one (1) foot
above the base flood level; or
2. The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are
no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be
securely attached to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
A. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section
400.2800 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry
debris and potential projectiles, the following provisions shall apply:
1. The community shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based
on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway
must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood without
increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one
(1) foot at any point.
2. The community shall prohibit any encroachments, including fill,
new construction, substantial improvements and other
development, within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has
been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that
the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in
flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
3. If Section 400.2920(2) is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood
hazard reduction provisions of these regulations.
4. In unnumbered A Zones, the community shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any flood elevation or floodway data currently
available from Federal, State or other sources as set forth in
Subsection 400.2890(B).
Section
400.2910
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2930
AO:665
Section 400.2940. Establishment of Appeal Board. [R.O. 2009
§25-495; Ord. No. 3859 §1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002]
The Board of Adjustment as established by the City of Brentwood, Missouri,
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the flood
plain management requirements of this Division.
Section 400.2950. Responsibility of Appeal Board. [R.O. 2009
§25-496; Ord. No. 3859 §1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002]
Section 400.2960. Further Appeals. [R.O. 2009 §25-497; Ord. No.
3859 §1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002]
Any person, any neighborhood organization as defined in Section 32.105,
RSMo., representing such person, aggrieved by the decision of the Board of
Adjustment may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court.
Section 400.2970. Flood Plain Management Variance Criteria. [R.O.
2009 §25-498; Ord. No. 3859 §1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002]
A. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within all
unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones on the community's
FIRM:
1. Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use*; or
2. Meet the permitting, elevation, and the anchoring requirements for
manufactured homes of this Division.
*A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quickdisconnect
type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.
A. Where an application for a flood plain development permit or request
for a variance from the flood plain management regulations is denied by
the Flood Plain Administrator, the applicant may apply for such flood
plain development permit or variance directly to the Appeal Board as
defined in Section 400.2940.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the Flood Plain Administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this Division.
A. In passing upon such applications for variances, the Board of
Adjustment shall consider all technical data and evaluations, all
relevant factors, standards specified in other Sections of this Division
and the following criteria:
1. The danger to life and property due to flood damage;
Section
400.2930
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2970
AO:666
Section 400.2980. Conditions for Approving Flood Plain
Management Variances. [R.O. 2009 §25-499; Ord. No. 3859 §1(Exh.
A), 12-16-2002]
2. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
6. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flood
damage, for the proposed use;
7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
8. The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and Flood Plain Management Program for that area;
9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters, if applicable, expected at the site; and
11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets
and bridges.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (½) acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing
Subsections (B) through (F) below have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the one-half (½) acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places or local inventory of
historic places upon determination provided the proposed activity will
not preclude the structure's continued historic designation.
C. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
Section
400.2970
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.2980
AO:667
Section 400.2990. Conditions for Approving Variances for Accessory
Structures. [R.O. 2009 §25-500; Ord. No. 3859 §1(Exh. A),
12-16-2002]
D. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon:
1. A showing of good and sufficient cause;
2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
3. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
Divisions.
F. A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a
community official that:
1. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for
one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage, and
2. Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life
and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record
of all variance actions as required by this Division.
A. Any variance granted for an accessory structure shall be decided
individually based on a case-by-case analysis of the building's unique
circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions
as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in Sections 400.2970
and 400.2980 of this Division.
B. In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the
threat to public health and safety, the following conditions shall be
included for any variance issued for accessory structures that are
constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed.
1. Use of the accessory structures must be solely for parking and
limited storage purposes in Zone A only as identified on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
2. For any new or substantially damaged accessory structures, the
exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e.,
foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring,
etc.) below the base flood elevation must be built with floodresistant
materials in accordance with Section 400.2890(D)(2) of
this Division.
Section
400.2980
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.2990
AO:668
3. The accessory structures must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure in
accordance with Section 400.2890(D)(1) of this Division. All of the
building's structural components must be capable of resisting
specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic, buoyancy and
hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.
4. Any mechanical, electrical or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they
are contained within a water-tight, floodproofed enclosure that is
capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance
with Section 400.2890(D)(4) of this Division.
5. The accessory structures must meet all National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP) opening requirements. The NFIP requires that
enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the 100-year flood,
contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters in accordance with Section 400.2900(3) of this
Division.
6. The accessory structures must comply with the flood plain
management floodway encroachment provisions of Section
400.2920(2) of this Division. No variances may be issued for
accessory structures within any designated floodway, if any
increase in flood levels would result during the 100-year flood.
7. Equipment, machinery or other contents must be protected from
any flood damage.
8. No disaster relief assistance under any program administered by
any Federal agency shall be paid for any repair or restoration costs
of the accessory structures.
9. A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature
of a community official that
a. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage, and
b. Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with
the record of all variance actions as required by this Division.
10. Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and
approved by the community and registered professional engineer
or architect prior to the issuance of any flood plain development
permit for construction.
Section
400.2990
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.3000
AO:669
Section 400.3000. Penalties for Violation. [R.O. 2009 §25-501; Ord.
No. 3859 §1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002]
Violation of the provisions of this Division or failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with granting of variances) shall constitute an ordinance
violation. Any person who violates this Division or fails to comply with
any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the
penalties set forth in Section 100.080 of the Brentwood City Code. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the City of Brentwood or other appropriate
authority from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
Section 400.3010. Amendments. [R.O. 2009 §25-502; Ord. No. 3859
§1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002]
The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this Division may
from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed or appealed to
reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act
of 1973, provided however, that no such action may be taken until after a
public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties of interest and citizens
shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City
of Brentwood. At least twenty (20) days shall elapse between the date of
this publication and the public hearing. A copy of such amendments will be
provided to the Region VII office of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA). The regulations of this Division are in compliance with the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) regulations.
Section 400.3020. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §25-503; Ord. No. 3859
§1(Exh. A), 12-16-2002; Ord. No. 4542 §4, 6-16-2014]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Division
shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning they have in
common usage and to give this Division its most reasonable application.
100-YEAR FLOOD — See "base flood."[Ord. No. 4543 §4, 6-16-2014]
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — The same as "APPURTENANT STRUCTURE".
ACTUARIAL RATES — See "RISK PREMIUM RATES".
ADMINISTRATOR — The Federal Insurance Administrator.
AGENCY — The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
AGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES — Agricultural products and
livestock.[Ord. No. 4543 §4, 6-16-2014]
AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURE — Any structure used exclusively in
connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of
agricultural commodities.[Ord. No. 4543 §4, 6-16-2014]
Section
400.3000
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.3020
AO:670
APPEAL — A request for review of the Flood Plain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this Division or a request for a variance.
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE — A structure that is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the flood plain within a
community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in
any given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the structure having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "STRUCTURE".
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OR CHIEF ELECTED OFFICIAL — The
official of the community who is charged with the authority to implement
and administer laws, Divisions and regulations for that community.
COMMUNITY — Any State or area or political subdivision thereof which has
authority to adopt and enforce flood plain management regulations for the
areas within its jurisdiction.
DEVELOPMENT — Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, levees,
levee systems, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — For insurance purposes, a non-basement building
which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation
walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings or columns.
ELIGIBLE COMMUNITY or PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY — A community
for which the Administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance under
the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION — For the purposes of determining rates,
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the
effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective
before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing
structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the flood plain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
Section
400.3020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.3020
AO:671
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the overflow of
inland; and/or (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of
a community on which the Administrator has delineated both special flood
hazard areas and the designated regulatory floodway.
FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION — A determination by the
Administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the
flood level that has a one percent (1%) or greater chance of occurrence in
any given year.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards.
FLOOD FRINGE — The area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but
still subject to inundation by the regulatory flood.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Administrator, where the boundaries of the flood
areas having special flood hazards have been designated as (unnumbered
or numbered) A Zones.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community
on which the administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations.
FLOOD PLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source. (See "FLOODING".)
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT — The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage including,
but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
flood plain management regulations.
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning Divisions,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
Divisions (such as flood plain and grading Divisions) and other applications
of police power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in
any combination thereof, that provide standards for the purpose of flood
damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities or structures and their contents.
Section
400.3020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.3020
AO:672
FLOODWAY or REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one (1) foot.
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES — The lines marking the limits of
floodways on Federal, State and local flood plain maps.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of flood plain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as bridge openings and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use that cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water. This term includes only docking facilities and facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, but does
not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
1.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
2.
Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in States
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
3.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
a.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved
programs.
b.
4.
Section
400.3020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.3020
AO:673
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable floodproofing design requirements of this Division.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one (1) or more
sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MAP — The Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM), Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) or the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) for a
community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
MARKET VALUE or FAIR MARKET VALUE — An estimate of what is fair,
economic, just and equitable value under normal local market conditions.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP), the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or
other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
flood plain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of the flood plain management regulations adopted by a community and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of flood plain management
regulations adopted by the community.
NFIP — The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY, ALSO KNOWN AS AN ELIGIBLE
COMMUNITY — A community in which the Administrator has authorized
the sale of flood insurance.
PERSON — Any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association or any other entity, including Federal, State and local
governments and agencies.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least fifty-one percent (51%) of the
actual cash value of the structure, less land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
Section
400.3020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.3020
AO:674
REMEDY A VIOLATION — To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with Federal, State or local flood plain management regulations
or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its non-compliance.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two (2) separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, equals or exceeds twentyfive
percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.[Ord. No. 4543 § 4, 6-16-2014]
RISK PREMIUM RATES — Those rates established by the Administrator
pursuant to individual community studies and investigations which are
undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with Section 1307
of the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 and the accepted
actuarial principles. "Risk premium rates" include provisions for operating
costs and allowances.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — See "AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD
HAZARD".
SPECIAL HAZARD AREA — An area having special flood hazards and shown
on a FHBM, FIRM or FBFM as Zones (unnumbered or numbered) A and AE.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvements and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start
of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement
or other improvements were within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
permit date. The "actual start" means either the first (1st) placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs
or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, any work
beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home
on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling, the installation of streets and/or
walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, the
erection of temporary forms, nor installation on the property of accessory
structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start
of construction" means the first (1st) alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
1. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
2.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
3.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.
4.
Section
400.3020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.3020
AO:675
STATE COORDINATING AGENCY — That agency of the State Government
or other office designated by the Governor of the State or by State Statute
at the request of the Administrator to assist in the implementation of the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) in that State.
STRUCTURE — For flood plain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home. "Structure", for insurance
purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent
site, as well as a manufactured home on a permanent foundation. For
the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of
construction, alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or
supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless
such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to predamaged condition would
equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before
"start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures
which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
OR SUBDIVISIONS — Where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the
repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.[Ord. No. 4543 § 4,
6-16-2014]
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by the community from the terms of a
flood plain management regulation. Flood insurance requirements remain
in place for any varied use or structure and cannot be varied by the
community.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's flood plain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications or other evidence of compliance required by this Division
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications that have
been identified by the local Code Enforcement Official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
1.
Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
2.
Section
400.3020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.3020
AO:676
is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — The height in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum where specified)
of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the flood plain.
Section
400.3020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.3020
AO:677

DIVISION 9
Stream Buffer Protection
Section 400.3030. Findings and Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §25-504; Ord.
No. 4117 §1, 3-3-2008]
Section 400.3040. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §25-505; Ord. No. 4117
§1, 3-3-2008]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein.
A. Whereas the Board of Aldermen of the City of Brentwood, Missouri,
finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits
including:
1. Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and
biological integrity of streams and their water resources.
2. Removing pollutants delivered in urban storm water.
3. Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation.
4. Protecting and stabilizing stream banks.
5. Providing for infiltration of storm water runoff.
6. Maintaining base flow of streams.
7. Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for
the aquatic ecosystem.
8. Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable
aquatic habitat.
9. Providing riparian wildlife habitat.
10. Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity.
11. Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of
greenspace.
B. The purpose of this Division is to protect the public health, safety,
environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses
due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream
water quality by provisions designed to:
1. Create buffer zones along the streams of the City of Brentwood,
Missouri, for the protection of water resources; and
2. Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing
buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any
such activities.
Section
400.3030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.3040
AO:679
BUFFER — With respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area
(established by Section 400.3050 below) lying adjacent to the stream.
FLOOD PLAIN — Any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at
least a one percent (1%) probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar
year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land
use plan, i.e., the regulatory flood.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Any manmade paved, hardened or structural
surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes, but is not limited
to, rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any
concrete or asphalt.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any land change including, but not limited to,
clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading,
excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any
other installation of impervious cover.
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Those actions or activities which
comprise, facilitate or result in land development.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any land or vegetation change, including, but not
limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging,
grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve
construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover.
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Those actions or activities which
comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance.
PARCEL — Any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest County tax
assessment records.
PERMIT — The permit issued by the Department of Planning and
Development required for undertaking any land development activity.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture,
public or private corporation, trust, estate, Commission, board, public or
private institution, utility, cooperative, City, County or other political
subdivision of the State, any interstate body or any other legal entity.
PROTECTION AREA or STREAM PROTECTION AREA — With respect to a
stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable
to such stream.
RIPARIAN — Belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond
or impoundment.
SETBACK — With respect to a stream, the area established by Section
400.3060 extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream.
STREAM — Any stream, beginning at:
All natural watercourses depicted by a solid or dashed blue line on
the most current United States Geological Survey (U.S.G.S.) 7.5 Minute
Series (Topographic) Maps for Missouri; or
1.
Section
400.3040
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.3040
AO:680
STREAM BANK — The sloping land that contains the stream channel and
the normal flows of the stream. Where no established top-of-bank can
be determined, the stream bank will be the "ordinary high water mark"
as defined by the Corps of Engineers in Title 33 of the Code of Federal
Regulation, Part 328.3.
STREAM CHANNEL — The portion of a watercourse that contains the base
flow of the stream.
Section 400.3050. Applicability. [R.O. 2009 §25-506; Ord. No. 4117
§1, 3-3-2008]
A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of twenty-five (25)
acres or more.
2.
A. This Division shall apply to all land development activity on property
containing a stream protection area as defined in Section 400.3040 of
this Division. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace
or supersede, any other applicable buffer or flood plain requirements
established under State law and approval or exemption from these
requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer
requirements established under State Law or from other applicable
local, State or Federal regulations.
1. Grandfather provisions. This Division shall not apply to the
following activities:
a. Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use
of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before
the effective date of this Division.
b. Existing development and ongoing land disturbance activities
including, but not limited to, existing agriculture, silviculture,
landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that
new development or land disturbance activities on such
properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements.
c. Any land development activity that is under construction, fully
approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or
has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this
Division.
d. Land development activity that has not been submitted for
approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan,
such as for an office park or other phased development that
has been previously approved within two (2) years of the
effective date of this Division.
2. Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this
Division. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an
exemption for any other activity proposed on a property.
a. Activities for the purpose of building one (1) of the following:
Section
400.3040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.3050
AO:681
(1) A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or
utility line;
(2) Public water supply intake or public wastewater
structures or storm water outfalls;
(3) Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property;
(4) Public access facilities that must be on the water including
boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river,
fishing platforms and overlooks;
(5) Public foot trails and paths;
(6) Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability,
vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as
native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used.
b. Public sewer line easements. This includes such impervious
cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the
utility including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve
structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing
the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation
routes in such easements, regardless of paving material,
except for access for the uses specifically cited in Section
400.3050(2)(a) above.
c. Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at
the time this Division takes effect or approved under the terms
of this Division.
d. Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this
Division takes effect or approved under the terms of this
Division, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover
as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility
including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve
structures.
e. Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property.
However, when emergency work is performed under this
Section, the person performing it shall report such work to the
(review and permitting authority) on the next business day
after commencement of the work. Within ten (10) days
thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform
such work within such time period as may be determined by
the (review and permitting authority) to be reasonably
necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work
may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or
water quality of the protection area.
f. Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for
forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental
Section
400.3050
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.3050
AO:682
Section 400.3060. Land Development Requirements. [R.O. 2009
§25-507; Ord. No. 4117 §1, 3-3-2008]
to other land development activity. If such activity results in
land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be
prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than
normal forest management practices will be allowed on the
entire property for three (3) years after the end of the activities
that intruded on the buffer.
g. Any activities approved under a 404 permit issued by the Corps
of Engineers and 401 water quality certification issued by the
Missouri Department of Natural Resources.
3. After the effective date of this Division, it shall apply to new
subdividing and platting activities.
4. Any land development activity within a buffer established
hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established
hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to
Section 400.3060(B) below.
A. Buffer And Setback Requirements. All land development activity
subject to this Division shall meet the following requirements:
1. For streams depicted as a solid blue line on the U.S.G.S. map, an
undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for fifty
(50) feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of
the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. For all
other streams subject to this Division, an undisturbed natural
vegetative buffer shall be maintained for twenty-five (25) feet,
measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream
as measured from the top of the stream bank.
2. No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within
the buffer or the setback.
B. Variance Procedures. Variances from the above buffer and setback
requirements may be granted in accordance with the following
provisions:
1. Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this
Division and its shape, topography or other existing physical
condition prevents land development consistent with this Division
and the Department of Planning and Development finds and
determines that the requirements of this Division prohibit the
otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the Board of
Adjustment of the City of Brentwood, Missouri, may grant a
variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder,
provided such variance requires mitigation measures to offset the
effects of any proposed land development on the parcel.
Section
400.3050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.3060
AO:683
2. Except as provided above, the Board of Adjustment of the City of
Brentwood, Missouri, shall grant no variance from any provision of
this Division without first conducting a public hearing on the
application for variance and authorizing the granting of the
variance by an affirmative vote of the Board of Adjustment. The
City of Brentwood, Missouri, shall give public notice of each such
public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the City
of Brentwood, Missouri. The Department of Planning and
Development shall require that the applicant post a sign giving
notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign
shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to
be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way.
Variances will be considered only in the following cases:
a. When a property's shape, topography or other physical
conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this Division
prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted.
b. Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal
buffer requirements in the ordinance would create an extreme
hardship.
Variances will not be considered when, following
adoption of this Division, actions of any property owner
of a given property have created conditions of a
hardship on that property.
3. At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following
information:
a. A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands,
flood plain boundaries and other natural features as
determined by field survey;
b. A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils,
vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property;
c. A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and
proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of
all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and
outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to
be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated;
d. Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be
maintained;
e. At least one (1) alternative plan, which does not include a
buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a
site plan is not possible;
f. A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed
intrusion;
Section
400.3060
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.3060
AO:684
Section 400.3070. Compatibility With Other Regulations and
Requirements. [R.O. 2009 §25-508; Ord. No. 4117 §1, 3-3-2008]
This Division is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any
other ordinance, rule or regulation, Statute or other provision of law. The
requirements of this Division should be considered minimum requirements
and where any provision of this Division imposes restrictions different from
those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of
law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective
standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take
precedence.
Section 400.3080. Additional Information Requirements for
Development on Buffer Zone Properties. [R.O. 2009 §25-509; Ord.
No. 4117 §1, 3-3-2008]
g. A storm water management site plan, if applicable; and
h. Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is
proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none
is being proposed.
4. The following factors will be considered in determining whether to
issue a variance:
a. The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other
physical characteristics of the property;
b. The locations of all streams on the property, including along
property boundaries;
c. The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback
intrusion;
d. Whether alternative designs are possible which require less
intrusion or no intrusion;
e. The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the
proposed variance; and
f. Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of
natural resources and the environment.
A. Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks
hereunder must include the following:
1. A site plan showing:
a. The location of all streams on the property;
b. Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the
property;
Section
400.3060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.3080
AO:685
Section 400.3090. Responsibility. [R.O. 2009 §25-510; Ord. No.
4117 §1, 3-3-2008]
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the
conditions thereof nor with the provisions of this Division shall relieve any
person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to
persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve
to impose any liability upon the City of Brentwood, Missouri, its officers or
employees for injury or damage to persons or property.
Section 400.3100. Inspection. [R.O. 2009 §25-511; Ord. No. 4117
§1, 3-3-2008]
c. Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than
five (5) foot contour intervals;
d. Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and
e. Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer
and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback;
2. A description of all proposed land development within the buffer
and setback; and
3. Any other documentation that the (review and permitting
authority) may reasonably deem necessary for review of the
application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is
addressed in the approval process.
All buffer and setback areas must be either recorded on a
final plat or depicted on a site plan of the property following
plan approval. A note to reference the vegetated buffer shall
state: "There shall be no clearing, grading, construction or
disturbance of vegetation except as permitted by this and any
other applicable ordinances of the City of Brentwood."
A. The Director of Planning and Development may cause inspections of the
work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course
thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the
work. The permittee shall assist the Director of Planning and
Development in making such inspections. The City of Brentwood shall
have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably
deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this Division and
for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public
or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of
any land development activities within the protection area.
B. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative
or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection and who
presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct,
hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process
of carrying out official duties.
Section
400.3080
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.3110
AO:686
Section 400.3110. Violations, Enforcement and Penalties. [R.O.
2009 §25-512; Ord. No. 4117 §1, 3-3-2008]
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this Division or the
requirements of an approved site plan or permit shall be subject to all
penalties and all enforcement actions set forth in this Chapter. Any such
action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be
a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief.
The imposition of any of the penalties or enforcement actions described
above shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, equitable relief.
Section 400.3120. through Section 400.3140. (Reserved)
Section
400.3110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.3120
AO:687

ARTICLE VI
Non-Conformities
DIVISION 1
Generally
Section 400.3150. Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §25-201; Ord. No. 2739
§43-80, 5-20-1985]
Within the City certain existing lots, structures and uses of land which
were lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code are
prohibited under the terms of this Chapter. This Article is intended to
declare non-conformities to be incompatible with the permitted uses in each
district, to permit non-conformities to continue until they are removed, and
to prohibit non-conformities from being expanded, enlarged or increased in
intensity.
Section 400.3160. Non-Conforming Lots. [R.O. 2009 §25-202; Ord.
No. 2739 §43-81, 5-20-1985]
Structures may be built on lots of record that were made non-conforming
by this Chapter as to size, width or area, provided however, that such
structures shall conform to setbacks and other regulations not involving
area or width of lot.
Section 400.3170. Restoration. [R.O. 2009 §25-203; Ord. No. 2739
§43-83.5, 5-20-1985]
If any non-conforming structure or any structure devoted in whole or in part
to a non-conforming use is damaged or, becomes extensively deteriorated
or, is destroyed by any means to an extent greater than fifty percent (50%)
of its then current fair market value, such structure shall not be restored
except in conformity with all applicable provisions of this Chapter including
the regulations of the zoning district in which the building is situated.
However, such structure may be restored if the Board of Adjustment finds
a compelling public necessity requiring the continuance of the nonconformity.
When a structure, the use of which does not conform to the
provisions of this Chapter, is damaged or, becomes extensively deteriorated
or, is destroyed by any means to an extent of more than twenty-five percent
(25%) but less than fifty percent (50%) of its fair market value, it may only
be restored on the issuance of a permit by the Building Official with the
approval of the Board of Aldermen. If such damage is twenty-five percent
(25%) or less of its fair market value, then restoration may be made as
otherwise provided by all applicable ordinances of the City.
Section 400.3180. Non-Conforming Structures. [R.O. 2009 §25-204;
Ord. No. 2739 §§43-82.1 — 43-82.3, 5-20-1985]
A. Any non-conforming structure which is devoted to a use which is
permitted in the zoning district in which it is located may be continued,
Section
400.3150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.3180
AO:689
Section 400.3190. Moving Structures. [R.O. 2009 §25-205; Ord. No.
2739 §43-82.4, 5-20-1985]
No structure described in Section 400.3180, Subsection (A), shall be moved
in whole or in part for any distance whatever to any other location on the
same or any other lot unless the entire structure shall thereafter conform to
the provisions of the zoning district in which it is located after being moved.
Section 400.3200. through Section 400.3250. (Reserved)
so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the restrictions in this
Article.
B. Any such structure described in Subsection (A) may be maintained,
repaired or remodeled, provided however, that no such maintenance,
repair or remodeling shall either create any additional non-conformity
or increase the degree of existing non-conformity of all or any part of
such structure. Nothing in this Zoning Code shall be deemed to prevent
the strengthening or restoring of a structure to a safe condition in
accordance with an order of public official who is charged with
protecting the public safety and who declares such structure to be
unsafe and orders its restoration to a safe condition, where such
restoration will not be in violation of this Section.
C. If any non-conforming structure or any structure devoted in whole or in
part to a non-conforming use is damaged or, becomes extensively
deteriorated or, is destroyed by any means to an extent greater than
fifty percent (50%) of its then current fair market value, such structure
shall not be restored except in conformity with all applicable provisions
of this Chapter including the regulations of the zoning district in which
the building is situated. However, such structure may be restored if the
Board of Adjustment finds a compelling public necessity requiring the
continuance of the non-conformity. When a structure, the use of which
does not conform to the provisions of this Chapter, is damaged or,
becomes extensively deteriorated or, is destroyed by any means to an
extent of more than twenty-five percent (25%) but less than fifty
percent (50%) of its then current fair market value, it may only be
restored on the issuance of a permit by the Building Official with the
approval of the Board of Aldermen. If such damage is twenty-five
percent (25%) or less of its fair market value, then restoration may be
made as otherwise provided by all applicable ordinances of the City.
Section
400.3180
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.3200
AO:690
DIVISION 2
Non-Conforming Uses
Section 400.3260. Uses to Continue. [R.O. 2009 §25-212; Ord. No.
2739 §43-83.1, 5-20-1985]
Any lawfully existing non-conforming use of part or all of a structure or any
lawfully existing non-conforming use of land, not involving a structure or
only involving a structure which is accessory to such use of land, may be
continued, so long as otherwise lawful, subject to the provisions contained
in this Division.
Section 400.3270. Ordinary Repair and Maintenance. [R.O. 2009
§25-213; Ord. No. 2739 §43-83.2, 5-20-1985]
Section 400.3280. Remodeling — Alterations. [R.O. 2009 §25-214;
Ord. No. 2739 §43-83.3, 5-20-1985]
A structure devoted in whole or in part to a non-conforming use shall not
be renovated, remodeled or rehabilitated to an extent greater than fifty
percent (50%) of its fair market value prior to such renovation, remodeling
or rehabilitation, nor shall the structural system of the building be altered,
unless the entire structure and use of the structure shall thereafter conform
to all provisions of this Chapter and of the zoning district in which the use
is located.
Section 400.3290. Extension. [R.O. 2009 §25-215; Ord. No. 2739
§43-83.4, 5-20-1985]
A non-conforming use shall not be extended, expanded, enlarged or
increased in intensity.
A. The normal maintenance and repair or the replacement, installation or
relocation of non-bearing walls, non-bearing partitions, fixtures, wiring
or plumbing may be performed on any structure that is devoted in
whole or in part to a non-conforming use. Neither this nor any other
provision of this Chapter shall be interpreted to authorize any increase
in the size or degree of the non-conforming use or any violation of the
provisions of any other Sections of this Division.
B. Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening
or restoring of a structure to a safe condition in accordance with an
order of a public official who is charged with protecting the public
safety and who declares such structure to be unsafe and orders its
restoration to a safe condition, where such restoration will not be in
violation of Sections 400.3180 and 400.3190.
Section
400.3260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.3300
AO:691
Section 400.3300. Change in Use. [R.O. 2009 §25-216; Ord. No.
2739 §43-83.7, 5-20-1985]
A non-conforming use shall not be changed to any use other than a use
permitted in the zoning district in which the use is located. When a nonconforming
use has been changed to any permitted use, it shall not
thereafter be changed back to a non-conforming use.
Section 400.3310. Abandonment or Discontinuance. [R.O. 2009
§25-217; Ord. No. 2739 §43-83.8, 5-20-1985]
If the non-conforming use of any building or premises is discontinued for
a period of one (1) year, regardless of any reservation of an intent not to
abandon or to resume such use, any subsequent use or occupancy of such
structures shall comply with provisions of this Zoning Code including those
of the zoning district in which the structure is located.
Section 400.3320. Accessory Uses. [R.O. 2009 §25-218; Ord. No.
2739 §43-83.9, 5-20-1985]
No use which is accessory to a principal non-conforming use shall continue
after such principal use shall cease or terminate.
Section 400.3330. Setback Lines. [R.O. 2009 §25-219; Ord. No. 2739
§43-84, 5-20-1985]
Section 400.3340. through Section 400.3380. (Reserved)
A. In addition to the provisions of Section 400.1840 regulating setbacks,
the following regulations shall apply to those non-conformities located
within prescribed setback lines from the rights-of-way of public or
approved private streets and highways.
1. No structure shall be constructed, reconstructed or structurally
altered in such a manner as to project into the area prescribed as a
setback from a public or approved private street or as established
by this Chapter.
2. The lawful use of any building, except signs, billboards or other
structures, all or part of which may otherwise be in violation of this
Chapter, may be continued, provided that no structural alterations
shall thereafter be made on the portion of the non-conforming
building located within the prescribed setback lines. New buildings
to replace destroyed or removed non-conforming buildings shall
conform to the provisions of this Chapter.
3. Any advertising sign, billboard or structure other than a building or
any stored material within the prescribed setback from the right-ofway
of a public or approved private street or highway shall be
removed within two (2) years from May 20, 1985.
Section
400.3300
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
400.3340
AO:692
Chapter 405
SUBDIVISIONS
Cross References — As to buildings and building regulations, ch. 500; as to
zoning, ch. 400.
State Law References — Zoning and planning, ch. 89, RSMo.; subdivisions,
§§89.400 et seq., RSMo.
Section
400.3340
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.3340
AO:693

ARTICLE I
In General
Section 405.010. Definitions.125 [R.O. 2009 §22-1; Code 1969 §37-1;
Ord. No. 3040 §1, 11-20-1989]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BUILDING LINE — A line on a plat between which line and street or private
place no buildings or structures may be erected.
LOT, FLAG — A residential lot with two (2) discernible portions as follows:
METES AND BOUNDS — The method used to describe a tract of urban
land intended to be used for dwelling or other purposes so that it can be
recorded in the County Recorder's office, as contrasted with the description
of a part of a properly approved and recorded subdivision plat by the lot and
block number.
PLAT — A map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan of the
subdivision is presented and which he/she submits for approval and intends
in final form to record.
SUBDIVISION —
Access portion: That portion of the lot having frontage on or abutting
a public road or street right-of-way and extending perpendicular
therefrom to the rear lot line of such lot.
1.
Appendage portion: That portion of the lot not fronting on or abutting
a public road or street right-of-way but connected to a public road or
street right-of-way by the access portion of the lot.
2.
1. The division of land into two (2) or more tracts, sites or parcels;
Dedication or establishment of a road, highway or street through a tract
of land regardless of area;
2.
3. Resubdivisions of land divided or platted into lots, sites or parcels.
125. State Law Reference — Subdivision defined, §89.300, RSMo.
Section
405.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.010
AO:695
Section 405.020. Procedure for Subdividing. [R.O. 2009 §22-2; Code
1969 §37-2; Ord. No. 3353 §1, 9-19-1994]
Any sale or contract of sale or agreement to purchase any lot or
subdivision of land by metes and bounds as defined in this Section
shall constitute a subdivision of land and require, prior to any sale or
contract of sale or agreement to purchase and before the delivery of a
deed, the submission of a plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission
as required by law; provided that this does not apply to the sale or
exchange of parcels of land to or between adjoining property owners
where such sale or exchange does not create additional lots or unless
such a sale has been approved by the Board of Aldermen. The term
shall be applicable and the provisions of this Chapter shall apply, any
precedent, custom or usage to the contrary notwithstanding, to the
creation of one (1) or more additional lots by the division, subdivision
or dividing up to property theretofore used as a single residential lot
upon which only a single residence had theretofore been situated.
A. In seeking to subdivide or resubdivide any tract or parcel of land within
the City, the owner or his/her authorized agent shall:
1. Confer with the Director of Planning and Development in order to
become thoroughly familiar with the City's regulations and
requirements affecting the territory in which the land in question
lies and shall obtain copies of all ordinances pertaining to
procedure and requirements for subdivision of land;
2. Submit to the Planning and Zoning Commission twenty (20) copies
of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision by either
mailing or delivering the twenty (20) copies to the Department of
Planning and Development in the City Hall;
3. The owner of a tract of land having three (3) or more acres or more
than one (1) parcel to be resubdivided having a combined acreage
of three (3) or more acres to be resubdivided shall deposit one
hundred dollars ($100.00) with the Department of Planning and
Development at the time a preliminary plat is filed. The one
hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be applicable as the land
subdivision permit fee required by this Chapter; provided that such
amount shall not be returned to the developer upon failure to meet
the requirements of this Chapter or submit a final plat in proper
form. The fee is for the purpose of providing funds for
administrative costs incidental to the processing of the plat by the
Board of Aldermen, the Planning and Zoning Commission and their
officers or employees, including review or improvement plans,
meetings, etc.
Section
405.010
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
405.030
AO:696
Section 405.030. Building and Repair Permits in Unapproved
Subdivisions. [R.O. 2009 §22-3; Code 1969 §37-3]
Building or repair permits shall not be issued for any structure located on a
lot in any subdivision, the plat of which has been prepared after March 16,
1964, but which has not been approved in accordance with the provisions
contained in this Chapter.
Section 405.040. Plat to Be Approved. [R.O. 2009 §22-4; Code 1969
§37-4]
No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded in the County
Recorder's office or have any validity until it shall have been approved in
the manner prescribed in this Chapter.
Section 405.050. Sale by Metes and Bounds. [R.O. 2009 §22-5; Code
1969 §37-5]
No person shall sell or attempt to sell a lot by metes and bounds in violation
of this Chapter.
Section 405.060. Variations and Exceptions. [R.O. 2009 §22-6; Code
1969 §37-6]
Whenever the strict enforcement of the regulations under this Chapter
would entail unusual, real and substantial difficulties or hardships, the
Planning and Zoning Commission and Board of Aldermen may vary or
modify them in such a way that the subdivider is allowed to plan and
develop his/her property and record a plat of the same without unjust
difficulties and expenses, but at the same time the public welfare and
interests of the City are fully protected and the general intent and spirit of
the regulations preserved.
Section 405.070. Changes or Amendments. [R.O. 2009 §22-7; Code
1969 §37-7]
Any regulations or provisions of this Chapter may be changed and amended
from time to time by the Board of Aldermen, provided that such changes or
amendments shall not become effective until after a study and report by the
City Planning and Zoning Commission.
Section 405.080. through Section 405.120. (Reserved)
Section
405.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.080
AO:697

ARTICLE II
Preliminary Plat
Section 405.130. Submission — Scale — Contents. [R.O. 2009
§22-21]
A. In seeking to subdivide land into building lots or to dedicate streets,
alleys or land for public use or to subdivide land into building lots,
together with the dedication or reservation of public or private streets
respectively, the preliminary plat shall be submitted at a scale of one
hundred (100) feet to the inch or larger scale and shall show:
1. The location of present property, Section, U.S. Survey and
Congressional Township lines and lines of incorporated areas,
sewer districts, public water supply and drainage districts, school
districts and other legally established districts, streets, buildings,
watercourses, tree masses and other existing features within the
area to be subdivided and similar facts regarding existing
conditions on land immediately adjacent thereto;
2. The proposed location and width of streets, alleys, lots, building
and setback lines and easements;
3. The location of open surface water drainage channels, together
with information regarding any necessary widening, straightening,
surfacing or other improvements of such channels, as well as
similar data regarding the location, size and type of construction of
any culverts, bridges or underground facilities for disposing of
either storm water or sanitary sewage; data regarding the area
served by the facilities, the estimated volume of runoff and other
similar information shall accompany the plans; any easements
necessary to accommodate the sewers or storm water drains or
underground construction shall be provided on the plat and the
subdivider shall also give satisfactory assurance to the Board of
Aldermen that the improvements necessary to accommodate the
disposal of both storm water and sanitary sewage shall be made;
4. The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded
and the name of the subdivider platting the tract;
5. The names and adjoining boundaries of all adjoining subdivisions
and the names of record owners of adjoining parcels of
unsubdivided land;
6. Contours with intervals of five (5) feet or less referred to sea level
datum;
7. North point, scale and date;
8. Any zoning districts that affect the property to be subdivided;
Section
405.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.130
AO:699
Section 405.140. Review by Planning and Zoning Commission. [R.O.
2009 §22-22; Ord. No. 3353 §2, 9-19-1994]
Section 405.150. through Section 405.190. (Reserved)
9. Grades and profiles of streets and plans or written and signed
statements regarding the grades of proposed streets and the width
and types of pavement, location, size, type of sanitary sewers or
other sewage disposal facilities, water mains and hydrants and
other utilities, storm water drainage facilities and other proposed
improvements, such as sidewalks, plantings and parks, and any
grading of individual lots.
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall study the preliminary plat
to see if it conforms with the minimum standards and requirements of
this Code or other ordinances of the City and shall approve or reject
such plat within sixty (60) days after submission of the plat to the
Commission. The "date of submission", for purposes of this Section,
shall be defined as the date of the first (1st) regular meeting of the
Planning and Zoning Commission at which the preliminary plat is first
reviewed by the Commission. If the Commission does not act within said
sixty (60) day period of time, the preliminary plat shall be deemed to be
approved by the Commission and shall be forwarded to the Board of
Aldermen for their review.
B. If the Planning and Zoning Commission does not approve the
preliminary plat of the subdivision, the Board of Aldermen may approve
the preliminary plat only by a two-thirds (?) vote of the membership of
the Board of Aldermen.
C. Approval of the preliminary plat by the Commission and/or the Board of
Aldermen does not constitute an acceptance of the subdivision final
plat. Preliminary plats not containing all of the data specified in Section
405.130 shall not be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and the Board of Aldermen.
Section
405.130
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
405.150
AO:700
ARTICLE III
Final Plat
Section 405.200. Submission, Accompanying Documents — Action
by Planning and Zoning Commission. [R.O. 2009 §22-36; Code 1969
§37-10]
The final plat on tracing cloth and five (5) black and white prints thereof
together with copies of any deed restrictions where such are too lengthy
to be shown on the plat and three (3) prints of certified plans showing
the improvements that have been constructed within the subdivision or,
a bond assuring construction of such improvements in accordance with
plans previously approved, shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Before approving the plat of all or part of a proposed
subdivision, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall require proof that
the improvements and revisions thereof required in this Chapter have been
satisfactorily completed. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall act
upon the final plat within thirty (30) days after it has been submitted unless
the subdivider agrees to an extension of this period.
Section 405.210. Style. [R.O. 2009 §22-37; Code 1969 §37-11]
The final plat is to be drawn at a scale of one hundred (100) feet or less
to the inch from an accurate survey and on one (1) or more sheets whose
maximum dimensions are twenty-nine (29) inches by thirty-four (34) inches.
In certain unusual instances where the subdivided area is of unusual size
or shape, the Planning and Zoning Commission may permit a variation in
the scale or size of the final plat. If more than two (2) sheets are required,
an index sheet of the same dimensions shall be filed showing the entire
subdivision on one (1) sheet together with all areas shown on other sheets.
Section 405.220. Contents. [R.O. 2009 §22-38; Code 1969 §37-12]
A. The final plat shall show:
1. The boundary lines of the area being subdivided with accurate
distances and bearings, also all Sections, U.S. Survey and
Congressional Township lines and the boundary lines of
incorporated areas, sewer, school and other legally established
districts within or adjoining the subdivided area;
2. The lines of all proposed streets and alleys with their width and
names;
3. The accurate outline of any property which is offered for dedication
for public use;
4. The line of departure of one street from another;
5. The lines of all adjoining lands and the lines of adjacent streets and
ways with their width and names;
Section
405.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.220
AO:701
Section 405.230. Approval. [R.O. 2009 §22-39; Code 1969 §37-13]
Section 405.240. through Section 405.250. (Reserved)
6. All lot lines and an identification system for all lots and blocks;
7. Building lines and easements for rights-of-way provided for public
use, services or utilities with figures showing their dimensions;
8. All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating
boundaries of subdivisions, lots, streets, alleys, easements for
building lines and of any other area for public or private use. The
linear dimensions are to be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot;
9. Radii, arcs and chords, points of tangency, central angles for all
curvilinear streets and radii for all rounded corners;
10. All survey monuments and benchmarks together with their
descriptions.
A. The same procedure shall be followed with respect to the final plat as is
specified with respect to the preliminary plat, including the provisions
with respect to time within which such plat shall be approved and after
such final plat has been approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, they shall initial or sign a copy of such final plat and
deliver to the Department of Planning and Development's office the
original tracing and a copy thereof, together with a letter indicating
their approval thereof.
B. At the first (1st) meeting of the Board of Aldermen thereafter, such final
plat shall be presented to the Board of Aldermen for its approval or
rejection.
C. If the Planning and Zoning Commission does not approve the final plat
of the subdivision, the Board of Aldermen may approve the plat only by
a two-thirds (?) vote of the membership of the Board of Aldermen. Two
(2) copies of all final plats shall be filed in the office of the Department
of Planning and Development after approval by the Board of Aldermen.
D. If the final plat conforms to the approved preliminary plat and if the
necessary improvements are constructed in accordance with the
approved plans therefor or a satisfactory bond or escrow agreement is
submitted assuring their construction in accordance with the approved
plans, the final plat will be approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the Board of Aldermen.
Section
405.220
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
405.240
AO:702
ARTICLE IV
Improvements
Section 405.260. Permit. [R.O. 2009 §22-51; Code 1969 §§37-14 —
37-16]
Section 405.270. Installation in Unapproved Subdivision. [R.O.
2009 §22-52; Code 1969 §37-17]
The Board of Aldermen shall not permit any public improvements over
which it has any control to be made or any money expended for
improvements in any area that has been subdivided or upon any street that
has been platted after March 16, 1964, unless such subdivision or street has
been approved in accordance with the provisions contained in this Chapter.
Section 405.280. Employment and Responsibility of Registered
Professional Engineer. [R.O. 2009 §22-53; Code 1969 §37-18]
A registered professional engineer shall be employed by the developer to
design the improvement plans and such engineer shall be responsible for
the submission of improvement design details, specifications, staking out
and supervising the installation of such improvements.
A. A subdivision improvement construction permit shall be required of all
land developers prior to the installation of any street paving, storm
drainage facilities, sanitary sewer facilities or any other improvements
on any rights-of-way in subdivisions within the City.
B. A permit fee based upon an estimated inspection charge of five dollars
($5.00) per hour for each hour that an improvement installation
inspection shall take place shall be required to be paid before the
issuance of a construction permit.
C. An inspection fee of five dollars ($5.00) per one hundred (100) lineal
feet of road or street and five dollars ($5.00) per two hundred (200)
lineal feet of storm water facilities shall be charged as an inspection
charge. The amount of inspection time for permit purposes shall be
estimated by the engineer employed by the City in accordance with the
plans approved but such estimate shall not be conclusive as to the
payment required for actual inspections made, but shall be adjusted
upon completion of the improvements to reflect the actual inspection
time involved.
D. A construction permit shall not be issued until after complete plans and
specifications for the specific subdivision improvements are on file with
the Department of Planning and Development.
Section
405.260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.290
AO:703
Section 405.290. Preparation of Plans and Specifications for
Improvements. [R.O. 2009 §22-54; Code 1969 §37-19]
Receipt of a copy of the preliminary plat signed by the Chairman of the
Planning and Zoning Commission or receipt of a letter of approval of the
preliminary plat subject to conditions is authorization for the subdivider to
proceed with the preparation of detailed plans and specifications for the
minimum improvements required in this Chapter. Prior to construction of
any improvements required in this Chapter or to the submission of any
bond, the subdivider shall furnish the Planning and Zoning Commission and
the Board of Aldermen all plans, information and data necessary for the
improvements and shall secure approval of the detailed improvement plans
and secure a permit for their construction in accordance with the approved
drawings in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
Section 405.300. Examination and Report of Director of Planning
and Development. [R.O. 2009 §22-55; Code 1969 §37-20]
The Director of Planning and Development shall examine the preliminary
plat, improvement plans and final plat and report to the Board of Aldermen,
the Planning and Zoning Commission, Public Works Department and Fire
Department whether or not the design, improvements for paving, storm
water facilities, sanitary sewerage facilities, etc., are reasonably adequate
and in proper condition to function effectively.
Section 405.310. Improvements Required — Bond. [R.O. 2009
§22-56; Code 1969 §37-31]
Before the final plat of any subdivided area shall be approved and recorded,
the subdivider shall make and install the improvements described in this
Article. In lieu of final completion of the minimum improvements before
the plat is finally approved, the subdivider may post a bond or escrow
agreement, approved by the City Attorney and City Treasurer, with the City,
which bond or escrow will ensure the City that the improvements will be
completed by the subdivider within two (2) years after final approval of the
plan. The amount of the bond shall not be less than the estimated cost of
the improvements and the amount of the estimate shall be approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission. If the improvements are not completed
within the specified time, the Board of Aldermen may use the bond or any
necessary portion thereof to complete same.
Section 405.320. Minimum Improvements. [R.O. 2009 §22-57; Code
1969 §37-28]
A. The minimum improvements installed in any subdivision before the plat
can be finally approved shall be in accordance with the following
paragraphs:
1. The subdivider shall grade and improve all new streets and alleys,
if any, within the subdivision area and such additional street rightsof-
way as may be necessary along existing dedicated public streets
Section
405.290
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
405.320
AO:704
which have been accepted for maintenance and are to be improved
by the developer. The paving on such new streets and alleys shall
be in accordance with the standards of the City. Grading for streets
and alleys including necessary clearing and grubbing, removal of
existing structures, excavating, filling, spreading and compacting
shall be in accordance with the requirements set forth in this
Article and in conformity with approved lines, grades, slopes and
typical cross sections.
a. Material incorporated in fills shall be free of vegetable matter,
frozen material and other deleterious substance and shall
contain no large rocks or lumps.
b. Areas to be graded by cutting or filling shall be rough graded
to within two-tenths (.2) of a foot of the accepted finished
elevation after necessary allowance has been made for the
thickness of pavement and base courses and other
installations.
c. All tree stumps, masonry and other obstructions shall be
removed to a depth of at least two (2) feet below the top of the
finished subgrade.
d. Fill material shall be placed in layers which when compacted
shall not exceed six (6) inches. Each layer shall be spread
evenly and shall be blade mixed during spreading to ensure
uniformity. Each layer of a fill shall be compacted by means of
tamping or sheeps-foot rollers, multiple-wheel pneumatic tired
rollers, successive passes of heavy earth-moving equipment or
the equivalent. Rolling of each layer shall be continuous over
its entire area and sufficient passes of the rolling equipment
shall be made to ensure the desired maximum practical density
has been obtained. In general, when the material being
compacted ceases to shove and push under the moving
compaction equipment or, in the case of tamping foot rollers,
the roller "has walk out", sufficient density has been obtained.
In no case, shall the density of the fill material be less than
eighty percent (80%) of the American Association of State
Highway Officials Standard T 99-49.
e. The top six (6) to eight (8) inches of finished subgrade, whether
on a cut section or a fill section, shall be compacted to a density
of at least ninety percent (90%) of the American Association of
State Highway Officials Standard T 99-49. The compacted
subgrade shall be continuous for at least one (1) foot beyond
the pavement edge or beyond the back of curbs.
f. Finished grading shall provide profiles and cross sections
reasonably satisfactory to the Department of Planning and
Development. Graded slopes for fill sections shall not be
steeper than the Department of Planning and Development
Section
405.320
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.320
AO:705
determines to be reasonably satisfactory and cut slopes shall
be consistent with the physical conditions at any given cut
section.
g. Prior to the application of base and surface course materials,
the City shall inspect the grading for streets and alleys to
determine that the requirements for grading and other
requirements hereof have been fulfilled. It shall be the
responsibility of the subdivider to notify the Department of
Planning and Development not less than forty-eight (48) hours
in advance that work is to be ready for inspection.
h. The paving crown and curb on end of such new streets and
alleys shall be of a character suitable for the expected traffic
and in harmony with similar improvements in the surrounding
areas. Where asphaltic macadam surfacing is used, the
specifications shall include a seven (7) inch, two (2) course
waterbound macadam base and a two (2) inch asphaltic
penetration or asphaltic concrete surface in accordance with
the standard specifications of the County Highway
Department. Concrete curb and gutter of the lip type having a
width of two (2) feet shall be required along the edges of
asphaltic streets with the curb and gutter to be included in the
width of paving specified in Section 405.360. Concrete
pavements shall be installed with a minimum thickness of six
(6) inches in accordance with the standard specifications of the
City with the curb and gutter being an integral part of the
concrete pavement.
2. The subdivider shall, whenever necessary, grade any portion of the
property subdivided into lots so that each lot will be usable and
suitable for the erection of residential or other structures thereon.
3. If outlets are within reasonable distance, the subdivider shall
install storm water and sanitary sewers and provide a sanitary
sewer connection for each lot. Such installation shall be in
accordance with the standards and specifications of the City and
before the improvements are started, the plan therefor shall be
approved by the engineer of the sewer district in the area within
which the subdivision lies. If no outlets are within reasonable
distance, the subdivider shall make such provisions for sanitation
as will satisfy the City and County health officials and before the
plat shall be approved, the subdivider shall present to the Planning
and Zoning Commissioner an order from the City and County
health officials showing that the provisions will properly care for
and protect the health, safety and welfare of the existing and
probable future population within the subdivision and surrounding
area.
4. The detailed plans for the proper disposal of storm water affecting
the proposed subdivision shall show the location of all open
Section
405.320
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
405.320
AO:706
Section 405.330. Relation to Adjoining Street System. [R.O. 2009
§22-58; Code 1969 §37-21; Ord. No. 3148 §1, 7-1-1991]
The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provisions for
the proper location and width of major streets. The subdivider may be
required to continue certain adjoining streets through the area that is being
subdivided, whenever the same is necessary to provide for local movement
of vehicles or to enable adjoining property to be properly subdivided.
Northeast corner of Hanley Industrial Court at 1000 Hanley Industrial
Court.
Northwest corner of Hanley Industrial Court at 8400 Hanley Industrial
Court.
Southeast corner of Hanley Industrial Court at 900 Hanley Industrial
Court.
Section 405.340. Dedication of Streets. [R.O. 2009 §22-59; Code
1969 §37-22]
Where streets, places and parks are established as private ways and areas
rather than dedicated to public use or to the City, adequate provision shall
be made in the deed restrictions accompanying the plat to dedicate such
ways and areas to a subdivision board of trustees and to make proper
provision for the board of trustees to have the power of assessment of
property owners in the subdivision for the supervision, maintenance and
drainage channels, together with such improvements which may
be necessary, such as widening, straightening, surfacing or other
improvements of such channels, reconstruction or construction of
new bridges, culverts and the construction of all underground
enclosed pipe sewers and surface accessories necessary to
efficiently carry off the storm water and prevent ponding on the
surface of the proposed subdivision. The plans for these facilities
shall be shown both in plan and profile with details of all necessary
accessories. The datum regarding the area to be served by the
facilities and the estimated runoff from the area tributary to the
facilities beyond the subdivision shall accompany the detailed
plans.
5. The subdivider shall install water mains and fire hydrants in the
subdivided area. Such installation shall be in accordance with the
standards and specifications of the County water company and the
location of the hydrants shall first be approved by the Fire Chief
and the State Inspection Bureau.
B. It is also desirable to install other improvements such as trees, electric
lines, gas mains and similar facilities in any subdivision. When the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Board of Aldermen deem it
necessary, they may require that any such improvements shall be
installed before the plat is approved.
Section
405.320
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.340
AO:707
construction or reconstruction of improvements on such ways, streets or
areas. Alleys should not be provided in residential districts.
Section 405.350. Street Names. [R.O. 2009 §22-60; Code 1969
§37-29]
Section 405.360. Street Widths. [R.O. 2009 §22-61; Code 1969
§37-23]
A. All subdivision names and the names of all streets contained in
subdivisions shall be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission
prior to the final approval by such Commission. The Planning and
Zoning Commission shall not approve any subdivision name or any
street name which is confusingly similar to any subdivision or street
name in the City or County of St. Louis. The applicant shall, prior to the
final approval of the subdivision plat by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, submit the certificate of the St. Louis postal authorities
certifying that the subdivision name and the street names employed in
the subdivision are not the same and are not confusingly similar to
subdivision or street names otherwise in use in the City or County of St.
Louis. In its discretion, the Planning and Zoning Commission may
accept other evidence satisfactory to it to the same effect.
B. Streets that obviously are in alignment with others already existing and
named shall bear the names of the existing streets.
A. The minimum widths of rights-of-way for streets within the City shall be
as follows:
1. The street widths for major highways shall be not less than seventysix
(76) feet or as may be approved by the Board of Aldermen.
2. The minimum widths of rights-of-way for two-family or apartment
developments shall be sixty (60) feet.
3. The minimum widths of rights-of-way for single-family
developments, where lots have a frontage of less than one hundred
(100) feet, shall be fifty (50) feet.
4. The minimum widths of rights-of-way for single-family
developments, where lots have a frontage of one hundred (100) feet
or more, shall be forty (40) feet.
5. Street paving for seventy-six (76) foot rights-of-way shall be sixtyfour
(64) feet wide from outside of curb to outside of curb.
Street paving widths for sixty (60) foot rights-of-way shall be not
less than thirty (30) feet from outside of curb to outside of curb.
Street paving widths for fifty (50) foot rights-of-way shall be not
less than thirty (30) feet from outside of curb to outside of curb.
Section
405.340
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
405.360
AO:708
Paving of streets in industrial subdivisions or carrying heavy traffic
shall be not less than thirty (30) feet wide from outside of curb to
outside of curb, with the necessary utility easements on each side
or, as may be approved by the Board of Aldermen.
Local access and minor streets shall have rights-of-way not less
than forty (40) feet wide and paving widths of not less than twentysix
(26) feet from outside of curb to outside of curb or as approved
by the Board of Aldermen.
6. When streets adjoin unsubdivided property, a half-street, no less
than thirty (30) feet in width, may be dedicated and whenever
subdivided property adjoins a half-street, the remainder of the
street shall be dedicated.
7. Where tracts, parcels or lots with frontage of more than three
hundred (300) feet are subdivided or resubdivided along an
existing width of paving of less than twenty-six (26) feet, the
developer shall be required to add a two (2) foot concrete curb and
gutter along existing frontage in accordance with standard
specifications of the City and the provisions of this Article and shall
install necessary concrete or asphalt paving material in accordance
with the City's standards between the centerline of the existing
pavement and the outside curb or provide a minimum outside width
of paving and including curb of twenty-six (26) feet. Such paving
material shall be in conformance with the classification of the
existing paving. Where the right-of-way width of an existing minor
public street is less than forty (40) feet, the developer shall provide
for the dedication of one-half (½) of the incomplete width to allow
for the installation of the necessary paving and gutters.
8. The developer of any subdivision frontage on any opposite side of a
street after right-of-way and paving has been installed in
accordance with Subsection (A) of this Section shall be required to
install an additional section of concrete curb and gutter and
conforming pavement to provide widths of pavement and rights-ofway
as required in this Section.
9. Where tracts, parcels or lots with frontage of more than three
hundred (300) feet are subdivided or resubdivided along an
existing major public street, except for maintenance, with an
existing width of paving of less than thirty-six (36) feet, the
developer shall be required to add a two (2) foot concrete curb and
gutter along the frontage in accordance with the standard
specification of the City and the provisions of this Article and shall
install necessary concrete or asphalt paving material in accordance
with the City's standards between the centerline of the existing
pavement and the outside curb to provide a minimum outside width
of paving of thirty-six (36) feet, which includes curbs and gutters.
The paving material shall be in conformity with the classification of
the existing paving. Where the right-of-way width of an existing
Section
405.360
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.360
AO:709
Section 405.370. Easements. [R.O. 2009 §22-62; Code 1969 §37-24]
Where alleys are not provided, easements of not less than five (5) feet in
width shall be provided on each side of all rear lot lines, and side lines
where necessary, for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers,
gas, water and heat mains. Easements of greater width may be required
along lines or across where necessary for the extension of main sewers and
similar utilities.
Section 405.380. Blocks. [R.O. 2009 §22-63; Code 1969 §37-25]
Section 405.390. Lots. [R.O. 2009 §22-64; Code 1969 §37-26; Ord.
No. 3040 §2, 11-20-1989]
major public street is less than fifty (50) feet, the developer shall
provide for the dedication of one-half (½) of the incomplete width
to allow for installation of necessary paving and gutters.
10. The developer of any subdivision or resubdivision of frontage on
the opposite side of a street, after right-of-way and paving have
been installed in accordance with Subsection (A) of this Section,
shall be required to install an additional two (2) feet of concrete
curb and gutter and conforming paving to provide a total of thirtysix
(36) foot width of paving and an additional right-of-way to
complete the fifty (50) foot width.
B. A developer or subdivider shall submit plans, profiles and elevations of
all streets which he/she is required to pave or install curbs or gutters
under the preceding Subsection of this Section.
A. No block shall be longer than fifteen hundred (1,500) feet between
street lines.
B. Blocks of seven hundred fifty (750) feet in length shall have a crosswalk
near the center of the block. The right-of-way for such walks shall not
be less than ten (10) feet in width.
C. In platting residential lots containing from six thousand (6,000) square
feet to fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, it is recommended that
the depth of the block not exceed three hundred (300) feet.
D. Where it is desirable to subdivide a tract of land, which because of its
size or location does not permit an allotment directly related to a
normal street arrangement, there may be established one (1) or more
places. Such a place may be in the form of a court, a dead-end street or
other arrangement; provided that proper access shall be given to all
lots from a dedicated place, street or court. If such a place is more than
two hundred fifty (250) feet in length, it shall terminate in an open
space, preferably circular, having a minimum radius of fifty (50) feet.
Except in unusual instances no dead-end street or place shall exceed
one thousand (1,000) feet in length.
Section
405.360
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
405.390
AO:710
Section 405.400. Building Lines. [R.O. 2009 §22-65; Code 1969
§37-27]
Building lines shall be shown on all lots intended for residential use of any
character and on commercial lots immediately adjoining residential area.
A. All side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight street lines or
radial to curved street lines unless a variation to this rule will give a
better street and lot plan. Lots with double frontage shall be avoided.
B. The minimum width of residential lots measured along the front lot line
shall be as required by this Article; provided that where such lots front
upon a cul-de-sac or curved road or street having a radius of two
hundred (200) feet or less, the minimum width of the lot may be
measured at the building line; provided that the width at the street line
shall be not less than fifty percent (50%) of the width required in the
zoning district, with the width being measured on the arc of the street
line.
C. The minimum area of any lot in a subdivision shall not be less than the
minimum lot area requirements of the zoning district in which the area
is located. Lots with an area larger than the minimum requirements are
desirable. The lots shall also have a width and depth entirely adequate
to provide the necessary yard regulations of the zoning regulations.
D. Where corner lots rear upon lots facing the side street, the corner lots
shall have extra width sufficient to permit the establishment of front
building lines on both the front and the side of the lots adjoining the
streets. Extra width should be provided on all corner lots irrespective of
whether they rear upon lots facing the side streets.
E. Lots on major highway intersections and at all other acute angle
intersections which, in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, are likely to be dangerous to traffic movement shall have a
radius of twenty (20) feet at the street corner. On business lots a chord
may be substituted for the circular arc. Where grade separation
structures are proposed at the intersection of major highways, the lots
and improvements in the subdivision shall be arranged so as to make
adequate provisions for such structures.
F. All residential lots shall have at least ninety percent (90%) of the
maximum width of the front building line as lot frontage on the street
right-of-way line, except for lots with frontage on cul-de-sacs, which lots
shall have at least fifty percent (50%) of the maximum width of the front
building line as lot frontage on the street right-of-way line.
G. No flag lot shall be platted unless the access portion of the lot meets the
minimum dimension and area requirements or lots in the particular
zoning district. No part of any residential dwelling structure nor any
accessory structure shall be constructed upon the appendage portion of
a flag lot.
Section
405.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.400
AO:711
Such building lines shall not be less than required by the zoning regulations.
Provisions shall be made by deed requiring all enclosed parts of the building
to be set back of such building lines.
Section 405.410. Fire Hydrants. [R.O. 2009 §22-66; Code 1969
§37-30]
Section 405.420. Boundary Adjustments. [R.O. 2009 §22-67; Ord.
No. 3354 §1, 9-19-1994]
A. The subdivider shall obtain from the State Inspection Bureau a listing of
the recommendations for the installation of fire hydrants within the
proposed subdivision or development.
B. No building permit shall be issued by the Building Official until the
provisions of this Section have been complied with.
C. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any previously platted
subdivision or development where there has been any previous
payment, even though of a lesser sum, made to the City Treasurer for
such fire hydrant rental by the subdivider or developer.
A. To facilitate the transfer of minor portions of property between adjacent
property owners and to allow adjustments to be made to lot lines of
platted lots or other lawful parcels, the City Administrator may approve
a minor adjustment to the property lines providing the following
conditions are met:
1. After the boundary adjustment, all parcels of property involved in
the adjustment comply with all requirements and restrictions set
forth in the Revised Code of Ordinances for the City including,
without limitation, Chapter 400 and this Chapter 405;
2. There is no change in zoning of any of the parcels of property
involved in the adjustment; and
3. No additional lot shall be created by any boundary adjustment.
B. Any person desiring a boundary adjustment as described in Section
405.420(A) shall submit the following to the City Administrator:
1. A written request for the boundary adjustment, signed by all
owners of the properties involved in the adjustment, as shown on
the deeds described in Subsection (B)(2) below;
2. A copy of the deeds for the parcels involved in the boundary
adjustment;
3. A plat showing the parcels as each exists before the boundary
adjustment;
4. Three (3) copies of a plat, in recordable form, showing the parcels
after the boundary adjustment, including a legal description of
Section
405.400
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
405.420
AO:712
each parcel, a certification by a licensed surveyor that the plat
meets or exceeds the current Missouri land surveying
requirements and standards and containing the following approval
form;
The undersigned, City Administrator of the City of Brentwood,
Missouri, hereby approves the boundary adjustment shown on
this plat in accordance with Section 405.420 of the Revised
Code of the City of Brentwood, Missouri.
City Administrator
Date:
5. A filing fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
C. If all of the conditions indicated in Sections 405.420(A) and 405.420(B)
have been met, the City Administrator shall approve the plat by signing
the plat accordingly. The plat approved by the City Administrator shall
be filed with the St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds within sixty (60)
days after approval by the City Administrator. If any plat is not filed
within this period, the approval shall expire.
D. Should the City Administrator decline to approve the plat as submitted,
the petitioner is entitled to appeal the City Administrator's decision to
the Board of Aldermen. The Board of Aldermen may require that a
formal subdivision process be initiated as a prerequisite of their
approval.
Section
405.420
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.420
AO:713
Chapter 410
SIGNS AND ADVERTISING DEVICES
Cross References — As to buildings and building regulations, ch. 500; as to
posting notices and signs, §215.920; as to zoning, ch. 400.
State Law References — Billboards, §§226.500 et seq., RSMo.
Section 410.010. Intent. [Ord. No. 4609 §1, 3-2-2015126]
Section 410.020. Applicability — Effect. [Ord. No. 4609 §1,
3-2-2015]
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all signs in the City, as herein
defined, unless otherwise provided by this Chapter. Every sign shall comply
with all other applicable ordinances of the City. In case of a conflict between
provisions of this Chapter and other applicable provisions, the more
restrictive shall govern. Any sign not specifically provided for herein as a
permitted sign or a prohibited sign shall be designated as a permitted sign
or a prohibited sign by the Director consistent with Section 410.010's stated
intent, and the most closely applicable provisions of this Chapter. If said
sign is designated as a permitted sign, then said sign shall be subject to all
limitations and provisions stated herein for a permitted sign which is most
similar to said sign.
Section 410.030. Definitions and Interpretation. [Ord. No. 4609 §1,
3-2-2015]
Words and phrases used in this Chapter shall have the meanings set forth
in this Section. Words and phrases not defined in this Section, but defined
in the Zoning Ordinance of the Brentwood City Code, shall be given the
A. It is the intent of this Chapter to regulate and control the location,
erection, number and maintenance of signs and matters relating
thereto within the City of Brentwood in order to promote public safety,
health and general welfare of the community, without infringing upon
the rights granted by the First Amendment to the Constitution of the
United States of America. These regulations are specifically designed
to:
1. Provide for uniform regulation and orderly development of signs
consistent with established polices and ordinances of the City;
2. Further the goals and policies of the City Comprehensive Plan;
3. Prohibit hazardous and dangerous signs; and
4. Provide a desirable and attractive living and work environment
through harmonious and uniform signage.
126. Editor's Note: Section 1 of this Chapter superseded former Ch. 410, Signs and Advertising
Devices, as adopted by Ord. No. 3605 §1 (Exh. A), 8-17-1998, as amended.
Section
405.420
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
410.030
AO:714
meanings set forth in such ordinance. Principles for computing sign area
and sign height are contained in Section 410.130. All other words and
phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise. Section headings or captions are for reference
purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this Chapter.
ANIMATED SIGN — Any sign designed to use movement or change of
lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene.
BANNER — A permanent sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that
is mounted on a building or pole.
BEACON — Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere
or directed at one (1) or more points not on the same zone lot as the light
source; also, any light with one (1) or more beams that rotate or move,
including strobe lights.
BILLBOARD — Any sign which is:
BUILDING SIGN — Any sign attached to any part of a building, as
contrasted with a freestanding sign.
CANOPY — A roof-like structure extending from a building entry that
provides pedestrians protection from the weather, which is not intended to
be driven under.
CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy,
or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance,
window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign or portion thereof with characters,
letters or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering
the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes
more than eight (8) times per day shall be considered an animated sign and
not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this Chapter. A sign on which the
only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or
temperature shall be considered a "time and temperature" portion of a sign
and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this Chapter.
COMMERCIAL STREET FRONTAGE — Property frontage on any of the
following: Brentwood Boulevard, Eager Road (between Hanley Road and
Brentwood Boulevard), Strassner Drive, Hanley Industrial Court, Hanley
Industrial Drive, Hanley Road, Manchester Road and any street in a
commercially developed area deemed a commercial street by the Board of
Aldermen.
COMPREHENSIVE SIGN PLAN — A narrative and graphic depiction of the
proposed or existing signs on each zone lot.
1. Located on a lot not containing a building;
Visible from any point of the traveled ways of an interstate highway;
and
2.
Not a roof sign, post or standard sign, monument sign or a projecting
sign.
3.
Section
410.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.030
AO:715
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — A temporary sign erected on the premises on
which construction is taking place, during the period of such construction.
DIRECTOR — The Planning and Zoning Administrator of the City or his or
her designee.
ELECTION SEASON — The period from thirty (30) days prior to any election
voted in by the residents of Brentwood until three (3) days after that
election.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN — Any sign, or portion of a sign, that
displays an electronic image, which may or may not include text, where
the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by
electronic processes. Electronic message signs include computer
programmable, microprocessor, or controlled electronic displays, and the
images can be produced from LED technology, fiber optics, light bulbs, or
other illumination devices within the display area. Electronic message signs
do not include projected images or messages projected onto buildings or
other objects.
ERECT — To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix and shall
also include the painting of wall signs.
FACING OR SURFACE — The surface of the sign upon, against or through
which the message is displayed or illustrated on the sign.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign supported by structures or supports that
are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from
any building or other structure.
GROUND SIGN — Any sign not attached to a building and which is
supported by uprights, posts, braces or a solid base not attached to any part
of a building. This category does not include a post sign. There is no space
between the bottom of the ground sign and the ground.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign which has characters, letters, figures,
designs or outlines illuminated by electric light or luminous tubes as part of
the sign proper.
INCIDENTAL SIGN — A sign which is too small to be legible from a position
off the premises.
LOGO — A letter, character or symbol used to represent a person,
corporation or business enterprise.
LOT — Any piece or parcel of land or a portion of a subdivision, the
boundaries of which have been established by some legal instrument of
record, that is recognized and intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer
of ownership.
MARQUEE — Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a
building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building,
generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign attached to in any manner, or made a part of,
a marquee.
Section
410.030
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
410.030
AO:716
NON-CONFORMING SIGN — Any sign that does not conform to the
requirements of this Chapter.
OFF-SITE SIGN — A sign located on property not owned or leased by the
owner of the sign.
ON-SITE SIGN — A sign located on property owned or leased by the owner
of the sign.
PENNANT — Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether
or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or
string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
PERSON — Any association, company, corporation, firm, organization or
partnership, singular or plural, of any kind.
POLE SIGN — See "post sign."
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including,
but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels;
signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons
used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or
painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless
said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.
POST SIGN — Any sign not attached to a building or structure and
supported by one (1) or more stationary poles, posts or standards. A post
sign is also known as a "pylon sign" or "pole sign."
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The building in which is conducted the principal
use of the zone lot on which it is located. Zone lots with multiple principal
uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages
and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings.
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a
manner that its leading edge extends more than twelve (12) inches beyond
the surface of such building or wall.
PYLON SIGN — See "post sign."
RESIDENTIAL SIGN — Any sign located on property used for a residential
use or a sign located on vacant property within a residential district.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the
roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically
above the highest portion of the roof.
ROOF SIGN, INTEGRAL — Any sign erected or constructed as an integral
part or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design,
such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of
the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the
roof by a space of more than six (6) inches.
SETBACK — The distance from the property line to the nearest part of
the applicable building, structure, or sign, measured perpendicularly to the
property line.
Section
410.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.030
AO:717
SIGN — Any device, fixture, placard or structure that uses any color, form,
graphic, illumination, symbol or writing to advertise, announce the purpose
of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate
information of any kind.
SIGNAGE PLAN — A narrative and graphic depiction of the proposed or
existing signs on each zone lot.
STREET — A strip of land or way subject to vehicular traffic (as well
as pedestrian traffic) that provides direct or indirect access to property,
including, but not limited to, alleys, avenues, boulevards, courts, drives,
highways, lanes, places, roads, terraces, trails, or other thoroughfares.
STREET FRONTAGE — The distance for which a lot line of a zone lot adjoins
a public street, from one (1) lot line intersecting said street to the furthest
distant lot line intersecting the same street.
STRUCTURAL TRIM — The molding, battens, cappings, nailing strips,
latticing and platforms which are attached to the sign structure.
SUSPENDED SIGN — A sign that is suspended from the underside of a
horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.
TEMPORARY SIGN OR BANNER — Any sign or banner that is used only
temporarily, meaning for a period of less than four (4) weeks, and is not
permanently mounted. Any sign displayed for a period greater than four (4)
weeks is considered a permanent sign.
WALL SIGN — Any sign attached parallel to, but within twelve (12) inches
of, a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the
limits of an outside wall of any building or structure which is supported by
such wall or building, and which displays only one (1) sign surface.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign affixed to the inside of an exterior window or glass
door.
ZONE LOT — A parcel of land in single ownership that is of sufficient size to
meet minimum zoning requirements for area, coverage, and use, and that
can provide such yards and other open spaces as required by the zoning
regulations.
ZONING DISTRICT — As described in the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 400)
and designated on the Zoning District Map, for the City of Brentwood,
with the exception of institutional use which includes public/private schools,
religious organizations and not-for-profit organizations. Institutional use is
not a zoning district in the City of Brentwood.
Section 410.040. Signs Allowed in all Zoning Districts — No
Building Permit Required. [Ord. No. 4609 §1, 3-2-2015]
A. The following signs shall be exempt from regulation under this Chapter:
1. The erection, construction and maintenance of official traffic signs,
signals, and any public notice or warning required by a valid and
applicable Federal, State or local law, regulation or ordinance.
Section
410.030
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
410.040
AO:718
Section 410.050. Signs Allowed on Private Property with and
Without Permits. [Ord. No. 4609 §1, 3-2-2015]
2. Signs for the control or direction of traffic and other authorized
public purposes related to the promotion of the health, safety and
welfare of the general public as required by the City or other
governmental authority.
3. Any lot in a residentially zoned area that is on the market for sale or
lease shall be permitted one (1) additional sign of six (6) square feet
per sign face and a maximum of two (2) sign faces.
a. Institutional uses within a residentially zoned area that are on
the market for sale or lease shall be permitted one (1)
additional sign of sixteen (16) square feet per sign face and a
maximum of two (2) sign faces.
4. Any lot in a commercial zoned area that is on the market for sale or
lease shall be permitted one (1) additional sign of sixteen (16)
square feet per sign face and a maximum of two (2) sign faces.
5. One (1) ground sign of six (6) square feet or less in all residential
districts, provided, in each instance, that any such sign is located
on private property with the owner's permission. Additional ground
signs are permitted under this Chapter during the election season,
not to exceed the total number of questions or candidates on the
ballot for the ensuing election.
6. Ground signs, sixteen (16) square feet or less, are permitted under
this Chapter for commercial and industrial zoning districts during
the election season, not to exceed the total number of questions or
candidates on the ballot for the ensuing election.
7. Incidental signs.
8. Traffic control signs on private property, such as stop, yield and
similar signs, the face of which meet Department of Transportation
standards.
A. Signs shall be allowed on private property in the City in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter.
1. Every property shall have the street address prominently
displayed, in a size which permits reading from the street, at a
location immediately adjacent to or above every entry or exit door.
No permit is necessary for this type of signage.
2. Permitted signage subject to the size and location limitations
detailed in this Chapter:
a. Residential district signage.
Section
410.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.050
AO:719
(1) A sign up to one (1) square foot in area mounted on the
wall next to the main entry door subject to issuance of a
sign permit (suggested use: home occupation sign).
(2) Residential subdivision or development monument signs.
Two permanent signs, not exceeding thirty-two (32)
square feet in size per face, shall be allowed per
development. Exception: Where the development has
access to two (2) or more streets, or has more than one (1)
entrance on one (1) street, such signs shall be allowed at
each entrance. Such signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet in
height from the surrounding grade to the highest point of
the sign (suggested use: subdivision or development
identification signage, e.g. York Woods). A sign permit is
required.
(3) Temporary signage as described in Section 410.110. A sign
permit is required.
(4) On-site construction signs for developments with one (1)
to two (2) lots, with only one (1) such sign per lot not to
exceed six (6) square feet in gross sign area per face with a
maximum of two (2) faces. Such a sign shall not be erected
in a public right-of-way and shall be removed no later than
ten (10) days after the receipt of an occupancy permit for a
building or development or ten (10) days after completion
of the work if no occupancy permit is required. A sign
permit is required.
(5) For developments with three (3) lots or greater, one (1)
sign, not to exceed forty-eight (48) square feet in gross
sign area per face with a maximum of two (2) faces if
placed back to back. For developments with three (3) lots
or greater with two (2) street frontages, either one (1)
forty-eight-square-foot sign with a maximum of two (2)
faces if placed back to back, or one (1) V-shaped sign with
two (2) faces not to exceed forty-eight (48) square feet per
face, located where the two (2) street frontages intersect
are allowed. For developments with three (3) lots or
greater, one additional sign per lot having a maximum size
of eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches. For all
other sign configurations for developments with three (3)
lots or greater, on-site construction signs are subject to
review and approval by the Public Works Committee. A
sign permit is required.
b. Signage for all other zoning districts or uses.
(1) Ground signs for commercial developments (suggested
use: development identification sign). A sign permit is
required.
Section
410.050
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
410.050
AO:720
Section 410.060. Signs in the Public Right-Of-Way. [Ord. No. 4609
§1, 3-2-2015]
(2) Temporary signage as described in Section 410.110. A sign
permit is required.
(3) One (1) wall sign per commercial street frontage. A sign
permit is required. See Section 410.120(A)(2).
(4) One (1) ground sign per commercial street frontage.
Under certain circumstances described in Section
410.120(A)(5)(a), a projecting sign may be substituted for
the ground sign. A sign permit is required.
(5) Window signage subject to the limitations of Section
410.120(A)(4).
(6) Incidental signage. A sign permit is required.
(7) On-site construction signs, with only one (1) such sign per
entire development not to exceed seventy-two (72) square
feet in gross sign area shall be permitted. Such signs shall
be allowed to have two (2) seventy-two-square-foot faces if
placed back-to-back or in a "V" shape. Such a sign shall not
be erected in a public right-of-way and shall be removed
ten (10) days after the receipt of an occupancy permit for a
building or development or ten (10) days after completion
of the work if no occupancy permit is required. A sign
permit is required.
A. No permanent or temporary signs shall be allowed in the public rightof-
way except for the following:
1. Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post
legal notices, identify public property, convey public information,
and direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
2. Bus stop signs erected by a public transit company.
3. Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines,
pipes or facilities.
4. Signs in place less than three (3) days and as defined by and in
accordance with other existing City ordinances, and with the
permission of the Director of Planning and Development
(recommended use: garage sale and open house signs).
5. Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, a
public utility company, or a contractor doing authorized or
permitted work within the public right-of-way.
B. Other Signs In The Public Right-Of-Way Forfeited. Any sign installed or
placed on public property, except in conformance with the
Section
410.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.060
AO:721
Section 410.070. Signs Prohibited Under this Chapter. [Ord. No.
4609 §1, 3-2-2015]
Section 410.080. Existing Signs not Conforming with this Chapter.
[Ord. No. 4609 §1, 3-2-2015]
requirements of this Section, shall be forfeited to the City and subject
to confiscation. In addition to other remedies hereunder, the City shall
have the right to recover from the owner or person placing such a sign
the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign.
A. All signs not expressly permitted under this Chapter or exempt from
regulation hereunder in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter
are prohibited in the City. Such signs include, but are not limited to:
1. Beacons;
2. Pennants;
3. Freestanding residential;
4. Roof signs;
5. Portable signs;
6. Individuals dressed in costume intended to attract attention as
human signs to a business for advertising purposes;
7. Post signs, pylon signs or pole signs;
8. Strings of lights not permanently mounted to a rigid background,
except those that are decorative and convey no message;
9. Inflatable signs and tethered balloons excepting balloons in a
residential area which are used for less than two (2) days;
10. Vehicle signs, except those which are painted on or permanently
affixed flat against the factory surface of a vehicle;
11. Off-site signage, absent the consent of the property owner;
12. Signs that falsely advertise that an activity, business, product or
service is sold or conducted on the premises upon which the sign is
located and thereby misdirect traffic. Such signs, including the sign
structures, shall be removed within thirty (30) days of written
notification to the owner of the premises. Nothing herein shall be
construed so as to prohibit signs permitted under Section 410.140;
13. Animated signs; and
14. Electronic message signs.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, the owner of any zone lot or other
premises on which exists a sign for which there is not a current and
Section
410.060
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
410.080
AO:722
Section 410.090. Permits Required. [Ord. No. 4609 §1, 3-2-2015]
If a sign requiring a permit under the provisions of this Chapter is to be
placed, constructed, erected, or modified on a zone lot, the business owner,
or its authorized agent, shall secure a sign permit prior to the construction,
placement, erection or modification of such a sign in accordance with the
requirements of Section 410.110. Furthermore, the property owner shall
maintain in force, at all times, a sign permit for such sign. No signs shall
be erected in the public right-of-way except in accordance with Section
410.060. No sign permit of any kind shall be issued for an existing or
proposed sign unless such sign is consistent with the requirements of this
Chapter (including those protecting existing signs).
valid sign permit shall be obligated to either remove such sign or to
bring it into conformity with the provisions of this Chapter.
1. Non-conforming existing signs, permits and terms. A sign that
would be permitted under this Chapter only with a sign permit, but
which was legally existing prior to the enactment of this Chapter or
on a later date when the property is annexed to the City, and which
was constructed in accordance with the ordinances and other
applicable laws in effect on the date of its construction, but which
by reason of its size, height, location, design or construction is not
in conformance with the requirements of this Chapter, shall be
automatically designated as a non-conforming sign.
2. Such designation shall allow the sign, which was made nonconforming
by the adoption of this Chapter, to remain in place and
be maintained until one (1) of the events described in Subsection
(A)(2)(a) through (c) of this Section takes place. A change in the
information on the face of an existing non-conforming sign is
allowed; however, no action may be taken which increases the
degree or extent of the non-conformity. Every non-conforming sign
shall either be eliminated or made to conform with the
requirements of this Chapter if one (1) or more of the following
circumstances occur:
a. When any proposed change, repair or maintenance would
constitute an expense of more than fifty-percent of the
replacement value of the sign; or
b. When there is a change in ownership of the company in whose
name the sign permit was originally issued, whether said
change is accomplished by sale (other than transfer to heirs) or
by any other means (this includes the change in ownership of
the majority of shares of stock if said company is a
corporation); or
c. If rental property, by lessee vacation of the property.
Section
410.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.100
AO:723
Section 410.100. Temporary Sign Permits. [Ord. No. 4609 §1,
3-2-2015]
Section 410.110. Sign Permit Procedures. [Ord. No. 4609 §1,
3-2-2015]
A. A temporary sign shall be allowed only upon the issuance of a
temporary sign permit, which shall be subject to the following
requirements:
1. Term. A temporary sign permit shall allow the use of a temporary
sign for a specified thirty-day period, except for construction signs,
which may be used during the construction period and shall be
removed no later than ten (10) days after the receipt of an
occupancy permit for a building or development, or ten (10) days
after completion of the work if no occupancy permit is required.
2. Number. Only three (3) temporary sign permits shall be issued to
the same business license holder on the same zone lot in any
calendar year.
a. Institutional uses may be permitted one (1) temporary sign not
exceeding fifty (50) square feet in size, provided that the
display of such sign shall be limited to one temporary sign per
month for up to ten (10) days each period. A separate sign
permit shall be required for each event.
3. Application. Application for approval of a temporary sign permit
shall be made on the forms on file in the Planning and Development
Department and is approved or rejected by the City Administrator.
The applicant may appeal a decision of the City Administrator to
the Board of Aldermen.
4. Standards. Allowable height, size, and location of temporary signs
shall be determined in the same fashion as permitted for
permanent signs.
A. The following procedures shall govern the application for, and issuance
of, all sign permits under this Chapter, and the submission and review
of signage plans:
1. Applications. All applications for sign permits of any kind shall be
submitted to the director on an application form and shall include
all information stated in this Chapter.
2. Fees.
a. Application fees. A non-refundable application fee of twentyfive
dollars ($25.00) shall be paid to the City upon application
for any sign permit (other than for a billboard sign). A nonrefundable
application fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00)
shall be paid to the City upon application for any billboard sign
Section
410.100
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
410.110
AO:724
to defray the ordinary and necessary expense of the City to
assure compliance with local wind and other structural loads
and electrical requirements.
b. Billboard sign annual fees. Each person or entity to whom a
permit to erect and/or maintain a billboard sign in the City has
been issued shall pay an annual fee of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00), commencing on July 1 after the date such permit
was issued, and on each July 1 thereafter until such billboard
sign is removed.
3. Permit for new sign or for sign modification. An application for
construction, creation, or installation of a new sign or for
modification of an existing sign shall contain such information as
the Director shall require, including, without limitation, the
following:
a. The applicant's name, address and phone number;
b. All permits (duly issued by the appropriate governmental
authority) which are necessary or required in connection with
the erection of such sign, including, without limitation, a
building permit, any electrical permit and/or any permit
required by the Missouri State Highway and Transportation
Commission pursuant to Sections 226.500 to 226.600 RSMo.,
1986, as amended (the State sign law). With respect to any
applicant who maintains that a permit is not required by the
State sign law, a written certification to the City, in form and
substance satisfactory to the City and its counsel, of the
reasons why such permit is not required by the State sign law;
c. The location of the building, structure or lot to which or upon
which the sign is to be attached or erected;
d. The position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or
structures;
e. Documentation in form and substance satisfactory to the
Director demonstrating the applicant's right to occupy the
property on which the sign is to be located;
f. A site plan of the property showing the sign location in relation
to all buildings, roads and streets;
g. A copy of the plans and specifications of the sign, including the
method of construction and attachment and an elevation
showing the dimensions and height of the sign from ground
level;
h. A copy of the street sheets and calculations showing the sign is
designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in
Section
410.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.110
AO:725
Section 410.120. Sign Standards, Design, Construction, and
Maintenance. [Ord. No. 4609 §1, 3-2-2015]
the amount required by this Chapter and all other laws and
ordinances of the City;
i. Such other information as the Director or his or her designee
may request from time to time to ensure full compliance with
this Chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the City.
4. Inspection. The applicant shall call for a final inspection after the
installation of the sign is complete, and in the case of signs
involving electrical connections, after the electric inspections have
been made and passed. If the sign has been installed in accordance
with the permit provisions, the sign shall be approved. In the event
the sign was not installed in accordance with the permit provisions,
the inspector shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies. The sign
is not considered an approved sign until all deficiencies have been
corrected. If, after six (6) months, the sign construction has not
been approved, the permit shall lapse and become void, and the
City may take steps as indicated in Section 410.170.
5. Assignment of sign permits. A current and valid sign permit shall
be freely assignable to a successor as owner of the business or
holder of a business license for the same premises. However, nonconforming
signs are to be governed by the provisions of Section
410.080.
A. All signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance
with the following standards:
1. General requirements.
a. All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of the current
City adopted building and electrical code.
b. Except for temporary signs and window signs conforming in all
respects with the requirements of this Chapter, all signs shall
be constructed of permanent materials and shall be
permanently attached to the building by direct attachment to a
rigid wall, frame or structure in a manner acceptable to the
Building Official.
c. All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in
compliance with all building and electrical codes, and in
conformance with this Code, at all times.
d. All signs and related structures shall be maintained in good
repair, free of rust, peeling, flaking, fading, broken or cracked
surfaces and broken or missing letters.
Section
410.110
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
410.120
AO:726
e. Architectural consistency. Sign installations shall be consistent
with, and not conceal, the architectural detail of a building.
f. All signs shall be constructed and lettered to a professional
quality. All elements of the signage shall be secured in such a
manner as to minimize movement and shall be attached to the
main building or structure or other suitable structures to
secure the sign. In no instance shall signs be attached to
vehicles unless otherwise permitted in this Chapter.
2. Wall sign regulations.
a. Single-occupant building on a single zoned lot.
(1) One (1) wall sign per face of building facing a commercial
street or side street contiguous with the subject property
or which faces a driveway or parking lot located between
the street and the building.
(2) Sign area as determined by Section 410.130(A)(1) is
restricted to one-fourth (1/4) square feet of sign area per
lineal foot of commercial street frontage, provided that no
sign shall be required to be less than twenty (20) square
feet.
(3) Maximum wall sign area is two hundred fifty (250) square
feet.
b. Single-story building with multiple tenants on a single zoned
lot.
(1) The total of all wall signage on a building may not exceed
thirty-percent of the wall area facing the street.
(2) One (1) sign having an area of eighty (80) square feet or
less for each commercial street frontage.
(3) Each tenant having a grade level public entry from the
commercial street, or side street contiguous with the
subject property, or which faces a driveway or parking lot
located between the street and the building is entitled to
one (1) wall sign.
(4) Wall sign area as computed by Section 410.130(A)(1) is
restricted to one-fourth (1/4) square feet of sign face per
lineal foot of tenant frontage on a commercial street,
provided that no sign shall be required to be smaller than
twenty (20) square feet.
(5) Maximum sign area per tenant is restricted to eighty (80)
square feet.
c. Multifloor building with multiple tenants on a single zoned lot.
Section
410.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.120
AO:727
(1) The total of all wall signage on a building may not exceed
thirty-percent of the wall area facing the street.
(2) One (1) sign having an area of eighty (80) square feet or
less for each commercial street frontage.
(3) Each grade level tenant having a public entry from the
commercial street, or from a side street contiguous with
the subject property, or which faces a driveway or parking
lot located between the street and the building is entitled
to one (1) wall sign.
(4) Wall sign area as computed by Section 410.130(A)(1) is
restricted to one-fourth (1/4) square feet of sign face per
lineal foot of tenant frontage on a commercial street,
provided that no sign shall be required to be smaller than
twenty (20) square feet.
(5) Maximum sign area per tenant is restricted to eighty (80)
square feet.
3. Ground sign regulations.
a. Each property in non-residential zoning districts is entitled to
one (1) ground sign per commercial street frontage.
(1) Not more than one (1) face of the sign may be visible by
the public from any point (except from points on or around
the prolongation of the axis of a V-shaped sign) on the
street.
(2) The ground sign must display the street number in
addition to the sign language. The street number does not
count against the area limit of the sign, but the area
allocated to the street number may not be larger than four
(4) square feet.
(3) If there is not enough physical room between the building
and the street to accommodate a ground sign, a building
projecting sign may be authorized in accordance with the
provisions of Section 410.120(A)(5).
(4) Sign regulations.
(a) No part of the sign may be located within ten (10) feet
of the public right-of-way or be positioned in any
manner that will interfere with the line of sight of
pedestrians or vehicles attempting to enter or exit
from the property.
(b) Sign area is restricted to one-fourth (1/4) square feet
per lineal foot of commercial street frontage, but will
not be required to be smaller than twenty-four (24)
Section
410.120
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
410.120
AO:728
square feet nor may any sign be larger than two
hundred fifty (250) square feet.
(c) Maximum height of sign is five (5) feet above grade,
including a base not more than one (1) foot high,
measured in accordance with Section 410.130(A)(3).
4. Window signage.
a. Window signage is permitted in any window of nonresidentially
zoned property, which is located on the grade
level of the building housing that business, provided that
window faces a commercial street or parking lot (unless said
parking lot is adjacent to residentially used property and said
signage would be capable of being viewed from such
residential area). The total gross sign area of all window signs
shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the area of any
individual window located in the lowest portion of the building
as measured from the adjacent exterior grade. For the
purposes of this Section, panes of glass separated by a
structural column or portion of exterior finished wall shall be
considered individual windows. Further, glass located within a
door, whether or not it is used as an entrance/exit, is not an
eligible location for a window sign. Graphics painted directly
onto the glass surface are prohibited.
b. Total window signage shall not exceed 25 square feet unless
specifically approved through a Comprehensive Sign Plan.
c. The area for window signage is in addition to any other
permitted signage.
5. Projecting signs.
a. Projecting signs are permitted only in those cases where a
business is entitled to a ground sign but is prevented from
installing one due to physical conditions. A permit application
for a projecting sign that is rejected by the Director may be
appealed to the Board of Aldermen.
b. Sign regulations.
(1) Maximum size is twenty-four (24) square feet per sign face
and is not dependent upon building frontage or lot
frontage.
(2) No more than two (2) faces per sign. Faces must be within
eighteen (18) inches of each other.
(3) In all cases, at least ten (10) feet of clearance for
pedestrian or vehicular traffic must be provided.
Section
410.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.120
AO:729
Section 410.125. Illuminated Signs. [Ord. No. 4609 §1, 3-2-2015]
(4) No part of the sign may be closer than five (5) feet to the
right-of-way.
6. Canopies and canopy signs.
a. For businesses directly fronting on a public pedestrian
sidewalk, canopies may be installed for purposes of shielding
pedestrians from the weather or to afford protection for
merchandise in store windows that may be harmed by direct
sunlight.
b. Canopies may bear a sign no larger than one (1) foot in height
and twelve (12) feet in width.
A. The following requirements shall apply to illuminated signs. Lighting
for billboards shall be as defined in Section 410.140.
1. No sign shall have blinking, flashing or fluttering lights or other
illuminating device of variable light intensity, brightness or color.
Clocks and thermometers which only indicate the time or
temperature shall not be considered illuminated signs, provided
that the gross area of such devices is not greater than sixteen (16)
square feet per face, the vertical dimension of any letter or number
is not greater than twenty-four (24) inches and the color or
intensity of light is constant except for periodic changes in the
information display, which occur not more frequently than once
every fifteen (15) seconds. Beacon lights are not permitted.
2. No colored lights shall be used at any location or in any manner so
as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices.
3. Neither direct nor reflected light from primary light sources shall
create a hazard to operators of motor vehicles on public
thoroughfares.
4. No exposed reflective-type bulb or incandescent lamp which
exceeds forty (40) watts shall be used on the exterior surface of any
sign in such manner as to expose the face of the bulb, light or lamp
to any public street or adjacent property.
5. The use of exposed neon in a window sign(s) with aggregate area
larger than six (6) square feet must be reviewed and approved by
the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to installation or
erection of such sign(s).
6. The use of exposed neon as an illumination source is prohibited.
7. Signage may be illuminated by either internal or external lighting
sources. In either situation, the light source shall be completely
screened from view.
Section
410.120
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
410.125
AO:730
Section 410.130. Computations. [Ord. No. 4609 §1, 3-2-2015]
8. External lighting, such as floodlights and thin-line and goose-line
reflectors are permitted, provided the light source is directed upon
the face of the sign and is effectively shielded so as to prevent
beams or rays of light from being directed onto areas other than
the sign, and the lights are not of such intensity so as to cause
glare, or impair the vision of the driver of a motor vehicle. Where
the Director denies an applicant for excessive or uncontrolled
lighting, the applicant can appeal the decision through the same
process defined for the submission of a Comprehensive Sign Plan
identified in Section 410.135.
A. The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and
sign height.
1. Computation of area of individual signs.
a. The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall
sign or other sign with only one (1) face) shall be computed by
means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or
combination thereof, that will encompass the extreme limits of
the writing, representation, emblem or other display, together
with any material or color forming an integral part of the
background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from
the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not
including any supporting framework, bracing or decorative
fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets Zoning
Ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the display
itself.
b. Square foot area is computed by multiplying the length of the
sign by the height, both at their greatest measurement
comprising each word or symbol. Grid calculation of exact
square foot area is acceptable with engineer's sealed
calculations and drawing.
2. Computation of area of multifaced signs. The sign area for a sign
with more than one (1) face shall be computed by adding together
the area of all sign faces visible from any one (1) point. When two
identical sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces
cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such
sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more
than eighteen (18) inches apart, the sign area shall be computed by
the measurement of one (1) of the faces.
3. Computation of height.
a. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the
base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest
Section
410.125
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.130
AO:731
Section 410.135. Comprehensive Sign Plans. [Ord. No. 4609 §1,
3-2-2015]
attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be
construed to be the lower of:
(1) Existing grade prior to construction; or
(2) The newly established grade after construction, exclusive
of any filling, berming, mounding or excavating solely for
the purpose of locating the sign.
b. In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be
determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption
that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is
equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a
public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance
to the principal building on the zone lot, whichever is lower.
A. When a Comprehensive Sign Plan is approved for a proposed or existing
development, to the extent the terms of the Comprehensive Sign Plan
conflict with the general provisions of this Chapter, the Comprehensive
Sign Plan governs. Comprehensive Sign Plans are intended to provide
for flexible sign criteria that promote superior design and are tailored
to a specific development which may vary from general ordinance
provisions; however, the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed
terms would encourage and promote established principles within the
Comprehensive Plan. In keeping with the intent to allow flexibility in
the design of developments, the following options may be available for
signs accessory to uses in non-residential district properties subject to:
1. As an alternative to what would otherwise be allowed, signs may be
permitted in accordance with a Comprehensive Sign Plan subject to
the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission and
approval of the Board of Aldermen. The Comprehensive Sign Plan
shall show the location, size, height and extent of all proposed
signs. In addition, the geographic limits of the area to be covered
by the Comprehensive Sign Plan must be shown.
2. Any application submitted for a Comprehensive Sign Plan may be
made by any property owner, owner of an easement, lessee,
contract purchaser or their agent. Such application shall be
accompanied by a statement setting forth the names of the record
owners of the properties upon which such signs are proposed to be
located and the notarized agreement of each record owner to the
placement of such signs on their property. When an application
requests permission to erect a sign on property owned by someone
other than the applicant, then such application shall be
accompanied by a written and notarized statement signed by the
record owners of such properties which indicates their
endorsement of the application.
Section
410.130
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
410.135
AO:732
Section 410.140. Billboards. [Ord. No. 4609 §1, 3-2-2015]
3. When a Comprehensive Sign Plan is proposed, the following must
be submitted:
a. Location, size, height, construction, material and placement of
signs.
b. Illumination level, color and type.
c. The number of proposed signs.
d. Elevations of all detached signs.
e. Dimensions, height, square footage of all existing signs or note
that none exist for both freestanding and attached signs
(submit picture of all existing signage).
f. Material specifications for proposed signs, including sign
materials and colors.
g. Landscaping of detached signs.
4. All proposed signs shall be reviewed based on the following
criteria:
a. Proposed signs are consistent with the purpose of this Chapter.
b. Proposed signs are compatible with the theme, visual quality,
and overall character of the surrounding area.
c. Proposed signs are in scale and harmonious with the
development and shall be so located and sized as to ensure
convenience to the visitor, user or occupant of the development
while not adding to street clutter or otherwise detracting from
the nature of the development and adjacent uses and the
purposes of architectural and urban design elements.
d. The proposed Comprehensive Sign Plan is consistent with and
furthers the goals of the Comprehensive Plan.
5. Submissions for consideration of a Comprehensive Sign Plan shall
be filed with the Director and forwarded to the Planning and
Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
review the application in accordance with the above criteria and
forward a recommendation to the Board of Aldermen for its final
review and approval. When a Comprehensive Sign Plan is approved
for a development, regulations regarding signage shall be dictated
by the provisions of the approved plan.
6. Amendments to previously approved Comprehensive Sign Plans
will require items necessary for the review of the changes in light
of the previous approval.
Section
410.135
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.140
AO:733
A. General Provisions.
1. All billboard signs must comply with the more restrictive of these
regulations or the requirements contained in all State and Federal
laws, including, without limitation, Sections 226.500 to 226.600,
RSMo., 1986, as amended (the State sign law).
2. All new billboard signs must comply with all provisions of
applicable building codes, and the applicant must obtain all
necessary permits or licenses which are necessary or required.
3. Where a billboard sign, whether installed prior to or subsequent to
the effective date of this Chapter, does not include any message for
a period of one hundred twenty (120) continuous days, such
billboard structure shall be deemed abandoned thereafter and shall
be removed.
4. No billboard sign shall be placed on rocks, trees, or on poles
maintained by public utilities.
5. The owner of a billboard sign and each user thereon shall
indemnify and hold the City harmless from and against any loss,
claim or expense (including attorneys' fees, publisher's liability and
advertiser's liability) arising, directly or indirectly, from the
erection and or/use of said billboard sign, and such owner and user
shall maintain liability insurance in accordance with, and in the
amounts required by, Section 135.070(F) of this Code, except that
the minimum insurance for publisher's and advertiser's liability
shall be five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per
occurrence, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) aggregate.
6. No new billboard structure shall be erected in which two (2) or
more displays are stacked one above the other.
B. Standards For Location, Spacing, Size, Height And Lighting.
1. Location and spacing.
a. No billboard sign shall be maintained, erected, or located
anywhere in the City unless:
(1) The proposed site for such billboard sign is in an area of
the City then zoned "LID" (Light Industrial District), "GC"
(General Commercial District) or "RSC" (Retail Service
Commercial District); and
(2) The proposed site of such billboard sign is within six
hundred sixty (660) feet of the nearest edge of the right-ofway
of, and visible from, Interstate Highway 64 and/or
Interstate Highway 170; and
b. No billboard sign shall hereafter be maintained, erected or
located within five hundred (500) feet of an existing billboard
Section
410.140
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
410.140
AO:734
sign on the same side of the highway, irrespective of whether
such existing billboard sign is located within or outside the
territorial limits of the City. This distance shall be measured
along the nearest edge of the pavement at points directly
opposite the billboard sign along each side of the highway. This
shall apply only to billboard signs located on the same side of
the highway involved.
c. No billboard sign shall be placed closer than five hundred
(500) feet to an intersection on a dual or proposed dual
highway; provided, however, that such billboard may be affixed
to or located adjacent to a building at such intersection in such
a manner as not to materially cause any greater obstruction of
vision than caused by the building itself.
d. All billboard signs shall be exempt from the setback
requirements of the zoning district in which they are
permitted. All billboard signs shall, however, be set back from
the road right-of-way a minimum of thirty (30) feet.
e. No billboard sign shall be located on the right-of-way or any
road or any slope or drainage easement for such road.
f. No portion of a billboard shall be placed within a fifty-foot
radius of any point of a building.
2. Size.
a. The maximum area for any one (1) billboard shall be six
hundred seventy-two (672) square feet with a maximum height
of twenty-one (21) feet and a maximum length of thirty-two
(32) feet, inclusive of border and trim but excluding the base,
apron, or supports and other structural members. The area
shall be measured by the smallest square, rectangle, triangle,
circle, or combination thereof which will encompass the entire
billboard.
b. The maximum size limitations shall apply to each side of a
billboard structure, and billboards may be placed back-to-back,
double-faced, or in V-type construction with not more than two
(2) displays to each facing, but such billboard structure shall
be considered as one (1) billboard.
3. Height. The maximum height to top of signage shall not exceed
forty-five (45) feet above ground level or the grade level of the
adjoining street, whichever is higher.
4. Lighting.
a. No revolving or rotating beam or beacon of light shall be
permitted as part of any billboard sign. No flashing,
Section
410.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.140
AO:735
Section 410.150. Special Signage. [Ord. No. 4609 §1, 3-2-2015]
Signage not specifically mentioned in this Chapter shall be regulated by
standards enumerated for signage deemed similar in style, size and function
by the Director.
Section 410.160. Violations. [Ord. No. 4609 §1, 3-2-2015]
Section 410.170. Enforcement and Remedies. [Ord. No. 4609 §1,
3-2-2015]
intermittent or moving light or lights shall be permitted as a
part of any billboard sign.
b. External lighting, such as floodlights, thin-line and goose-line
reflectors are permitted, provided the light source is directed
upon the face of the billboard sign and is effectively shielded so
as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed into
any portion of the main traveled way of any road or highway
near such billboard sign, and the lights are not of such
intensity so as to cause glare, impair the vision of the driver of
a motor vehicle or otherwise interfere with a driver's operation
of a motor vehicle.
c. No billboard sign shall be so illuminated that it interferes with
the effectiveness of, or obscures, an official traffic sign, device
or signal.
A. Any of the following shall be a violation of this Chapter and shall be
subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this
Chapter and by State law:
1. To install, create, erect or maintain any sign in a way that is
inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such sign or the
zone lot on which the sign is located.
2. To install, create, erect or maintain any sign requiring a permit
without such a permit.
3. To fail to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected or
maintained in violation of this Chapter, or for which the sign permit
has lapsed, or for which the sign permit has been withdrawn or
which has not been approved by the Director.
4. To continue any such violation. Each such day of a continued
violation shall be considered a separate violation when applying the
penalty portions of this Chapter.
5. Each sign installed, created, erected or maintained in violation of
this Chapter shall be considered a separate violation when applying
the penalty portions of this Chapter.
Section
410.140
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
410.170
AO:736
Section 410.180. Appeals. [Ord. No. 4609 §1, 3-2-2015]
A. Any violation or attempted violation of this Chapter or of any condition
or requirement adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected
or abated, as the case may be, by injunction or other appropriate
proceedings pursuant to State law.
1. Sign removal required. If the Director has determined that a sign is
not an approved sign or has determined the time allowed for the
continuance of a non-conforming sign has expired, the sign must be
removed. Notification of the order to remove the sign shall be by
certified mail to the business owner. Responsibility for removal of
the sign shall lie with the business owner. If the business owner
fails to remove the sign, the zone lot owner shall be responsible for
the sign removal.
2. In the event the sign has not been removed as a result of Section
410.170(A)(1), the remedies of the City shall include the following:
a. Issuing a stop-work order for any and all work on any permit
activity on the same zone lot.
b. Seeking an injunction or other order of restraint or abatement
that requires the removal of the sign or the correction of the
non-conformity.
c. Imposing any penalties that can be imposed directly by the City
under the Zoning Ordinance.
d. Seeking in court the imposition of any penalties that can be
imposed by such court under the Zoning Ordinance.
e. In the case of a sign that poses an immediate danger to the
public health or safety, taking such measures as are available
to the City under the applicable provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance and building code for such circumstances.
f. The City shall have such other remedies as are and as may
from time to time be provided for or allowed by State law for
the violation of the Zoning Ordinance.
g. All such remedies provided herein shall be cumulative. To the
extent that State law may limit the availability of a particular
remedy set forth herein for a certain violation or a part thereof,
such remedy shall remain available for other violations or
other parts of the same violation.
A. Any aggrieved person may appeal a decision of the Director before the
Board of Adjustment as established and in conformance with the
requirements of Section 400.860 of the Zoning Regulations, subject to
the further requirements of this Chapter.
Section
410.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.180
AO:737
Section 410.190. Severability. [Ord. No. 4609 §1, 3-2-2015]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Chapter is, for any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions of this Chapter.
Section 410.200. Message Substitution Clause. [Ord. No. 4609 §1,
3-2-2015]
Whenever a commercial sign would be permitted under this Chapter,
subject to the landowner's consent, a non-commercial sign may be installed
in its place, or vice versa, provided it otherwise complies with this Chapter.
Such substitution of message may be made without any additional approval
or permitting. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the
contrary within this Chapter. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any
inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or
vice versa. This provision does not create a right to increase total signage
on a parcel, nor does it affect the requirements that the sign comply in all
other respects with the provisions of this Chapter.
Section 410.210. Special Use Signs on Public Property —
Requirements. [Ord. No. 4609 §1, 3-2-2015]
B. Prior to accepting any application for a variance from the regulations of
this Chapter, all remedies must be exhausted, including submittal and
review of a Comprehensive Sign Plan.
C. Grounds For Granting A Variance. The Board of Adjustment may grant
variances from this Chapter for any permitted form of signage where it
is found that strict compliance with the Chapter would subject the
applicant to undue hardship and/or practical difficulties, and to grant
such a variance would:
1. Be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Chapter;
and
2. Not be detrimental to the public welfare.
D. Appeals from decisions of the Board of Adjustment shall be to the
Circuit Court of St. Louis County in conformance with the requirements
of Section 400.860.
A. Director Approval. The Director shall approve the purpose, number,
type, location, size and height, and the positing time limit of all signs on
public rights-of-way and easements.
B. Application. An application to the City Administrator for permission to
erect such sign(s) shall be in writing, and shall explain the purpose and
type of sign requested, and state the posting time desired. The
Section
410.180
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
410.210
AO:738
Chapter 500
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Cross References — As to fire prevention and protection, ch. 205; as to
commission on human rights, §§240.020 et seq.; as to discriminatory
practices, §§240.070 et seq.; as to licensing and regulations of general
contractors and builders, §§605.960 et seq.; as to offenses involving
smoking, §§215.1820 et seq.; as to signs, ch. 410; as to subdivisions, ch.
405; as to swimming pools, ch. 510; as to zoning, ch. 400.
State Law Reference — Municipal authority to regulate buildings, §79.450,
RSMo.
application shall be accompanied by a drawing showing the proposed
sign, indicating the size, and the requested location.
C. Other Permits. Necessary permits required by other governmental
departments, utility companies, etc., must be obtained by the applicant,
and evidence that such permits have been obtained shall accompany
the application to the City Administrator.
D. Insurance. For signs larger than six square feet in sign area, an
insurance policy shall be filed with the City, in the amount of one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) to cover all risks of liability to the public.
Section
410.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.210
AO:739

ARTICLE I
In General
Section 500.005. Enforcement Official.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Director of Planning and
Development or his/her designated representative of the City to enforce the
provisions of this Chapter. No order for correction of any violation under
this Chapter shall be issued without the approval of the Director of Planning
and Development or his/her designated representative.
Section 500.010. Regulations Governing Construction. [Ord. No.
4782 § 2, 6-19-2017]
Section 500.020. Construction Hours. [R.O. 2009 §6-2; Ord. No.
3943 §1, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 4782 § 3, 6-19-2017]
Section 500.030. Job Site. [R.O. 2009 §6-3; Ord. No. 3943 §1,
7-19-2004; Ord. No. 3959 §1, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 3987 §1,
8-15-2005]
A. The following regulations shall apply to:
1. The construction of all new residential dwellings and renovations to
existing dwellings in excess of fifty percent (50%) of habitable
space.
2. Room additions when said work exceeds twenty percent (20%) of
any floor on which the addition is constructed.
3. All commercial construction.
A. Construction hours are established as Monday through Friday from
7:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m. and on Saturday from 10:00 a.m. until 4:00
p.m. No work audible from the exterior is to be done on Sunday without
the express permission of the Director of Planning and Development.
No diesel or other mechanical noise may be audible from off the job site
outside of the prescribed hours.
B. Defined Terms.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any activity which progresses or
contributes to the completion of the construction on the job site; such
activities shall, include, but are not limited to, operation or use of tools
or equipment, collecting debris and/or cleaning up the job site, making
deliveries, and staging material or equipment delivery vehicles, cranes
or other construction vehicles (excluding workers' transport vehicles)
adjacent to the job site.
JOB SITE — The parcel(s) under private ownership of the location of the
construction activity and adjoining roadways.
Section
500.005
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.030
AO:741
A. Any roadway in front of and around work areas shall remain passable to
all emergency vehicles, delivery and trash trucks.
B. Construction fencing shall be required on all property lines on all job
sites subject to these regulations prior to commencement of any
demolition and shall adhere to the guidelines outlined in Section
500.060 herein.
C. The use of temporary construction facilities, offices, storage containers,
trailers, portable bathrooms, construction materials, dumpsters, and
similar construction related items must be submitted to the Department
of Planning and Development for approval of the extent and location of
all items prior to commencement. These items may only be stored
within the construction fenced area after a proper construction fence is
installed as described in Section 500.060 herein. Privacy fence netting
may also be required. Placement of the equipment noted above should
generally follow the standards in Section 400.1950 of this Code of
Ordinances. Violations of this Subsection shall be punishable as
provided in Section 400.1950. [Ord. No. 4792 § 3, 8-2-2017]
D. No construction materials or equipment may be stored on the sidewalks
or any public right-of-way.
E. No temporary construction, delivery, landscape or other types of
vehicles may be stored on or within the construction fenced area for a
period in excess of five (5) days. "Temporary" vehicles are those
containing their own motor, licensed for travel and necessary for less
than five (5) days of the construction timeline.
F. Dumpsters shall be required to be emptied or covered to minimize
debris float to adjacent properties, when any fill within the dumpster
exceeds the interior height of the dumpster by more than eighteen (18)
inches at any time. In any event, no debris shall be allowed to overflow
from the dumpster onto the job site.
G. All public sidewalks and streets adjacent to the job site shall remain
clear of any mud or debris at the conclusion of each workday.
H. Any potential mud runoff or seepage onto adjacent properties or public
rights-of-way must be prevented through the use of straw bales or other
approved screening devices, the location of which must be maintained
within the subject property line (fence).
I. Written notification must be given to the Director of Planning and
Development at least four (4) days prior to any "salvage" operation or
other potential physical alteration to the exterior of any pre-existing
structure sometimes referred to as a "salvage sale".
J. Prior to the demolition or "salvaging" of any pre-existing structure,
defined as including physical demarcation to the exterior as visible from
the street, removal of exterior (including removal of siding or tiles),
removal of windows, doors, trim or guttering or any appearance of the
Section
500.030
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.030
AO:742
exterior of the home or included portion of the lot, that would be
deemed unsightly, unsafe or unsanitary by City of Brentwood Building
Code, shall require a construction fence to be erected in accordance
with the guidelines outlined in Section 500.060 herein.
K. After salvaging is completed, no pre-existing structure shall remain in a
salvaged condition, as described above, for a period in excess of twentyfive
(25) calendar days prior to demolition, unless the "salvage" area
consists of more than three (3) pre-existing structures constituting a
"large scale" housing development, in which case the time period shall
be no more than sixty (60) calendar days prior to demolition. Upon
violation, the Director of Planning and Development may order the
property secured, including boarding-up of missing or broken windows
and doors, to insure against any ingress or egress of the structure(s), at
the owner's expense. Within ten (10) days following a violation, the
Director of Planning and Development may move forward with
immediate condemnation proceedings upon determination that the
owner has duly abandoned the property.
Total salvage time not to exceed ten (10) calendar days, including any
sale and removal of items, unless the job site consists of more than
three (3) pre-existing structures constituting a "large scale" housing
development, whose total salvage time shall not exceed twenty-five (25)
calendar days, including any sale and removal of items.
L. After demolition is completed, no job site shall remain cleared for a
period in excess of forty-five (45) calendar days prior to beginning of
construction to include excavation. Upon violation, the Director of
Planning and Development may withdraw all construction permits and
require the area to be graded, seeded or sodded or may do so at the
owner's expense or all of the above. If the permitted construction area
consists of more than three (3) proposed home sites constituting a
"large-scale" housing development, this Section shall be waived, so long
as at least one (1) home site begins construction to include excavation
within sixty (60) calendar days of site demolition.
Total demolition procedure time not to exceed ten (10) calendar days,
including removal of items. If the demolition area consists of more than
three (3) pre-existing structures constituting a "large-scale" housing
development, the total demolition procedure time shall not exceed
twenty-five (25) calendar days, including removal of items.
M. A copy of these regulations shall be posted at the job site at all times.
N. A copy of the approved plans shall be located on the job site at all times.
Section
500.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.040
AO:743
Section 500.040. Amendments — Changes. [R.O. 2009 §6-4; Ord.
No. 3943 §1, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 3959 §1, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 3987
§1, 8-15-2005]
All building material changes, significant structural changes, load-bearing
alterations or site plan changes shall be submitted for approval to the
Director of Planning and Development prior to the work starting.
Section 500.050. Notice of Inspection. [R.O. 2009 §6-6; Ord. No.
3943 §1, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 3959 §1, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 3987 §1,
8-15-2005]
All inspections require a twenty-four (24) hour notice. All projects will
remain classified "open" until a final inspection is made on the project.
Electrical, plumbing, mechanical and fire inspections must be completed
and approved prior to a framing inspection. In the event that a project
requires multiple inspections (framing, plumbing, mechanical, fire, etc.),
these can sometimes be done at the same time to avoid multiple inspection
appointments.
Section 500.060. Construction Fences. [R.O. 2009 §6-7; Ord. No.
3943 §1, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 3959 §1, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 3987 §1,
8-15-2005]
A. No construction fence may be erected until the Director of Planning and
Development approves the site plan depicting materials, location and
access "gate(s)". All buildings undergoing salvage, construction,
removal or demolition shall, at minimum, be enclosed on all sides with a
construction grade plastic-mesh fence material, international orange,
measuring not less than four (4) feet high. Preferred allowable fencing
material shall consist of solid wood construction measuring not less
than four (4) feet and not more than six (6) feet in height. Chain link
fencing may be required if deemed necessary by the Director of
Planning and Development.
1. Duration and removal of temporary construction fences.
Construction fences may not be erected more than ten (10)
calendar days prior to demolition or any salvaging process, but in
any event must be in place prior to commencement of any
demolition, excavation, construction or salvaging process as
described in Section 500.030. All fences must be approved by the
Director of Planning and Development prior to the fence
installation. If demolition, salvaging as described herein or
construction does not occur within the prescribed ten (10) day
period, then the fencing must be removed and the site restored.
2. Fence construction. Required temporary construction fences shall
comply with the following requirements:
a. Standard construction gauge international orange plastic
mesh installed to a minimum height of four (4) feet and a
Section
500.040
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.060
AO:744
Section 500.070. Sidewalks. [R.O. 2009 §6-8; Ord. No. 3943 §1,
7-19-2004; Ord. No. 3959 §1, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 3987 §1,
8-15-2005]
Existing sidewalks must be maintained throughout the construction
process. Construction-related damage would require the replacement of
damaged sidewalk panels to the specifications of the Department of
Planning and Development. In situations where the Director of Planning
and Development has approved construction fences encroaching upon the
public right-of-way, such fences will require a temporary sidewalk be
constructed and maintained, extending no more than four and one-half (4½)
feet beyond the curb line. Such walks shall be no less than four (4) feet in
width, constructed in a safe and substantial manner as deemed necessary
by the Public Works Superintendent. In instances where the public right-ofway
affected is in proximity to large amounts of pedestrian or commercial
traffic, such as may be the case with a large-scale residential development
exceeding three (3) total housing units, the Director of Planning and
Development may require the sidewalk to be roofed, handrails installed and
properly lighted as a protection to the public from effects of construction or
demolition.
Section 500.080. Failure to Comply. [R.O. 2009 §6-9; Ord. No. 3943
§1, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 3959 §1, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 3987 §1,
8-15-2005; Ord. No. 4782 § 4, 6-19-2017]
maximum of five (5) feet from grade. The surety of the fence
and gate(s) shall be maintained for the duration of the project.
b. Suitable iron, steel, painted metal or wood, non-rebar fence
posts shall be installed at no greater than eight (8) foot
intervals. Space between any two (2) posts installed side by
side shall not be any greater than four (4) inches apart.
c. Access to the work site must be through a suitable "gate" to
consist of a movable portion of the fence, which can be closed,
fastened or otherwise secured as to emulate a continuous
segment of the adjacent fencing and post configuration.
Maximum gate width shall be fourteen (14) feet. Gate must be
fastened or secured every evening or on weekends, so as to
prevent unauthorized access. The space between gates, posts
or hardware shall be no greater than four (4) inches.
d. No temporary construction fence may encroach beyond the
subject property line. No temporary construction fence may
encroach upon any public right-of-way without the prior
written approval of the Director of Planning and Development.
A. Failure to comply with these regulations can result in the issuance of a
stop work order, a fine consistent with Section 100.080 of the
Brentwood City Code, or both, and could result in further court imposed
fines.
Section
500.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.080
AO:745
Section 500.090. Demolition Permit Required. [R.O. 2009 §6-10;
Ord. No. 4011 §1, 3-6-2006]
Section 500.100. Records. [R.O. 2009 §6-11; Ord. No. 4011 §1,
3-6-2006]
The Director of Planning and Development shall maintain, for such
reasonable time, a file of all demolition permits issued by that office. Copies
of demolition permits shall be available on request for examination by the
public.
Section 500.110. Notification Requirements. [R.O. 2009 §6-12; Ord.
No. 4011 §1, 3-6-2006]
B. The General Contractor, and in the case of residential properties the
property owner, shall be jointly and severally responsible for complying
with the provisions of this Article and ensuring all sub-contractors and
workers are complying with all provisions contained in Article I of
Chapter 500.
A. No building shall be demolished unless the Director of Planning and
Development has issued a demolition permit, except for accessory
structures less than one hundred forty-four (144) square feet in area or
fourteen (14) feet in height without utilities present.
B. Application shall be made for a demolition permit before work is
started; except, however, no demolition permit shall be required for any
demolition or structure removal undertaken by or on behalf of the City
pursuant to the City's dangerous buildings and/or nuisance ordinances.
C. The Director of Planning and Development shall issue the permit only
upon a finding that the work will conform to all of the applicable
ordinances of the City.
A. Upon issuance of a demolition permit by the City, the applicant shall
provide the following items to the Department of Planning and
Development at least seven (7) business days prior to the anticipated
date of demolition of all principal structures:
1. Letters, in sufficient quantity as required by the Director of
Planning and Development, typed on the demolition contractor's
letterhead detailing the probable dates of demolition as stated on a
weekly basis, i.e., demolition of this house will occur the week of
January twelfth (12th) through sixteenth (16th).
2. Envelopes, in sufficient quantity as required by the Director of
Planning and Development, containing the demolition contractor's
return address, the address of the property owner receiving the
demolition notice and sufficient postage to mail the demolition
notice.
Section
500.080
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.110
AO:746
Section 500.120. Use of Deposits. [R.O. 2009 §6-13; Ord. No. 4011
§1, 3-6-2006]
3. The Director of Planning and Development shall provide the
demolition contractor a list of all properties within three hundred
(300) feet of the principal structure to be demolished so that the
demolition contractor can provide the items required under
Subsections (1 — 2) of this Section.
A. A deposit is required for all demolition permits to insure compliance
with the provisions of this Article. The applicant shall enter into a
memorandum of understanding on a form approved by the City
governing the use and release of deposit. All such permits are subject to
limitations and restrictions on demolition activities including, but not
limited to:
1. No permit holder shall deposit mud, rocks or foreign matters onto
any public or private street or right-of-way.
2. No permit holder shall damage any public or private street,
sidewalk, street tree, utility facility or private property.
3. No permit holder, upon timely notification by the Department of
Public Works, shall permit the accumulation of any junk or debris
on the premises.
4. No permit holder shall be permitted to create any public or private
nuisance relating to odors, noise, dust or lighting.
5. No permit holder shall be permitted to work outside of the normal
construction hours of 7:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M. (Monday through
Friday) and 10:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M. on Saturday with no demolition
work allowed on Sunday.
6. No permit holder shall permit mud or silt to flow or be deposited on
any adjoining property or roadway.
7. Any mud or silt, which may accumulate on any adjoining property
or roadway, must be removed within twenty-four (24) hours.
B. A demolition deposit shall be collected in conjunction with issuance of
permits and permit fees as set out in Appendix A to this Chapter 500.
C. If it is determined that the applicant has either damaged or deposited
foreign matter onto a public street or right-of-way, the City shall deduct
the cost of cleaning or repairing such street or right-of-way from the
deposit amount. The City shall also withhold any partial or full refund of
the deposit amount if the applicant is in violation of any of the
construction limitations outlined in this Chapter. Such deposit shall not
be refunded except upon certification that the project has been
completed in compliance with the requirements of this Article.
D. Use And Release Of Deposit.
Section
500.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.120
AO:747
Section 500.130. Contractor in Good Standing. [R.O. 2009 §6-14;
Ord. No. 4011 §1, 3-6-2006]
No permit will be issued to any applicant who owes any tax, fee, bill, debt or
other monetary obligation to the City of Brentwood until such outstanding
tax, fee, bill, debt, monetary obligation or lien is paid to the satisfaction of
the Director of Planning and Development nor will a permit be issued to any
contractor who is currently under a stop work order by the Department of
Public Works.
Section 500.140. Contractors — License Fees and Requirements.
[Ord. No. 4631 §1, 5-18-2015]
The City requires all contractors to procure licenses from the City and
requires them to be licensed by St. Louis County. All licenses are seventyfive
dollars ($75.00) per year with no proration. Contractors with a valid
business license with the City of Brentwood shall be exempt from this fee.
Section 500.150. Parking Areas to Be Paved. [R.O. 2009 §14-292;
Ord. No. 2948 §1, 10-3-1988]
1. All such funds shall be deposited by the City in a separate account
and the City shall document the use, replacement or release of such
funds, as deposited by each applicant, according to generally
accepted accounting principles.
2. The City may use an applicant's deposited funds for expenses
incurred to ensure compliance with all applicable codes, approved
plans and other permit requirements. If the City so utilizes such
funds, the applicant shall, within five (5) days of the date of written
notice, be obligated to deposit a sum equal to the amount so used
so as to maintain full funding of the required deposit.
3. Upon final inspection by the City and satisfactory completion of all
required work by the applicant, the deposit shall be released to the
applicant.
4. Any violation of Section 500.110 may result in full forfeiture of the
applicant's deposit.
E. Appeals. Appeals shall be had in the manner provided for in Article V,
Dangerous Buildings, Sections 500.320 et seq.
F. Additional Remedies. If an applicant fails to comply with any obligation
of this Section, the Director of Planning and Development may withhold
or withdraw any grading, building, occupancy or other permit until
such non-compliance is cured.
A. All parking areas on residential property in the City must be
constructed of a paved surface, such as asphalt, concrete or some other
approved durable, load-bearing material, under the following
circumstances:
Section
500.120
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.150
AO:748
Section 500.160. through Section 500.190. (Reserved)
1. Upon change of ownership of the property;
2. Upon change in the primary occupant of the property.
Section
500.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.160
AO:749

ARTICLE II
Building Code
Section 500.200. Adoption of International Building Code.127 [R.O.
2009 §6-16; Ord. No. 2798 §2, 4-21-1986; Ord. No. 3109 §2,
1-22-1991; Ord. No. 3567 §1, 10-6-1997; Ord. No. 3657 §1,
6-21-1999; Ord. No. 3925 §§1 — 2, 2-2-2004; Ord. No. 3944 §1,
7-19-2004; Ord. No. 3971 §1, 3-21-2005; Ord. No. 4553 §2,
6-16-2014]
A. The International Building Code, 2009 Edition, including Appendix
Chapter K (see International Building Code Section 101.2.1, 2009
Edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and is
hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City of Brentwood, Missouri
for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for
supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for
occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures
unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such
structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code on file
in the office of the City of Brentwood are hereby referred to, adopted,
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Section, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed below.
B. The following Sections are hereby revised:
1. Section 101.1. These regulations shall be known as the Building
Code of the City of Brentwood.
2. Section 114.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move,
remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment
regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or
in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
3. Section 114.2 Notice of violation. The Building Official is
authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person
responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension,
repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or
structure in violation of the provisions of this code, or in violation of
a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code.
Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or
condition and the abatement of the violation.
4. Section 114.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is
not complied with promptly, the Building Official is authorized to
127. State Law Reference — Adoption by reference, §67.280, RSMo.
Section
500.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.200
AO:751
Section 500.205. Penalty.
Any person who shall violate a provision of the Building Code adopted
herein or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation
of an approved plan of or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the
appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or
abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the
unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the
provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant
thereto.
5. Section 114.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a
provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a
building or structure in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be
punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 100.080 of
the Brentwood City Code.
6. Section 1612.3. Establishment of flood hazard areas. To establish
flood hazard areas, the Board of Aldermen has adopted a flood
hazard map and supporting data. The flood hazard map shall
include, at a minimum, areas of special flood hazard as identified by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency in an engineering
report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of
Brentwood," dated May 16, 1977, as amended or revised with the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM August 2, 1995)
and Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM December 28,
1973) and related supporting data along with any revisions thereto.
The adopted flood hazard map and supporting data are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be part of this Section.
7. Section 3412.2. Applicability. Structures existing prior to January 1,
1960, in which there is work involving additions, alterations or
changes of occupancy shall be made to comply with the
requirements of this Section or the provisions of Sections 3403
through 3409. The provisions in Sections 3412.2.1 through
3412.2.5 shall apply to existing occupancies that will continue to
be, or are proposed to be, in Groups A, B, E, F, M, R, S and U. These
provisions shall not apply to buildings with occupancies in Group H
or I.
Section
500.200
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.205
AO:752
ARTICLE III
Residential Code
Section 500.210. Adoption of International Residential Code.128
[R.O. 2009 §6-16; Ord. No. 2798 §2, 4-21-1986; Ord. No. 3109 §2,
1-22-1991; Ord. No. 3567 §1, 10-6-1997; Ord. No. 3657 §1,
6-21-1999; Ord. No. 3925 §§1 — 2, 2-2-2004; Ord. No. 3944 §1,
7-19-2004; Ord. No. 3971 §1, 3-21-2005; Ord. No. 4553 §1,
6-16-2014]
A. The International Residential Code, 2009 Edition, including Appendix
Chapters A, B, C, F, H, J, M, N, P, Q, as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the
City of Brentwood, Missouri for regulating and governing the
construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair,
equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and twofamily
dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not
more than three (3) stories in height with separate means of egress as
herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of
fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Residential Code are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
Section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes
prescribed below.
B. The following Sections are hereby revised:
1. Section R101.1. Title. These provisions shall be known as the
Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings of the City of
Brentwood, and shall be cited as such.
2. Section R113.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move,
remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment
regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or
in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
3. Section R113.2 Notice of violation. The Building Official is
authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person
responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension,
repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or
structure in violation of the provisions of this code, or in violation of
a detail statement or a plan approved thereunder, or in violation of
a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code.
Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or
condition and the abatement of the violation.
4. Section R113.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is
not complied with in the time prescribed by such notice, the
128. State Law Reference — Adoption by reference, §67.280, RSMo.
Section
500.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.210
AO:753
Building Official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the
jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in
equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the
removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or
structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order
or direction made pursuant thereto.
5. Section R113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a
provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a
building or structure in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be
punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 100.080 of
the Brentwood City Code.
6. Table R301.2(1). Table R301.2(1) is amended as noted below.
TABLE R301.2(1)
Climate and Geographic Design Criteria
Wind Design Subject to Damage From
Ground
Snow
Load
Speed
(mph)
Topographic
effects
Seismic
Design
CategoryWeathering
Frost
line
depth Termites
20 psf 90 Yes C Severe 30
inches
Moderate
to Heavy
TABLE R301.2(1) (continued)
Climate and Geographic Design Criteria
Winter
Design
Temp
Ice
Barrier
Underlayment
Required Flood Hazards
Air
Freezing
Index
Mean
Annual
Temp
8°F Yes Rate Maps
August 2, 1995
1500 54°
7. Section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems is deleted entirely
and replaced with Section R317.1 for one- and two-family dwellings
and R317.2 for townhouses from the 2006 International Residential
Code as mandated by Missouri Revised Statute Section 67.281. (1)
and (2).
8. Section R317.1 Two-family dwellings. Dwelling units in two-family
dwellings shall be separated from each other by wall and/or floor
assemblies having not less than a 1-hour fire-resistance rating
when tested in accordance with ASTME 119. Fire-resistance-rated
floor-ceiling and wall assemblies shall extend to and be tight
Section
500.210
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.210
AO:754
against the exterior wall, and wall assemblies shall extend to the
underside of the roof sheathing.
Exceptions:
i. A fire-resistance rating of ½ hour shall be permitted in
buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler
system installed in accordance with NFPA 13.
ii. Wall assemblies need not extend through attic spaces when the
ceiling is protected by not less than ? inch (15.9 mm) Type X
gypsum board and an attic draft stop constructed as specified
in Section R502.12.1 is provided above and along the wall
assembly separating the dwellings. The structural framing
supporting the ceiling shall also be protected by not less than
½ inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board or equivalent.
9. Section R317.1.1 Supporting construction. When floor assemblies
are required to be fire-resistance-rated by Section R317.1, the
supporting construction of such assemblies shall have an equal or
greater fire-resistive rating.
10. Section R317.2 Townhouses. Each townhouse shall be considered a
separate building and shall be separated by fire-resistance-rated
wall assemblies meeting the requirements of Section R302 for
exterior walls.
Exception: A common 2-hour fire-resistance-rated wall is permitted
for townhouses if such walls do not contain plumbing or mechanical
equipment, ducts or vents in the cavity of the common wall.
Electrical installations shall be installed in accordance with
Chapters 33 through 42. Penetrations of electrical outlet boxes
shall be in accordance with Section R317.3.
11. Section R317.2.1 Continuity. The fire-resistance-rated wall or
assembly separating townhouses shall be continuous from the
foundation to the underside of the roof sheathing, deck or slab. The
fire-resistance rating shall extend the full length of the wall or
assembly, including wall extensions through and separating
attached enclosed accessory structures.
12. Section R317.2.2 Parapets. Parapets constructed in accordance
with Section R317.2.3 shall be constructed for townhouses as an
extension of exterior walls or common walls in accordance with the
following:
i. Where roof surfaces adjacent to the wall or walls are at the
same elevation, the parapet shall extend not less than 30
inches (762 mm) above the roof surfaces.
ii. Where roof surfaces adjacent to the wall or walls are at
different elevations and the higher roof is not more than 30
Section
500.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.210
AO:755
inches (762 mm) above the lower roof, the parapet shall extend
not less than 30 inches (762 mm) above the lower roof surface.
Exception: A parapet is not required in the two cases above
when the roof is covered with a minimum class C roof covering,
and the roof decking or sheathing is of noncombustible
materials or approved fire-retardant-treated wood for a
distance of 4 feet (1219 mm) on each side of the wall or
walls, or one layer of ?-inch (15.9 mm) Type X gypsum board
is installed directly beneath the roof decking or sheathing,
supported by a minimum of nominal 2-inch (51 mm) ledgers
attached to the sides of the roof framing members, for a
minimum distance of 4 feet (1220 mm) on each side of the wall
or walls.
iii. A parapet is not required where roof surfaces adjacent to the
wall or walls are at different elevations and the higher roof is
more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the lower roof. The
common wall construction from the lower roof to the underside
of the higher roof deck shall have not less than a 1-hour fireresistance
rating. The wall shall be rated for exposure from
both sides.
13. Section R317.2.3.Parapet construction. Parapets shall have the
same fire-resistance rating as that required for the supporting wall
or walls. On any side adjacent to a roof surface, the parapet shall
have noncombustible faces for the uppermost 18 inches (457 mm),
to include counter-flashing and coping materials. Where the roof
slopes toward a parapet at slopes greater than two units vertical in
12 units horizontal (16.7 percent slope), the parapet shall extend to
the same height as any portion of the roof within a distance of 3
feet (914 mm), but in no case shall the height be less than 30 inches
(762 mm).
14. Section R317.2.4 Structural independence. Each individual
townhouse shall be structurally independent.
Exceptions:
i. Foundations supporting exterior walls or common walls.
ii. Structural roof and wall sheathing from each unit may fasten to
the common wall framing.
iii. Nonstructural wall coverings.
iv. Flashing at termination of roof covering over common wall.
v. Townhouses separated by a common 2-hour fire-resistancerated
wall as provided in Section R317.2.
Section
500.210
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.210
AO:756
Section 500.215. Penalty.
Any person who shall violate a provision of the Residential Code adopted
herein or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation
of an approved plan of or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
15. Section P2603.6.1. Septic tanks are not permitted; hence the first
measurement in this paragraph is not applicable. Building sewers
shall be a minimum of 30 inches below grade.
Section
500.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.215
AO:757

ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Provisions
Section 500.220. Registration Of Vacant Residential Structures.129
[Ord. No. 4727 § 1, 8-15-2016]
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide for effective
monitoring and routine inspection of vacant buildings and structures
that, due to housing code violation, may endanger the life, limb, health,
property, safety or welfare of the general public, and this Chapter shall
apply to all residential structures that have been vacant for more than
six (6) months and that are subject to housing code violation.
B. Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this
Section, shall mean:
HOUSING CODE — A local building, fire, health, property maintenance,
nuisance or other ordinance which contains standards regulating the
condition or maintenance of residential buildings or property.
RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE — A structure devoted primarily to
residential use, whether classified as residential or commercial, and
regardless of the number of dwelling units contained within such
structure.
C. Registration Requirement. Every parcel of residential property
improved by a residential structure or commercial property improved
by a structure containing multiple dwelling units that is vacant and has
been vacant for at least six (6) months and is characterized by violation
of the housing code shall be registered as a vacant residential structure
and shall be subject to the registration fee.
D. Designation Of Vacant Residential Structures.
1. Registration. The Director of Planning and Development or his
designee shall investigate any property that may be subject to
registration. Based upon his findings, the Director may register
property as a vacant residential structure subject to this Chapter.
2. Notice Of Registration. Within five (5) business days of such
registration, the City Clerk shall notify the owners of the registered
property by mail at their last known address according to the
records of the City of Brentwood and St. Louis County. Such notice
shall state:
a. A description of the property registered;
129. Editor's Note: The registration fee referenced in this Section was approved by a majority
of the qualified voters at an election held 11-8-2016. Former Section 500.220, Seismic
Design Of New Construction And Major Renovations To Existing Structures, adopted and
amended by R.O. 2009 § 6-18; Ord. No. 3107 § 1, 12-17-1990, was repealed 6-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 4553 § 3.
Section
500.220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.220
AO:759
b. A description of the housing code violation found on the
property;
c. The fact that a semiannual registration fee has been levied on
the property; and
d. The amount of the semiannual registration fee.
3. Time To Cure — Reconsideration. Within thirty (30) days of the date
of notification, the property owner may complete any
improvements to the property that may be necessary to remove the
property from registration under this Chapter and may request a
reinspection of the property and reconsideration of the levy of the
registration fee. Upon receipt of a written request for
reconsideration of the levy of the registration fee which sets out the
reasons claimed by the property owner as to why the registration
fee should be waived, the Director may waive levy of the
registration fee following timely compliance.
4. Appeal Of Registration And/Or Reconsideration To Municipal
Court. Within thirty (30) days of the date of such notification or
within thirty (30) days of the date of reconsideration by the
Director, the property owner may appeal the decision to the office
of the Municipal Court for the City of Brentwood.
E. Registration Fee.
1. Amount Of Fee. There is hereby established and assessed a
semiannual fee which shall be set from time to time by the Board of
Aldermen, and such fee shall be imposed on all owners of property
registered under this Section.
2. Owner Responsible. It shall be the joint and several responsibility
of each owner of property registered pursuant to this Chapter to
pay the semiannual registration fee.
3. Accrual Of Fee. The registration fee shall begin to accrue on the
beginning of the second calendar quarter after registration by the
Director or reconsideration by the Director; however, in the event
that an appeal is filed with the Municipal Court, the registration fee
shall begin to accrue on the beginning of the second calendar
quarter after the final decision of the Municipal Judge or court of
competent jurisdiction.
4. Billing Procedures — Late Penalties. The Director of Finance shall
cause to be mailed to the owner of property registered under this
Chapter, at his or her last known address, a bill for the semiannual
registration fee. The fee shall be due and payable within thirty (30)
days of mailing. In addition to any other penalties provided by law,
if an owner fails to pay the fee assessed for such property within
thirty (30) days of the date of mailing, a late payment fee of twenty-
Section
500.220
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.220
AO:760
Section 500.230. through Section 500.260. (Reserved)
five dollars ($25.00) per month shall be assessed for each month
during which the fee remains unpaid.
5. Failure To Pay Fee Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any owner of
property registered pursuant to this Chapter to fail to pay the
registration fee imposed for such property. Any person found guilty
of failing to pay any required fee shall be punished as provided in
Section 100.080 of the Brentwood City Code.
6. Collection Of Delinquent Fees — Lien On Property And Other
Effects Of Delinquent Fees — Foreclosure Proceedings.
a. Action To Recover. In addition to any other penalties provided
by law, the City may initiate and pursue an action in a court of
competent jurisdiction to recover any unpaid fees, interest and
penalties from any person liable therefor and, in addition, may
recover the cost of such action, including reasonable attorney
fees.
b. Lien On Property. Any unpaid or delinquent fees, interest and/
or penalties, whether or not reduced to judgment, shall
constitute a lien against the property for which the fee was
originally assessed until the same shall be fully satisfied. The
Director of Finance is authorized to take all steps necessary to
file and perfect such liens as may be required or directed by
the Director from time to time.
c. Obtaining Permits Prohibited. In addition to any other
penalties provided by law, if an owner fails to pay the fee
assessed for such property, including any late payment fee
subsequently imposed within sixty (60) days of the date of
mailing of the initial bill, said owner shall not be permitted to
apply for, obtain or renew any City license or permit of any kind
until such delinquency has been satisfied.
d. Foreclosure. Any registration fees which are delinquent for a
period of one (1) year shall be subject to foreclosure
proceedings in the same manner as delinquent real property
taxes. The owner of the property against which the assessment
was originally made shall be able to redeem the property only
by presenting evidence that the violation of the applicable
housing code cited by the Director has been cured and
presenting payment of all registration fees and penalties.
e. Sale Of Property. Upon bona fide sale of the property to an
unrelated party, the lien on such property for the registration
fees shall be considered released and the delinquent
registration fee forgiven.
Section
500.220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.230
AO:761

ARTICLE V
Dangerous Buildings130
Section 500.270. Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §6-26; Ord. No. 1899 §1,
1-19-1970]
The purpose of this Article is to provide for vacation and the mandatory
demolition of buildings and structures or mandatory repairs and
maintenance of buildings and structures within the City which are
detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of its residents and which are
declared to be a public nuisance.
Section 500.280. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §6-27; Ord. No. 3134 §1,
4-15-1991]
A. For the purpose of this Article, any structure or premises that has any
or all of the conditions or defects described below shall be considered
detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City
and shall be considered dangerous:
1. Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members
list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing
through the center of gravity of any such wall or vertical structural
member falls outside of the middle third of its base.
2. Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show thirty-three percent
(33%) or more, of damage or deterioration of the supporting
member or members, or fifty percent (50%) of damage or
deterioration of the non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or
covering.
3. Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors,
roofs, or other horizontal structural members, or in which the same
are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength or deflections
to be reasonably safe for the purpose used or intended to be used.
4. Any portion of a building, structure or appurtenance that has been
damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect,
abandonment, vandalism or by any other cause to such an extent
that it is likely to partially or completely collapse, or to become
detached or dislodged.
5. Those which are uninhabited and are open at door, window, wall or
roof.
6. A building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling
purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light,
ventilation, mechanical or plumbing system, or otherwise, is
130. Cross Reference — As To Nuisances, Ch. 220. State Law References — Dangerous
Buildings, §§67.400 Et Seq., RSMo.
Section
500.270
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.280
AO:763
determined by the Building Official to be unsanitary, unfit for
human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause
sickness or disease.
7. Those under construction upon which no substantial work shall
have been performed for ninety (90) days.
8. The building or structure, or any portion thereof, is clearly unsafe
for its use and occupancy.
9. Those in the process of demolition upon which no substantial work
shall have been performed for a period of fourteen (14) days
immediately following the time a notice shall be issued to complete
the demolition thereof under Section 500.310 of this Article.
10. Those containing therein substantial accumulations of trash,
garbage or other materials susceptible to fire, or constituting or
providing a harboring place for vermin or other obnoxious animals
or insects or in any way threatening the health of the occupants
thereof or the health of persons in the vicinity thereof.
11. Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress
that does not conform to the approved Building or Fire Code of the
jurisdiction as related to the requirements for existing buildings.
12. The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or
other means of egress is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise
unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of egress.
13. Those buildings built in violation of any safety provision of the
Building Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code,
Minimum Housing Standards Code or the Fire Prevention Code of
the City or used in violation thereof.
14. The building or structure, or part of the building or structure,
because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction,
the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary
for the support, or for any other reason, is likely to partially or
completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or
underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fail or give
way.
15. Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or
ornamentation on the exterior thereof that is not of sufficient
strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in
place so as to be capable of resisting natural or artificial loads of
one and one-half (1½) the original designed value.
16. Any building or structure, because of a lack of sufficient or property
fire-resistance-rated construction, fire protection systems,
electrical system, fuel connections, mechanical system, plumbing
Section
500.280
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.280
AO:764
Section 500.290. Standards. [R.O. 2009 §6-28; Ord. No. 3134 §1,
4-15-1991]
Section 500.300. Duties of Building Official and Director of
Planning and Development. [R.O. 2009 §6-29; Ord. No. 3134 §1,
4-15-1991]
system or other cause, is determined by the Building Official to be
a threat to life or health.
17. Any portion of a building remaining on a site after the demolition or
destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building
or structure is abandoned so as to constitute such building or
portion thereof as an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
A. The following standards shall be followed in substance in ordering
repair, vacation or demolition:
1. In any case where the conditions constituting the public nuisance
are such that the cost to repair the building or structure so that it
will no longer constitute a public nuisance is less than fifty percent
(50%) of the value of the building or structure, it shall be ordered
repaired and in the event it is not repaired by the owner, then the
City shall abate the nuisance by performing the necessary repairs.
2. In any case where the conditions constituting the public nuisance
are such that the cost to repair the building or structure so that it
will no longer constitute a public nuisance equal or exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the value of the building or structure, it shall be
ordered demolished and in the event it is not demolished by the
owner, then the City shall abate the nuisance by demolition.
3. If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it
dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of its occupants, it shall
be ordered to be vacated pending abatement of the nuisance.
4. Any building or structure constituting a public nuisance because of
the conditions described in Subsection (7) of Section 500.280 of
this Article shall be ordered to be completed in accordance with
lawful plans and specifications and if it shall not be so completed by
the owner, then the City shall abate the nuisance by demolition.
5. Any building or structure found to be a public nuisance because of
the conditions described in Subsection (9) of Section 500.280 of
this Article shall be ordered demolished and in the event it is not
demolished by the owner, then the City shall abate the nuisance by
demolition.
A. The Building Official shall:
Section
500.280
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.300
AO:765
Section 500.310. Notice. [R.O. 2009 §6-30; Ord. No. 3134 §1,
4-15-1991]
Whenever the Building Official has determined that any building or
structure is a public nuisance under the provisions of this Article, he/she
shall, as soon as possible thereafter, notify the owner, occupant, lessee,
mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest in the building
or structure as shown by the land records of the Recorder of Deeds for
the County that such building or structure has been found to be a public
nuisance under the provisions of this Article. The notice shall set forth a
description of the conditions found in the building or structure so as to
constitute the building or structure as a public nuisance under Section
500.280 of this Article. The notice shall also provide for abatement of the
nuisance by ordering the building or structure to be vacated if such be the
1. Inspect any building or structure about which complaints are filed
by any person alleging that the building or structure contains any
of the conditions described in Section 500.280 of this Article.
2. Inspect any building or structure reported by the Fire or Police
Departments of this City when that department has reason to
believe that the building or structure has any of the conditions set
forth in Section 500.280 of this Article.
3. Inspect any building or structure of the City at any time whenever
there is reason to believe that the building or structure has a
condition described in Section 500.280 of this Article.
4. Determine, in any case, where inspection shows that a building or
structure has any of the conditions referred to in Section 500.280
of this Article, whether or not it reasonably appears there is
immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of any person
because of such condition and if it does not reasonably appear, to
immediately notify the Director of Planning and Development
thereof. Should the Director of Planning and Development concur
in the finding of the Building Official that there is immediate
danger as aforesaid, the Building Official shall immediately post
upon the building or structure a notice reading as follows: "This
building has been found to be a public nuisance by the City of
Brentwood Director of Planning and Development. It also
reasonably appears that this building or structure is an immediate
danger to the health, safety or welfare of persons thereabout or
therein. This notice is to remain on this building or structure until it
is brought into compliance with the codes of the City of Brentwood,
Missouri. It is unlawful to remove this notice until such compliance
has occurred." Nothing contained in this Subsection shall be
construed to deprive any person entitled thereto by this Article of
the notice and hearings prescribed herein.
5. Report to the Director of Planning and Development any noncompliance
with the notice provided for in this Article.
Section
500.300
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.310
AO:766
case, repaired or demolished, giving a reasonable time for commencement
of the work and requiring the work to proceed continuously without
unnecessary delay. All notices under this Section shall be served either by
personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, but if service
cannot be had by either of these modes of service, then service may be had
by publication.
Section 500.320. Hearing — Appeal. [R.O. 2009 §6-32]
A. Upon application of any interested person receiving notice pursuant to
the provisions of this Article or upon failure to commence the work or
repair or demolition, or upon failure to proceed continuously with the
work without unnecessary delay, as provided to be done in the notice,
the Director of Planning and Development, or his or her designee, shall
set a date for hearing, and cause notice thereof to be served upon the
owner of the property at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing. The
notice of hearing shall be served in the same manner as the notice
required by Section 500.310. The notice shall also set forth the date,
time and place for hearing and shall order such person to appear before
the Director of Planning and Development, or his or her designee, and
show cause, if any, why the building should not be repaired or
demolished.
B. Any party may be represented by counsel and shall have any
opportunity to be heard.
C. If the evidence at the hearing supports a finding that the structure is a
nuisance or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the residents
of the City, the Director of Planning and Development shall issue an
order making specific findings of fact, based upon competent and
substantial evidence, which shows the building or structure to suffer
the conditions described in this Chapter, to be a nuisance and to be
detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the City.
The order shall also set forth a deadline for the structure to be repaired
or demolished.
D. If the evidence at the hearing does not support a finding that the
structure suffers from the conditions described in this Article, is a
nuisance and is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the
residents of the City, then no order shall be issued.
E. The decision of the Director of Planning and Development, or his or her
designee, may be appealed by filing an appeal, on such forms as
prescribed by the City, with the City Administrator within seven (7) days
from the Director's decision. The appeal form shall set forth, at a
minimum, the detailed grounds for such appeal and such further
information as requested on the appeal form. The City Administrator
shall review the decision of the Director of Planning and Development
either, within the Administrator's sole discretion, upon the record
previously made or upon a new hearing and shall issue a written
decision to all parties; such decision may be subject to judicial review in
Section
500.310
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.320
AO:767
Section 500.330. Service. [R.O. 2009 §6-32; Ord. No. 3134 §1,
4-15-1991]
Whenever a notice is required to be served upon the persons interested in
any building or structure under Section 500.310, the notice shall be served
upon the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other persons
having an interest in the building or structure as shown by the land records
of the Recorder of Deeds for the County and shall be signed by the person
who has the responsibility to issue the notice. The notice shall be served, if
the party or parties to be served reside in the City, by handing the notice to
the person to be served by anyone competent to be a witness or by leaving
the notice at the usual place of abode of the one to be served with a member
of the household over the age of fifteen (15) years. If the person to be served
shall not reside in the City or shall have absented himself/herself from the
City or concealed himself/herself so that personal service may not be made
as herein provided for and if his/her address shall be known, then service
shall be made by posting a copy of such notice in a conspicuous place on the
building or structure to which it relates and by certified mail, return receipt
requested; but if his/her address shall not be known, the service of notice
shall be by posting and by publication. The publication shall contain the
full text of the notice and shall be published at least once a week for three
(3) consecutive weeks on the same day of the week in some newspaper
of general circulation published in the County and shall contain the time
specified in the notice for a hearing to be held or for the commencement
of work or for any other thing to be done which shall be at least thirty (30)
days from the date of the first (1st) publication of notice.
Section 500.340. Findings and Conclusions. [R.O. 2009 §6-33; Ord.
No. 3134 §1, 4-15-1991]
Within thirty (30) days from the date of the hearing required by Section
500.320, the Director of Planning and Development shall, upon the basis
of competent and substantial evidence offered at the hearing, make a
conclusion of law as to whether or not the building or structure in question
is a public nuisance under the terms of this Article and detrimental to the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City; specifically finding
as a matter of fact the condition or conditions of such building or structure
which constitute the nuisance. If it is found that the building or structure
is a public nuisance, further findings shall be made as to whether or not
the procedures required by this Article have been substantially met and
complied with and whether or not the abatement order of the Building
Official to abate the nuisance was reasonable in its terms and conditions
and within the standards of this Article. In the event it is found that the
abatement order was not reasonable or within the standards of this Article,
it shall be the duty of the Director of Planning and Development to make his/
her own finding of fact as to what is reasonably required to abate the public
the Circuit Court of St. Louis County by filing an appropriate petition
for judicial review within fifteen (15) days of the Administrator's
decision.
Section
500.320
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.340
AO:768
nuisance within the standards of this Article. If the Director of Planning
and Development finds that a public nuisance does not exist or that the
procedures of this Article have not been substantially met and complied
with, the proceedings against the building or structure shall be dismissed.
Section 500.350. Order. [R.O. 2009 §6-34; Ord. No. 3134 §1,
4-15-1991]
If a proceeding is not dismissed following the findings required by Section
500.340, the Director of Planning and Development shall issue an order
directing the building or structure to be completed, repaired, demolished or
vacated, as the case may be, within the standards of this Article. This order,
together with the findings of fact and conclusions of law required by Section
500.340, shall be in writing and shall be immediately delivered or mailed to
each party to the hearing or to his/her attorney of record. In addition, copies
of the order and findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be posted in
a conspicuous place in City Hall for a period of thirty (30) days from the
date of issuance thereof. The order shall state a reasonable time which shall
not be less than thirty (30) days from the date of issuance within which to
comply with the order and shall provide that if it is not complied with within
such time, the Board of Aldermen, at the request of the Director of Planning
and Development, shall cause the work to be done by the City and its own
crews or by contractors employed by the City for that purpose.
Section 500.360. Costs. [R.O. 2009 §6-35; Ord. No. 3134 §1,
4-15-1991]
A. Whenever the City shall have caused the work to be done as provided
by Section 500.350, the Board of Aldermen shall certify the costs of the
work, for the cost of the reporter at the hearing and for the cost of all
expert witnesses retained by the City in connection with the hearing to
the City Clerk/Administrator who shall cause a special tax bill therefore
to be issued against the lot, tract or parcel of land upon which the
building or structure is located. The special tax bill from the date of its
issuance shall be deemed a personal debt against the property owner
and in addition shall be a lien on the lot, tract or parcel of land until paid
and shall be registered in the office of the City Clerk/Administrator in a
book to be kept by him/her for such purposes. The tax bill shall be
collected by the official or authority collecting taxes.
B. At the written request of the taxpayer delivered to the City Clerk/
Administrator of the City, a tax bill for repair or demolition of a building
or structure may be paid in installments over a period of not more than
ten (10) years. Interest shall be paid at the maximum rate per annum
allowable by law on the unpaid balance of the special assessment
computed from the date of issuance. If any payment of principal or
interest shall not be paid within thirty (30) days of its due date, the
entire remaining balance of the tax bill shall immediately become due
and payable.
Section
500.340
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.360
AO:769
Section 500.370. Insurance. [R.O. 2009 §6-36; Ord. No. 3134 §1,
4-15-1991]
C. If request for installment payments is not made prior to the time the
Board of Aldermen shall certify the cost of the work to the City Clerk/
Administrator, the tax bill shall be payable in sixty (60) days from its
date of issuance with interest thereon at the maximum rate per annum
allowable by law.
D. Tax bills issued under this Section shall be prima facie evidence of the
validity of the bill, the doing of the work and the liability of the property
for the damages stated in the bill and shall be collected if default should
occur by suit brought in a court of competent jurisdiction by the City
Attorney on behalf of the City.
A. If there are proceeds of any insurance policy based upon a covered
claim payment made for damage or loss to a building or other structure
caused by or arising out of any fire, explosion or other casualty loss and
if the covered claim payment is in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the
face value of the policy covering a building or other structure, then the
following procedure shall apply:
1. The insurer shall withhold from the covered claim payment twentyfive
percent (25%) of the covered claim payment and shall pay that
amount to the City to deposit into an interest-bearing account. Any
named mortgagee on the insurance policy shall maintain priority
over any obligation under this Section. If a special tax bill or
assessment is issued by the City for the expenses of repair or
demolition of such building as a dangerous building, the monies
held by the City shall be applied toward the payment of the special
tax bill or assessment. If there is any excess, it shall be paid by the
City to the insured or as the terms of the policy, including any
endorsements thereto, provide.
2. The City shall release the proceeds and any interest which has
accrued on such proceeds received under Subsection (1) of this
Section to the insured or as the terms of the policy and
endorsements thereto provide within thirty (30) days after receipt
of such insurance monies, unless the City has instituted legal
proceedings under the provisions of Sections 500.350 and 500.360.
If the City has proceeded under the provisions of Sections 500.350
and 500.360, all monies in excess of that necessary to comply with
the provisions of Sections 500.350 and 500.360 for the removal of
the building or structure, less salvage value, shall be paid to the
insured.
3. The City may certify that, in lieu of payment of all or part of the
covered claim payment under this Section, it has obtained
satisfactory proof that the insured has or will remove debris and
repair, demolish or otherwise make the premises safe and secure.
In this event, the City shall issue a certificate within thirty (30) days
Section
500.360
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.370
AO:770
Section 500.380. Appeal. [R.O. 2009 §6-37; Ord. No. 3134 §1,
4-15-1991]
Any owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent or other person having
an interest in the building or structure may appeal from the order and
determination of the Director of Planning and Development made under
the provisions of Section 500.350 of this Article. The appeal shall be to the
Circuit Court of the County as established in Chapter 536, RSMo.
Section 500.390. Emergency Powers. [R.O. 2009 §6-38; Ord. No.
3134 §1, 4-15-1991]
In all cases where it reasonably appears that an immediate danger to the
health, safety or welfare of any person exists, the Director of Planning and
Development may take emergency action to vacate, repair or demolish a
building or structure which is a public nuisance under the provisions of this
Article.
Section 500.400. Liability of Officers, Agents or Employees. [R.O.
2009 §6-39; Ord. No. 3134 §1, 4-15-1991]
No officer, agent or employee of the City shall be personally liable for any
damage that may occur to any persons or property as a result of any act
required of him/her or permitted to be taken by him/her under the terms
of this Article. Any suit brought against any such officer, agent or employee
of the City as a result of any such acts required or permitted shall be
defended by the City until the final determination of the proceedings; and if
judgment shall be obtained, it shall be paid by the City. It is hereby further
declared that no officer, agent or employee of the City owes any duty under
the provisions of this Article to any citizen or other individual, but that the
duties prescribed herein and imposed upon officers, agents or employees of
the City are duties to be performed for the government of said City.
Section 500.410. Violations — Penalties. [R.O. 2009 §6-40; Ord. No.
1899 §1, 1-19-1970; Ord. No. 3134 §2, 4-15-1991]
after receipt of proof to permit covered claim payment to the
insured without deduction. It shall be the obligation of the insured
or other person making the claim to provide the insurance company
with the written certificate provided for in this Subsection.
4. No provision of this Section shall be construed to make the City a
party to any insurance contract.
A. Any person having an interest in a dangerous building who shall fail to
comply with any notice or order to repair, recondition, vacate or
demolish the building given by any person authorized by this Code to
give such notice or order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with any
notice to vacate and anyone having an interest in the building as shown
Section
500.370
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.410
AO:771
Section 500.420. Fines on Repeat Offenders. [R.O. 2009 §6-41; Ord.
No. 3228 §1, 7-6-1992]
Any owner/occupant who has originally been cited or given notice of
violations by this City's representative, designated person or official and
has made the necessary corrections who then continues to cause conditions
of buildings and structures which have been determined to be detrimental
to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City and therefore
constitutes a violation of Section 500.800, defined and enumerated, will
be guilty of an offense and subject to a fine of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00). This amount to be paid to the City of Brentwood if upon notice of
repeat nuisance to the owner/occupant abatement is not completed within
forty-eight (48) hours after notice was served.
Section 500.430. Appeal for Repeat Offenders. [R.O. 2009 §6-42;
Ord. No. 3235 §1, 8-17-1992]
Any owner/occupant fined under the terms of Section 500.420, defined and
enumerated, may request a hearing before the City Clerk/Administrator on
the question of a repeated violation, and/or whether or not it was properly
abated within the prescribed forty-eight (48) hour remedy period. If, upon
such hearing, the City Clerk/Administrator finds that a violation exists, he/
she shall declare the building or structure to be detrimental to the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the City, uphold the fine upon the
violation and order its immediate abatement.
Section 500.440. Buildings to Be Secured. [R.O. 2009 §6-43; Ord.
No. 3447 §1, 11-6-1995]
by the land records of the Recorder of Deeds of the County where
the land lies and under a legal duty to repair, who fails to repair the
building in accordance with any notice given as provided for in this
Code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
C. Any person removing the notice provided for in Section 500.310 shall
be guilty of an ordinance violation.
A. If a structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation, occupancy or
use and is not in danger of structural collapse, Code Official shall be
permitted to post a placard of condemnation on the premises and order
the structure closed up so it will not be an attractive nuisance. Upon
failure of the owners to close up the premises within the time period
specified in the order, the Code Official shall cause it to be closed
through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by
private persons and the cost closed through any available public agency
or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof
shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is
located and shall be a lien on such real estate.
B. The owner is required to commence restoration of the structure to
habitable condition within a period of three (3) months from the date
Section
500.410
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.440
AO:772
Section 500.450. Authority to Disconnect Service Utilities.
The Building Official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection
of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this
Article in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate
hazard to life or property or when such utility connection has been made
without approval. The Building Official shall notify the serving utility and,
whenever possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or
service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If
not notified prior to disconnection the owner or occupant of the building
structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical
thereafter.
Section 500.460. through Section 500.490. (Reserved)
the placard of condemnation is posted. Failure to do so shall be
considered a violation of this Code and shall be punishable in
accordance with Section 100.080 of the Brentwood City Code. Each day
the violation remains unabated shall constitute a separate offense.
Section
500.440
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.460
AO:773

ARTICLE VI
Electricity
DIVISION 1
Generally
Section 500.500. National Electrical Code. [R.O. 2009 §6-51; Ord.
No. 3567 §2, 10-6-1997; Ord. No. 3657 §2, 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 3971
§2, 3-21-2005; Ord. No. 3998 §1, 12-19-2005; Ord. No. 4553 §4,
6-16-2014]
A. The National Electrical Code, 2008 Edition, as published by the
National Fire Protection Association, be and is hereby adopted as the
Electrical Code of the City of Brentwood, Missouri regulating and
governing the design, construction, installation, alteration, repairs,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of electrical
systems and equipment as herein provided; providing for the issuance
of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the Electrical
Code on file in the office of the City Clerk are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Section, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed below.
B. The following Sections are hereby revised:
1. Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the
Electrical Code of the City of Brentwood.
2. Section 106.6.2. Fee schedule. The fees for electrical work shall be
as indicated in Appendix A to Chapter 500 of the Municipal Code of
the City of Brentwood.
3. Section 106.6.3. Fee refunds. The Code Official shall authorize the
refunding of fees as follows:
i. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was
erroneously paid or collected.
ii. Not more than 65 percent of the permit fee paid when no work
has been done under a permit issued in accordance with the
Electrical Code.
iii. Delete
The Code Official shall not authorize the refunding of
any fee paid, except upon written application filed by
the original permittee not later than 180 days after the
date of fee payment.
4. Section 108.4. Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair
Section
500.500
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.500
AO:775
Section 500.510. Penalty.
Any person who shall violate a provision of the Electrical Code adopted
herein or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation
of an approved plan of or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 500.515. Change of User — Electric Provider Required to
Notify City. [Ord. No. 3332 §1, 3-21-1994]
For any month when there is a change of user of residential (rate 001) or
non-residential (rate 043) electric service within the City, Ameren Missouri
shall notify the Building Commissioner (or other appropriate official) of the
City in writing within seven (7) working days after the end of the month of
said changes, indicating the address and apartment or unit number, and the
name(s) of electric user(s) per service and address and apartment or unit
number in whose name service is connected or billed.
work in violation of the approved construction documents or
directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or certificate issued
under the provisions of this code shall be punishable in accordance
with the provisions of Section 100.080 of the Brentwood City Code.
5. Section 108.5. Stop work orders. Upon notice from the Code
Official that work is being done contrary to the provisions of the
code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall
immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be
given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the
person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under
which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists,
the Code Official shall not be required to give a written notice prior
to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work on
the system after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be punishable in accordance
with the provisions of Section 100.080 of the Brentwood City Code.
6. Appendix K Administrative Provisions to the National Electrical
Code 2008 Edition (NFPA 70) of the International Building Code
2009 Edition.
Section
500.500
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.515
AO:776
DIVISION 2
Electrical Permits and Fees
Section 500.520. Electrical Permit Required — Homeowner Permit.
[R.O. 2009 §6-56; Ord. No. 3567 §2, 10-6-1997]
Section 500.530. Permit and Inspection Fees. [R.O. 2009 §6-59;
Ord. No. 3567 §2, 10-6-1997]
Fees for inspections of buildings and premises where electrical installations
and maintenance are made under electrical, industrial, maintenance or
communication permits shall be paid to the General Fund of the City of
Brentwood in accordance with the schedule for electrical permits and
inspections contained in Appendix A to this Chapter 500 of the Municipal
Code of the City of Brentwood.
A. A permit may be issued for an addition or repair, modification or
reconstruction of an existing electrical system on the premises of a
detached single-family dwelling, including accessory structures, to the
owner or to a member of his/her immediate family residing with him/her
under the following conditions:
1. The dwelling shall be designed and used solely for living purposes.
2. The dwelling shall be occupied by or vacant and intended for
immediate occupancy by the owner and his/her family and no other
persons.
3. The permittee shall personally perform all required work.
B. Prior to the issuance of a permit under this provision, the Code Official
may require an affidavit or other reasonable proof that the request for
permit complies with the foregoing provisions and that the applicant
has the necessary knowledge and ability to perform the proposed work.
This Section does not authorize a waiver or modification of any
provision of this code relating to the materials, design, installation or
practice of electrical work or to the preparation and approval of
construction documents or to required fees for permits or inspections.
C. A permit issued to a homeowner pursuant to this code may be revoked
by the Code Official if he/she determines that work under the permit is
not being properly performed or that the application did not comply, or
no longer complies, with the provisions of the homeowner permit. Upon
revocation the homeowner may be required by the Code Official to
proceed immediately to procure a licensed person to correct or
complete the work.
Section
500.520
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.530
AO:777

DIVISION 3
Licensing of Electricians
Section 500.540. Required County License. [R.O. 2009 §6-71; Code
1969 §§12-8, 12-19]
No person shall engage in the business of making or maintaining electrical
installations nor shall any person install any electrical material, apparatus
or equipment of any kind without first having been examined and licensed
by the Building Commission of the County and having procured an electrical
contractor's license from the City.
Section 500.550. Electrical Contractor's License. [R.O. 2009 §6-74;
Code 1969 §12-11]
An electrical contractor's license shall permit any person to engage in
the work of installing, erecting and maintaining electrical wiring, fixtures,
apparatus, equipment, devices or components thereof that are used for
generation, transmission and utilization of electricity in and on buildings
and premises subject to the provisions of this Article. The fee for an
electrical contractor license shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per
annum.
Section 500.560. through Section 500.670. (Reserved)
Section
500.540
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.560
AO:779

ARTICLE VII
Mechanical Systems
Section 500.680. Mechanical Code Adopted — Amendments. [R.O.
2009 §6-101; Ord. No. 2798 §2, 4-21-1986; Ord. No. 3140 §2,
5-20-1991; Ord. No. 3567 §3, 10-6-1997; Ord. No. 3657 §3,
6-21-1999; Ord. No. 3971 §3, 3-21-2005; Ord. No. 4553 §5,
6-16-2014]
A. The International Mechanical Code, 2009 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Mechanical
Code of the City of Brentwood, Missouri regulating and governing the
design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation,
alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of plumbing systems as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Mechanical Code on file in the office of the City Clerk are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
Section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes
prescribed below.
B. The following Sections are hereby revised:
1. Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the
Mechanical Code of the City of Brentwood.
2. Section 106.5.2. Fee schedule. The fees for mechanical work shall
be as indicated in Appendix A to Chapter 500 of the Municipal Code
of the City of Brentwood.
3. Section 106.5.3. Fee refunds. The Code Official shall authorize the
refunding of fees as follows:
i. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was
erroneously paid or collected.
ii. Not more than 65 percent of the permit fee paid when no work
has been done under a permit issued in accordance with the
Mechanical Code.
iii. Delete
The Code Official shall not authorize the refunding of
any fee paid, except upon written application filed by
the original permittee not later than 180 days after the
date of fee payment.
4. Section 108.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm
or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish
or utilize a mechanical system, or cause same to be done, in conflict
with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
Section
500.680
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.680
AO:781
Section 500.685. Penalty.
Any person who shall violate a provision of the Mechanical Code adopted
herein or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation
of an approved plan of or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
5. Section 108.2 Notice of violation. The Code Official shall serve a
notice of violation or order to the person responsible for the
erection, installation, alteration, extension, repair, removal or
demolition of mechanical work in violation of the provisions of this
code, or in violation of a detail statement or the approved
construction documents thereunder, or in violation of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code. Such order
shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and
the abatement of the violation.
6. Section 108.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is
not complied with promptly, the Code Official shall request the
legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate
proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such
violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code
or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
7. Section 108.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair
work in violation of the approved construction documents or
directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or certificate issued
under the provisions of this code shall be punishable in accordance
with the provisions of Section 100.080 of the Brentwood City Code.
8. Section 108.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the Code Official
that work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in
a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease.
Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of
the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the
work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is
authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the Code
Official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to
stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work on the
system after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be punishable in accordance
with the provisions of Section 100.080 of the Brentwood City Code.
Section
500.680
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.690
AO:782
Section 500.690. through Section 500.730. (Reserved)
Section
500.690
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.690
AO:783

ARTICLE VIII
Plumbing
Section 500.740. Plumbing Code Adopted — Amendments. [R.O.
2009 §6-126; Ord. No. 3567 §5, 10-6-1997; Ord. No. 3657 §4,
6-21-1999; Ord. No. 3944 §2, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 3971 §4,
3-21-2005; Ord. No. 4553 §6, 6-16-2014]
A. The International Plumbing Code, 2009 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Plumbing
Code of the City of Brentwood, Missouri regulating and governing the
design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation,
alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of plumbing systems as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Plumbing Code on file in the office of the City Clerk are hereby referred
to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Section,
with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed below.
B. The following Sections are hereby revised:
1. Section 101.1. These regulations shall be known as the
International Plumbing Code of the City of Brentwood.
2. Section 106.6.2. Fee schedule. The fees for all plumbing work shall
be as indicated in the fee schedule of the Municipal Code, City of
Brentwood Appendix A to Chapter 500.
3. Section 106.6.3. Fee refunds. The Code Official shall authorize the
refunding of fees as follows:
i. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was
erroneously paid or collected.
ii. Not more than 65 percent of the permit fee paid when no work
has been done under a permit issued in accordance with the
International Plumbing Code.
iii. Delete
The Code Official shall not authorize the refunding of
any fee paid except upon written application filed by
the original permittee not later than 180 days after the
date of fee payment.
4. Section 108.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, remove,
demolish or utilize any plumbing system, or cause same to be done,
in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
Section
500.740
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.740
AO:785
5. Section 108.2 Notice of violation. The Code Official shall serve a
notice of violation or order to the person responsible for the
erection, installation, alteration, extension, repair, removal or
demolition of plumbing work in violation of the provisions of this
code, or in violation of a detail statement or the approved
construction documents thereunder, or in violation of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code. Such order
shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and
the abatement of the violation.
6. Section 108.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is
not complied with promptly, the Code Official shall request the
legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate
proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such
violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code
or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
7. Section 108.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair
mechanical work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall be
punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 100.080 of
the Brentwood City Code.
8. Section 108.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the Code Official
that work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in
a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease.
Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of
the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the
work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is
authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the Code
Official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to
stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work on the
system after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be punishable in accordance
with the provisions of Section 100.080 of the Brentwood City Code.
9. Section 305.6.1. Delete entirely and replace with: Building sewers
shall be a minimum of 30 inches below grade.
10. Section 904.1. Roof extension. All open vent pipes that extend
through a roof shall be terminated at least 12 inches above the roof,
except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than
weather protection, the vent extensions shall be run at least 7 feet
above the roof.
Section
500.740
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.745
AO:786
Section 500.745. Penalty.
Any person who shall violate a provision of the Plumbing Code adopted
herein or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation
of an approved plan of or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 500.750. through Section 500.790. (Reserved)
Section
500.745
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.750
AO:787

ARTICLE IX
Existing Building Code
Section 500.800. Existing Building Code Adopted — Amendments.
[R.O. 2009 §6-151; Ord. No. 3567 §6, 10-6-1997; Ord. No. 3657 §6,
6-21-1999; Ord. No. 3971 §5, 3-21-2005; Ord. No. 4553 §7,
6-16-2014; Ord. No. 4565 §1, 9-15-2014
A. A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the
City Clerk and the City of Brentwood, Missouri, being marked and
designated as the International Existing Building Code, 2009 Edition,
as published by the International Code Council be and is hereby
adopted as the code of the City of Brentwood, Missouri, for regulating
the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation,
alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to or
change of occupancy in existing buildings in the City of Brentwood,
Missouri, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of
fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions, and terms of such International Existing Building Code,
2009 Edition, published by the International Code Council on file in the
office of the City Clerk and hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this Section.
B. The following Sections are hereby revised:
1. Section 101.1. These regulations shall be known as the "Existing
Building Code of the City of Brentwood."
2. Section 113.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm, or corporation to repair, alter, extend, add, move, remove,
demolish, or change the occupancy of any building or equipment
regulated by this code or cause same to be done in conflict with or
in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
3. Section 113.2 Notice of violation. The Code Official is authorized to
serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for
the repair, alteration, extension, addition, moving, removal,
demolition, or change in the occupancy of a building in violation of
the provisions of this code or in violation of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this code. Such order shall direct the
discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement
of the violation.
4. Section 113.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is
not complied with promptly, the Code Official is authorized to
request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the
appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct, or
abate such violation or to require the removal or termination of the
unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the
provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant
thereto.
Section
500.800
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.800
AO:789
Section 500.805. Penalty.
Any person who shall violate a provision of the Existing Building Code
adopted herein or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof
or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in
violation of an approved plan of or directive of the Code Official, or of
a permit or certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be
guilty of an ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense.
5. Section 113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a
provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a
building or structure in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be
punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 100.080 of
the Brentwood City Code.
6. Section 1301.2 Applicability. Structures existing prior to January 1,
1960, in which there is work involving additions, alterations or
changes of occupancy shall be made to conform to the
requirements of this Chapter or the provisions of Chapters 4
through 12. The provisions of Sections 1301.2.1 through 1301.2.5
shall apply to existing occupancies that will continue to be, or are
proposed to be, in Groups A, B, E, F, M, R, and S. These provisions
shall not apply to buildings with occupancies in Group H or Group
I.
Section
500.800
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.805
AO:790
ARTICLE X
Fuel Gas Code
Section 500.810. Fuel Gas Code Adopted — Amendments. [R.O.
2009 §6-152; Ord. No. 3567 §7, 10-6-1997; Ord. No. 3657 §7,
6-21-1999; Ord. No. 3925 §3, 2-2-2004; Ord. No. 3944 §3, 7-19-2004;
Ord. No. 3971 §6, 3-21-2005; Ord. No. 4553 §8, 6-16-2014]
A. The International Fuel Gas Code, 2009 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas
Code of the City of Brentwood, Missouri regulating and governing fuel
gas systems and gas fired appliances as herein provided; providing for
the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the
Fuel Gas Code on file in the office of the City Clerk are hereby referred
to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Section,
with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed below.
B. The following Sections are hereby revised:
1. Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fuel
Gas Code of the City of Brentwood.
2. Section 106.6.2. Fee schedule. The fees for mechanical work shall
be as indicated in Appendix A to Chapter 500 of the Municipal Code
of the City of Brentwood.
3. Section 106.6.3. Fee refunds. The Code Official shall authorize the
refunding of fees as follows:
i. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was
erroneously paid or collected.
ii. Not more than 65 percent of the permit fee paid when no work
has been done under a permit issued in accordance with the
Fuel Gas Code.
iii. Delete
The Code Official shall not authorize the refunding of
any fee paid, except upon written application filed by
the original permittee not later than 180 days after the
date of fee payment.
4. Section 108.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm
or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish
or utilize an installation, or cause same to be done, in conflict with
or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
5. Section 108.2 Notice of violation. The Code Official shall serve a
notice of violation or order to the person responsible for the
erection, installation, alteration, extension, repair, removal or
Section
500.810
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.810
AO:791
Section 500.815. Penalty.
Any person who shall violate a provision of the Fuel Gas Code adopted
herein or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation
of an approved plan of or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
demolition of work in violation of the provisions of this code, or
in violation of a detail statement or the approved construction
documents thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this code. Such order shall direct the
discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement
of the violation.
6. Section 108.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is
not complied with promptly, the Code Official shall request the
legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate
proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such
violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code
or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
7. Section 108.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a
provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a
building or structure in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be
punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 100.080 of
the Brentwood City Code.
8. Section 108.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the Code Official
that work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in
a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease.
Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of
the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the
work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is
authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the Code
Official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to
stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work on the
system after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be punishable in accordance
with the provisions of Section 100.080 of the Brentwood City Code.
Section
500.810
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.815
AO:792
ARTICLE XI
Energy Conservation Code
Section 500.820. Energy Conservation Code Adopted —
Amendments. [R.O. 2009 §6-153; Ord. No. 3971 §7, 3-21-2005; Ord.
No. 4553 §9, 6-16-2014]
Section 500.825. Penalty.
Any person who shall violate a provision of the Energy Conservation Code
adopted herein or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof
A. The International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition, as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the Energy Conservation Code of the City of Brentwood, Missouri for
regulating and governing energy efficient building envelopes and
installation of energy efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems
as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection
of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Energy Conservation Code on
file in the office of the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Section, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes prescribed below.
B. The following Sections are hereby revised:
1. Section 101.1. Title. This code shall be known as the International
Energy Conservation Code of the City of Brentwood, and shall be
cited as such.
2. Section 108.1 Authority. Whenever the Code Official finds any work
regulated by this code being performed in a manner either contrary
to the provisions of this code or dangerous or unsafe, the Code
Official is authorized to issue a stop work order.
3. Section 108.2 Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and
shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the
owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a
stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop
work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions
under which the cited work will be permitted to resume.
4. Section 108.3 Emergencies. Where an emergency exists, the Code
Official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to
stopping the work.
5. Section 108.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any
work after having been served with a stop work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be punishable in accordance with the
provisions of Section 100.080 of the Brentwood City Code.
Section
500.820
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.825
AO:793
or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in
violation of an approved plan of or directive of the Code Official, or of
a permit or certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be
guilty of an ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense.
Section
500.825
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.825
AO:794
ARTICLE XII
Property Maintenance Code
Section 500.830. Property Maintenance Code Adopted —
Amendments. [R.O. 2009 §6-154; Ord. No. 3999 §1, 12-19-2005; Ord.
No. 4553 §10, 6-16-2014]
A. The International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 Edition, as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Brentwood, Missouri
for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for
supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for
occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures
unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing
structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property
Maintenance Code on file in the office of the City Clerk are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
Section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes below.
B. The following Sections are hereby revised:
1. Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the
International Property Maintenance Code of the City of Brentwood.
2. Section 103.5. Fees. The fees for activities and services performed
by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under the
International Property Maintenance Code shall be as indicated in
Appendix A to Chapter 500 of the Municipal Code of the City of
Brentwood.
3. Section 106.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm
or corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the
provisions of this code.
4. Section 106.2 Notice of violation. The Code Official shall serve a
notice of violation or order in accordance with Section 107.
5. Section 106.3 Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply
with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with
Section 107 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or civil
infraction as determined by the local municipality, and the violation
shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is
not complied with, the Code Official shall institute the appropriate
proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such
violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code
or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action
Section
500.830
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.830
AO:795
taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be
charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located
and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
6. Section 106.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a
provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a
building or structure in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be
punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 100.080 of
the Brentwood City Code.
7. Section 106.5 Abatement of violation. The imposition of the
penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of
the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to restrain,
correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a
building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct,
business or utilization of the building, structure or premises.
8. Section 302.4. Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be
maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of seven (7)
inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be
defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than
trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include
cultivated flowers and gardens. Upon failure of the owner or agent
having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service
of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in
accordance with Section 106.3 and as prescribed by the authority
having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of
violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or
contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter
upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds
growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the
owner or agent responsible for the property.
9. Section 304.14 is amended to read as follows: Insect screens. Every
door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of
habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any
areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored
shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less
than 16 mesh per inch, and every screen door used for insect
control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved
means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
10. Section 602.3 is amended to read as follows: Heat supply. Every
owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or
more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or
Section
500.830
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.830
AO:796
Section 500.835. Penalty.
Any person who shall violate a provision of the Property Maintenance Code
adopted herein or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof
or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in
violation of an approved plan of or directive of the Code Official, or of
a permit or certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be
guilty of an ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense.
implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat
to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F in all habitable
rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
Exceptions:
i. When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor
design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the
minimum room temperature shall not be required provided
that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity.
The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be
as indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code.
ii. In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F
a minimum temperature of 65°F shall be maintained.
11. Section 602.4 is amended to read as follows: Occupiable work
spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat
to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F during the period
the spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
i. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
ii. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous
physical activities.
Section
500.830
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.835
AO:797

ARTICLE XIII
Fire Prevention Code
Section 500.840. Fire Prevention Code Adopted — Amendments.
[R.O. 2009 §6-175; Ord. No. 3657 §8, 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 3971 §8,
3-21-2005; Ord. No. 4553 §11, 6-16-2014]
A. The International Fire Code, 2009 Edition, including Appendix
Chapters (see International Fire Code Section 101.2.1, 2009 edition), as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the Fire Code of the City of Brentwood, Missouri regulating and
governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion
hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to
life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the office of the City
Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this Section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes prescribed below.
B. The following Sections are hereby revised:
1. Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire
Code of the City of Brentwood.
2. Section 109.3 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a
provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a
building or structure in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be
punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 100.080 of
the Brentwood City Code.
3. Section 109.3.1 Abatement of violation. In addition to the
imposition of the penalties herein described, the Fire Code Official
is authorized to institute appropriate action to prevent unlawful
construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation; or to
prevent illegal occupancy of a structure or premises; or to stop an
illegal act, conduct of business or occupancy of a structure on or
about any premises.
4. Section 111.4. Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue
any work after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as the person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than
$100.00 dollars or more than $500.00 dollars.
Section
500.840
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.840
AO:799
Section 500.845. Penalty.
Any person who shall violate a provision of the Fire Prevention Code
adopted herein or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof
or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in
violation of an approved plan of or directive of the Code Official, or of
a permit or certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be
guilty of an ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense.
Section 500.850. Fire Safety Systems Permit Required — Fee
Established. [R.O. 2009 §9-2; Ord. No. 3718 §2, 8-21-2000; Ord. No.
4062 §1, 3-5-2007]
5. That the geographic limits referred to in certain Sections of the
2009 International Fire Code are hereby established as follows:
i. Section 3404.2.9.6.1 The storage of Class I and Class II liquids
in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within
the City of Brentwood without the written consent of Fire Code
Official. Existing tanks in safe condition and complying with
State and Federal requirements will be allowed to remain.
ii. Section 3406.2.4 The storage of Class I and Class II liquids in
above-ground tanks is prohibited within the City of Brentwood
without the written consent of Fire Code Official. Existing
tanks in safe condition and complying with State and Federal
requirements will be allowed to remain.
iii. Section 3506.2 The storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in
stationary containers is prohibited within the City of
Brentwood without the written consent of Fire Code Official.
Existing tanks in safe condition and complying with State and
Federal requirements will be allowed to remain.
iv. Section 3804.2 The storage of liquefied petroleum gas is
restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested
areas and is prohibited within the City of Brentwood, except
for residential or recreational uses in small quantities, without
the written consent of Fire Code Official. Existing tanks in safe
condition and complying with State and Federal requirements
will be allowed to remain.
A. In order to protect the life and safety of the general public, it is
necessary to provide the inspection and approval of construction of
buildings open to the general public and residential dwellings. To
ensure construction meets the standards of construction set forth in the
Fire Prevention Code adopted by the City, a fire safety systems permit is
Section
500.840
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.850
AO:800
Section 500.860. through Section 500.960. (Reserved)
required for any suppressions, extinguishing or alarm system from
the Department of Planning and Development to construct or remodel
such systems in any commercial, industrial, multi-family residential or
community use building in the City. This Section does not apply to oneand
two-family dwellings or townhouses of three (3) stories or less as
covered by the International Residential 2009 Edition.
B. The fee schedule established for any commercial, industrial, multifamily
residential dwelling or community use building in the City is
contained in Appendix A to this Chapter 500 of the Municipal Code of
the City of Brentwood.
Section
500.850
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.860
AO:801

ARTICLE XIV
Grading And Excavating
Section 500.970. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §6-187; Ord. No. 4010 §1,
3-6-2006]
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms shall have the meaning
given herein:
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is cut into, dug, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated
or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar
material is deposited, placed, pushed or transported to a place other than
the place from which it was excavated and shall include the conditions
resulting therefrom.
GRADING — Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include
conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
SITE — Any lot, tract, project or subdivision or contiguous lots or tracts of
a single owner or several owners acting jointly.
Section 500.980. Permit Required — Procedure. [R.O. 2009 §6-188;
Ord. No. 4010 §1, 3-6-2006]
A. Except as herein provided, no grading activities shall be commenced on
any site without obtaining a permit from the Director of Planning and
Development. A separate permit shall be required for each site;
provided however, that one (1) permit may cover both the excavation
and fill made from excavated materials. An application for a grading
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by the Department of
Planning and Development and filed with the Director of Planning and
Development. The application shall be accompanied by duplicate copies
of the following documents and information:
1. Contoured development map showing existing contours of the site
and adjoining strips of non-site property and proposed contours at
two (2) foot intervals after completion of the proposed grading and
development, based on United State Geological Survey datum, with
established elevations at building, walks, drives and streets; and
information on necessary clearing and grubbing, removal of
existing structures, excavating, filling, spreading and compacting.
The Director of Planning and Development may require the
development map to be prepared and sealed by a licensed
professional engineer or land surveyor.
2. An accurate plot plan showing the location of the site, a description
of the type and features of the soil and details of all structures,
walls, cribbing and surface protection.
3. Name and address of owner(s).
Section
500.970
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.980
AO:803
Section 500.990. Exceptions. [R.O. 2009 §6-189; Ord. No. 4010 §1,
3-6-2006]
4. Site location.
5. Estimated grading quantity.
6. Details of site drainage system.
7. Details of site erosion and siltation control, including siltation
basins and revegetation.
8. Construction access to site.
9. Location of temporary off-street parking.
10. The estimated schedule of operations, including the dates of
starting and completion of grading work, erosion and siltation
control and any interim drainage system.
11. Location of any sewage disposal system or underground utility line,
any part of which is within fifty (50) feet of the proposed
excavation, grading or filling area.
12. Location and present status of any known geotechnical features
which may affect the use of the site (e.g., ponds, sink holes).
13. Details of any interim drainage system proposed to be installed
during grading operations, any such system to be designed to
safely handle surface water, streams or other natural drains.
14. Location of the 100-year flood plain and floodway based on
currently adopted FEMA flood maps.
15. Density of the proposed fill.
16. Sources of off-site fill material, including information relating to
haul routes, trucks and equipment.
B. No permit shall be issued for a period exceeding one hundred twenty
(120) days, unless a phased grading schedule is approved, which
includes revegetation.
C. A permit shall not be issued until the deposit provided for in Section
500.1000 and the inspection fees provided for in Section 500.1020 are
paid.
D. No permit shall be issued unless all owners of the property sign the
application or unless the application is accompanied by a copy of a
contract signed by all owners of the property authorizing the applicant
to make application on their behalf and agreeing to be bound by the
provisions of this Article.
A. A grading permit shall not be required in the following instances:
Section
500.980
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.990
AO:804
Section 500.1000. Deposit. [R.O. 2009 §6-190; Ord. No. 4010 §1,
3-6-2006]
1. Grading for the foundation or basement of any building, structure
or swimming pool for which a building permit has been duly issued,
provided however, that the deposit required herein has been paid
and that the owners and contractors shall be subject to the
requirements imposed by this Article.
2. Grading of less than one (1) cubic yard for sites ten thousand
(10,000) square feet or less or less than five (5) cubic yards for sites
in excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
3. Grading by any public utility for the installation, inspection, repair
or replacement of any of its facilities.
4. Grading of property for or by any governmental agency in
connection with a public improvement or public work on such
property.
5. Grading of land for residential gardening, landscaping or similar
horticultural use, provided that there is substantial compliance
with the recommendations or standards of the local soil
conservation authority.
6. Grading activities in public right-of-way covered by an excavation
permit.
7. Trench excavation covered by a construction permit.
A. To insure compliance with the provisions hereof, each applicant for a
grading permit shall deposit with the City a sum not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) for each site as designated by the Director of Planning and
Development. Such deposit shall be available for and be used by the
City to:
1. Repair any damage to sidewalks, curbs, gutters or streets resulting
from grading activities.
2. Pay the cost of removal of dirt or mud from sidewalks, curbs,
gutters or streets if not promptly removed by the permittee or its
contractor.
3. Pay the cost of removal of refuse, dirt, paper or other waste
permitted to spread to other property, public or private, from the
premises on which the work is being done, if not promptly removed
by the permittee or its contractor.
4. Pay the cost of installing, restoring or repairing appropriate control
measures, reseeding or completion or alteration of grading if
abandoned or not appropriately performed by the permittee or its
contractor.
Section
500.990
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1000
AO:805
Section 500.1010. Standards — Safety Precautions. [R.O. 2009
§6-191; Ord. No. 4010 §1, 3-6-2006]
B. The City may reimburse itself for expenses incurred to ensure
compliance with all applicable codes from funds deposited pursuant to
this Article. Should the City so utilize such funds, the permittee and/or
owner shall, within seven (7) days of being notified by the Director of
Planning and Development, be obligated to deposit a sum equal to the
amount so used so as to maintain full funding of the required deposit. In
the event that the permittee or owner does not restore the deposit to its
original amount within the time specified herein, a stop work order may
be issued immediately.
C. Any portion of the deposit not expended by the City shall be refunded
when the grading activities are completed and soil conditions are
stabilized to the satisfaction of the City.
D. The deposit required herein shall in no way be construed as a limitation
of the liability of an applicant for damages caused as a result of his/her
grading activities, nor as a limitation or restriction on the right of the
City to enforce ordinances violated as a result of applicant's grading
activities through criminal prosecution, injunctive relief or other
means.
A. A permit shall be issued and shall remain in force only upon compliance
with the following requirements:
1. Surface waters — damage. Adequate provision shall be made to
prevent surface waters from damaging the cut face of an
excavation or sloping surface of a hill.
2. Retaining walls — cribbing. Retaining walls or cribbing shall be
required whenever necessary to prevent the surface of any
excavation or fill from exceeding at any point maximum allowable
slopes as set forth herein.
3. Drainage. All drainage provisions shall be of such design to carry
surface waters to the nearest practical storm drain, natural
watercourse or street, as approved by the Director of Planning and
Development, as a suitable place to deposit and receive such
waters.
4. Protection of streets — property. No excavation shall be made so
close to the property line as to endanger any adjoining public or
private street or property without supporting and protecting such
street or property from settling, cracking or other damage.
5. Fill. No fill shall be made so as to cause or to allow the same to be
deposited upon or to roll, flow or wash upon or over the premises of
another without the express written consent of the owner of such
premises so affected; or upon or over any street, walk or way; or so
Section
500.1000
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.1010
AO:806
close to the top of a bank of a channel as to create the possibility of
failure of the bank or sliding.
6. Materials. Materials for fills shall consist of material obtained from
excavation of cut areas, borrow pits or other approved source.
Materials shall be free of vegetable matter and deleterious material
and shall not contain rocks in excess of six (6) inches in diameter.
7. Minimum standards. Minimum standards of excavations and fills
shall be as follows, provided that more stringent standards may be
required by the Director of Planning and Development based upon
the particular site conditions:
a. No cut slope shall be made with a cut face steeper in slope than
three (3) horizontal to one (1) vertical, unless the material in
the excavated face is stable at a steeper slope, as has been
established for similar materials under comparable conditions
and is so certified by a registered professional engineer.
b. No fill shall be made which creates an exposed embankment
face steeper in slope than three (3) horizontal to one (1)
vertical. The embanked end of the fill shall be uniformly
compacted as provided in Subsection (8) below and stable
under the proposed conditions. If a steeper slope is proposed,
its stability shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer.
8. Compaction. All fills intended to support buildings or structures,
sewers or conduits shall be compacted to a minimum of a ninety
percent (90%) compaction as determined by Modified Proctor,
ASTM D-1557, unless a lesser percent is approved by the Director
of Planning and Development. Compaction of greater than ninety
percent (90%) may be required by the Director of Planning and
Development where the special conditions of the site warrant
same. Compaction of fills shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer. Compaction of other fills shall be required
where the Director of Planning and Development deems same
necessary as a safety measure to aid in preventing the saturation,
slipping or erosion of the fill.
The requirements of the Director of Planning and Development for
the compaction of fills shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
following:
a. Areas to be graded by cutting or filling shall be rough graded
to within two-tenths (2/10) of a foot of accepted elevation after
allowance has been made for thickness of topsoil, paved areas
and other installations.
b. The natural ground surface shall be prepared by removing
topsoil and vegetation and by compacting the fill upon a series
Section
500.1010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1010
AO:807
Section 500.1020. Inspections. [R.O. 2009 §6-192; Ord. No. 4010 §1,
3-6-2006]
Inspections shall be made by the Department of Public Works during each
stage of grading operations and final approval shall be required upon
completion of operations. The permittee shall notify the City upon
commencement of grading, completion of rough grading, completion of
finish grading before seeding or sodding and all re-establishment and
construction work. Inspection fees shall be charged to the permittee in the
sum of the direct cost to the City for each inspection hereunder.
of terraces. Hillside or slope fills shall require plowing or
scarification of original ground.
c. Grading on slopes shall require silt control at intermediate
levels to slow surface water, prevent rutting and decrease
erosion.
d. Grading sites shall require silting basins or other approved silt
control to prevent mud from washing onto adjacent properties.
e. If fill material moisture content is below the requirement for
compacting to maximum practical density, water in the proper
amount shall be added. If moisture content is too great, fill
material shall be aerated by blading or other satisfactory
methods to reduce moisture content.
f. Frozen materials or soft, mucky, friable, easily compressible
materials shall not be incorporated in fills intended to support
buildings, structures, sewers or conduits or in the embanked
ends of fills. Fill material shall not be placed, spread or rolled
while the ground is frozen or thawing.
g. The maximum uncompacted thickness of layers of the fill to be
compacted shall not exceed eight (8) inches.
h. Compaction shall be by tamping, sheeps foot rollers, multiple
wheel pneumatic or other type approved methods. Rolling shall
be continuous until the desired maximum density is obtained.
i. Topsoil disturbed by grading or building operations, if stripped
and piled for storage, shall be stored only in an amount
necessary to complete finished grading.
9. Removal of timber, rubbish. Timber, logs, trees, brush, vegetable
matter or rubbish of any description shall be removed and disposed
of so as to leave the disturbed area with a neat and finished
appearance. Tree stumps, masonry and other obstructions shall be
removed to the following depths:
a. Paved areas. Two (2) feet below subgrade.
b. Lawn areas. Two (2) feet below finished grade.
Section
500.1010
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.1030
AO:808
Section 500.1030. Use of Streets During Grading. [R.O. 2009
§6-193; Ord. No. 4010 §1, 3-6-2006]
Section 500.1040. Construction Dirt, Debris and Noise. [R.O. 2009
§6-194; Ord. No. 4010 §1, 3-6-2006]
A. At least three (3) working days prior to the use of any street in the City
by trucks or hauling or grading equipment engaged in grading
operations in the City, the contractor for such project shall notify the
Director of Planning and Development in writing of the intended
schedule, specifying the kind and description of trucks or hauling or
grading equipment, the loaded and unloaded weight of such trucks and
equipment, the number of each and length of time they will be required
to use the streets of the City. The contractor shall furnish the Director of
Planning and Development with all other information required by the
Director of Planning and Development related to such street usage.
The Director of Planning and Development may require such contractor
to post a deposit in a sum determined by the Director of Planning and
Development to insure compliance with this Section.
B. The Director of Planning and Development shall notify the contractor,
prior to the commencement of work and usage of the streets of the City,
of the route or routes to be used by such trucks and equipment. The
contractor shall be required to insure that such trucks or equipment
use only the designated route or routes. In the event of any emergency
requiring a change in route or routes or if the Director of Planning and
Development determines that the route or routes originally designated
are not appropriate or that excessive damage is being caused to any
street or streets by such usage, the Director of Planning and
Development may, upon notice to the contractor, designate an alternate
route or routes as designated by the Director of Planning and
Development.
C. The Director of Planning and Development, immediately prior to
notifying the contractor of the route or routes or alternate route or
routes shall examine the condition of the streets along such routes and
photograph such streets, showing the condition of the pavement, curbs,
sidewalks and other physical features. Promptly following termination
of the use of such streets for the trucks or hauling or grading
equipment, the Director of Planning and Development shall have
photographs of such streets made, reflecting the condition of the
pavement, curbs, sidewalks and other physical features and shall have
an inspection made of the condition of such streets, curbs and
sidewalks. The Director of Planning and Development shall make an
estimate of the cost of restoring such streets, curbs and sidewalks to
their original condition, if any damage has been done. In such case, the
Director of Planning and Development shall notify the contractor of the
cost of restoration. The contractor shall pay the City such cost within
fifteen (15) days.
Section
500.1030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1040
AO:809
A. Control Of Mud Or Silt. No permit holder shall permit mud or silt to flow
or be deposited on any adjoining property or roadway.
B. Barriers At Construction Site. After any new excavation or construction
is begun on any site and until sodding, planting, concreting, paving or
other final surfacing is in place which will avoid washing or spreading
of dirt and mud onto other property, the owner or permittee, or the
contractor of the owner or permittee, shall erect and maintain
temporary walls or other approved barriers to prevent such washing or
spreading of mud or dirt.
C. Removing Mud From Vehicle Wheels. The owner, permittee and the
contractors of the owner or permittee shall provide their personnel with
such equipment as necessary to remove dirt from the wheels of each
vehicle leaving the grading site where mud has accumulated on the
wheels before such vehicles enter any street. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner, permittee and contractors of the owner or
permittee to insure that no vehicles shall leave the site with mud on
their wheels. No driver of any such vehicle shall enter onto a street
without having the mud removed from the wheels of the vehicle prior to
entry.
D. Spilling Materials On Streets. The owner, permittee or contractor of the
owner or permittee loading dirt, mud or other materials on any vehicle
at any grading site shall so load same that no portion thereof shall be
spilled or be liable to be spilled on any street. It shall be unlawful for
any such person to permit any vehicle to enter upon any street within
the City loaded in violation of this provision. It shall be unlawful for any
driver to operate a vehicle on any street within the City, which vehicle is
loaded in such manner that it spills or is likely to spill mud, dirt or other
materials on the streets.
E. Cleaning Of Streets And Sidewalks. At the end of each day and as
required throughout the day during the course of grading or
construction, dirt and mud on the street, sidewalks, curbs, gutters and
the space between the sidewalk and the street, resulting from work,
shall be removed.
F. Protection Against Damage — Repair. Sidewalks, street curbs and
gutters shall be protected against breakage or damage to such
installations. Any damage shall be repaired by the owner, permittee and
the contractor of the owner or permittee.
G. Waste Material. During the course of construction or excavation or
grading, the owner, permittee and the contractor of such owner or
permittee shall remove all paper, refuse, lumber, other building waste
and all other waste material daily, provided no dumpster is available on
site for disposal of waste material and shall prevent same from blowing
or otherwise being scattered over adjacent property.
H. Planting Ground. After grading, excavation and/or construction are
completed, the property shall be seeded, sodded, planted, concreted,
Section
500.1040
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.1040
AO:810
Section 500.1050. Notice. [R.O. 2009 §6-195; Ord. No. 4010 §1,
3-6-2006]
paved or otherwise surfaced to prevent washing or spreading dirt and
mud onto other property, streets, sidewalks and the space between
sidewalks or into any stream.
I. Hours Of Grading. Grading shall be accomplished between the hours of
7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. Monday through Friday and 10:00 A.M. until
4:00 P.M. on Saturday, with no grading work allowed on Sunday unless,
in the case of emergency, an extension of hours is granted by the
Director of Planning and Development.
J. Noise. The permittee shall take all appropriate measures to reduce
noise to the fullest extent practical in the performance of the grading or
excavating work.
K. Right Of City To Immediately Abate Certain Conditions. Violations of
Subsections (A) through (G) above are hereby deemed public
nuisances, which may result in an immediate threat to the safety,
welfare and/or reasonable comfort of the citizens of the City. The
Director of Planning and Development is authorized to take such action
is reasonably necessary to correct any condition caused by violations of
Subsections (A) through (G) above without prior notice to the permittee
or owners. The cost of such corrective action shall be deducted from the
deposit provided hereunder. Within seven (7) days of making deduction
from the deposit, the Director of Planning and Development shall notify
the permittee or owner of the items corrected, the costs of correction
and the amount of deposit applied therefore. The owner shall have the
right to challenge the charges and application of deposit as in the same
manner as hereinafter provided in Section 500.1050.
A. Enforcement of this Article shall be the responsibility of the Director of
Planning and Development. Enforcement shall commence by providing
notice to either the owner of the property, the permittee or the
contractor of the violation or violations to be corrected. The notice may
be delivered by personal service, certified mail or by ordinary mail. (If
sent by ordinary mail, there will be a rebuttable presumption that the
letter was delivered three (3) days after the date it was sent.)
1. The notice shall generally describe the nature of the violation, the
location of the property (using the mailing or popular address
rather than a legal description, when reasonably possible to do so)
and ordering the property owner, the permittee and/or the
contractor to, within a period of seven (7) days from the receipt of
the notice, correct the deficiencies.
2. Any owner who wishes to challenge the order may do so in the
manner provided in Article V, Dangerous Buildings, Sections
500.320 et seq.
Section
500.1040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1060
AO:811
Section 500.1060. Correction of Violations. [R.O. 2009 §6-196; Ord.
No. 4010 §1, 3-6-2006]
Section 500.1070. Violation Is an Offense. [R.O. 2009 §6-197; Ord.
No. 4010 §1, 3-6-2006]
An owner who fails to correct a violation as set forth in this Article within
seven (7) days of notice to the owner, the permittee or the contractor shall
be guilty of an offense and may (at the option of the City) be charged in
Municipal Court with the offense of "failure to correct grading ordinance
violation".
Section 500.1080. through Section 500.1100. (Reserved)
A. If the violations set forth in the notice are not corrected within seven (7)
days after receipt of the notice by the property owner, the permittee or
the contractor, the Director of Planning and Development may cause
the same to be corrected. (The costs of correction may include, among
actual costs of correction, a fee for the City's costs in administering this
Article, which fee shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). The
Director of Planning and Development shall certify the cost of
correction to the City Administrator or other officer in charge of finance
who shall cause the certified cost to be included in a special tax bill or
added to the annual real estate tax bill, at the collecting official's option,
and shall be collected in the same manner and procedure as for
collecting real estate taxes.
B. If a condition is created by the permit holder that threatens the public
health or welfare, such condition shall, by its existence, be considered a
public nuisance. Such public nuisance shall require immediate
abatement by the permit holder. Should the permit holder fail to abate
the nuisance within the time period prescribed by the Director of
Planning and Development, the Director of Planning and Development
shall have the responsibility of abating such public nuisance. The cost
of abating such public nuisance shall be borne by the permit holder and
collected by the City in a manner as provided for by law.
Section
500.1060
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.1080
AO:812
ARTICLE XV
Sewer Lateral Repair Program
Section 500.1110. Sewer Lateral Repair Policy. [Policy established
12-15-2007; Ord. No. 4816, 12-18-2017]
Section 500.1120. Collection of Fee. [Ord. No. 3546 §1, 6-16-1997;
Ord. No. 3666 §1, 8-16-1999; Ord. No. 4238 §1, 6-21-2010; Ord. No.
4249 §1, 8-16-2010; Ord. No. 4816, 12-18-2017]
The Collector of Taxes of St. Louis County is hereby directed to collect, on
behalf of the City of Brentwood, an annual sewer lateral fee in accord with
Section 249.422, RSMo., 2016, in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) on
each residential property having six (6) or fewer dwelling units to provide
funds to pay the cost of repairs of lateral sewer lines pursuant to the
policy and program authorized in this Article. The fee imposed pursuant
to this Section shall be imposed upon condominiums that have six (6) or
less condominium units per building and each condominium unit in such
a configuration shall be responsible for its proportionate share of any fee
charged pursuant to this Section, and in addition, any condominium unit
shall, if determined to be responsible for and served by its own individual
lateral sewer line, be treated as an individual residence regardless of the
number of units in the development. It shall be the responsibility of the
condominium owner or condominium association who are of the opinion
that they are not properly classified as provided in this Section to notify the
St. Louis County Department of Revenue to rectify the situation.
Section 500.1130. through Section 500.1160. (Reserved)
A. In order to protect the public health, safety and local environment the
City of Brentwood, Missouri, shall operate a program to repair
defective sewer lateral lines on qualifying residential properties in the
City in accord with the provisions of Section 249.422, RSMo., 2016,
funded exclusively by the revenue derived from the fee established by
Section 500.1120, below.
B. The Board of Aldermen may by Resolution adopt and from time to time
revise and amend policies for the efficient and effective administration
of the residential sewer lateral repair program provided herein. Any
such policies shall be made readily available to the public.
Section
500.1110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1130
AO:813

ARTICLE XVI
Explosives Code
Section 500.1170. Citation of Article. [Ord. No. 4685 §1,
12-21-2015]
This Article shall be known and may be cited as "The Explosives Code."
Section 500.1180. Definitions. [Ord. No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BLASTING AGENT — Any material or mixture consisting of a fuel and
oxidizer intended for blasting, not otherwise classified herein as an
explosive, in which none of the ingredients are classified as explosives,
provided that the finished product, as mixed and packaged for use or
shipment, cannot be detonated by means of a No. 8 test blasting cap when
unconfined.
BLASTING CAP NO. 8 — A No. 8 test blasting cap is one containing two (2)
grams of a mixture of eighty percent (80%) mercury fulminate and twenty
percent (20%) potassium chlorate or a cap of equivalent strength.
DIRECTOR — The Planning and Development Services Director and
includes his/her authorized agents.
EXPLOSIVES and EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS — Gunpowder used for blasting,
all forms of high explosives, fuses, detonators and other detonating agents,
smokeless powders, and any chemical compound or mechanical mixture
that is commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an
explosion containing any oxidizing and combustible units or other
ingredients in such proportions, quantities, or packing, that ignition by fire,
by friction, by concussion, by percussion, by detonation of, by any part of
the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly
heated gases that the resultant gas pressures are capable of producing
destructive effects on contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb; but
explosives shall not include small arms ammunition, gasoline, kerosene, or
oils, greases or other petroleum products intended for lubrication purposes.
For the purposes of this Article, explosives shall be classified as Class A,
high explosives, and Class B, low explosives, and said classifications shall
be as follows:
Class A, high explosives: Those explosives possessing detonating
qualities such as dynamite, nitroglycerin, picric acid, lead azide,
fulminate of mercury, smokeless powder, blasting caps and detonating
primers.
1.
Class B, low explosives: Those explosives not otherwise specified herein
as Class A explosives, including, but not limited to, explosives
presenting a flammable hazard such as propellant explosives and
photographic flash powder.
2.
Section
500.1170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1180
AO:815
PERSON — Any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association, and including any trustee, receiver,
assignee or personal representative thereof.
PYROTECHNICS — Means and includes any combustible or explosive
composition or manufactured articles designated and prepared for the
purpose of producing audible or visual effects which are commonly referred
to as "fireworks."
SCALED DISTANCE — The actual distance (in feet) to the nearest structure,
divided by the square root of the maximum explosive weight (in pounds)
per eight-millisecond (or greater) delay. If delay intervals less than eight (8)
milliseconds are employed or if instantaneous blasting is employed, scaled
distance shall be computed by dividing the actual distance (in feet) by the
square root of the total explosive weight in pounds.
SINGULAR AND PLURAL — Words used in the singular number shall
include the plural and in the plural the singular.
SMALL ARMS AMMUNITION — Any shotgun, rifle, pistol or revolver
cartridge.
THE CITY or THIS CITY — The City of Brentwood, Missouri.
UNCONTROLLED STRUCTURE — Any building not owned or controlled by
the explosives user.
Section 500.1190. Scope. [Ord. No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
This Article shall apply to the manufacture, storage, sale, transportation or
use of explosives and blasting agents in the City. It shall not apply to the
discharge of small arms ammunition when discharged in connection with
hunting or target shooting or other lawful uses connected with firearms.
Section 500.1200. Exception — Military or Governmental Use. [Ord.
No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed as applying to the
regular military or naval forces of the United States, the duly authorized
militia of the State, the Police or Fire Departments or to regular employees
of the City in the proper performance of their official duties.
Section 500.1210. Exception — Amount of Explosives. [Ord. No.
4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, store, stock or hold for
resale any amount of explosives, blasting agents or blasting caps unless
such person has first obtained a written permit therefor from the
Director as hereinafter provided, except for the following items and
amounts:
1. Thirty (30) pounds of smokeless powder and one thousand (1,000)
small arms primers for hand loading of small arms ammunition.
Section
500.1180
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.1210
AO:816
Section 500.1220. Permit — Storage of Explosives — Requirements.
[Ord. No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
Section 500.1230. Permit Shall Be Granted — When. [Ord. No. 4685
§1, 12-21-2015]
Section 500.1240. Storage of Explosives. [Ord. No. 4685 §1,
12-21-2015]
2. Thirty (30) pounds of explosives or blasting agents in industrial
research laboratories and laboratories of technical institutes,
colleges, universities and similar institutions.
3. Pyrotechnics which shall be governed by other ordinance of the
City.
A. Application for such permit to possess, store, stock or hold for sale
those items specified in Section 500.1220 hereof shall be made to the
Director at the courthouse on forms provided and shall contain the
following information:
1. Name of applicant.
2. Address of residence.
3. Place of business.
4. Occupation.
5. Age.
6. Experience in the use of explosives and such other information
relative thereto as the Director may prescribe or require.
7. Maximum amount of each kind of explosives, blasting agents or
blasting caps applicant intends to store or stock at any one time
and the location and Type of construction of the magazine or
storage place of same.
A. A person shall be entitled to a permit to store or stock explosives or
blasting agents in the City who has met the following requirements:
1. Filed an application as provided in Section 500.1220 hereof.
2. Secured whatever construction, occupancy or other permits which
the applicant may otherwise be required by law to obtain.
3. Obtained a proper storage facility for the storage of such explosives
as the same may be required by this Article.
A. No person shall store any explosive materials in a manner not in
conformity to this Article.
Section
500.1210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1240
AO:817
Section 500.1250. Types of Storage Facilities. [Ord. No. 4685 §1,
12-21-2015]
Section 500.1260. Inspection of Storage Facilities. [Ord. No. 4685
§1, 12-21-2015]
Any person storing explosive materials shall open and inspect his storage
facilities at intervals not greater than three (3) days to determine whether
the explosives therein are intact and to determine whether there has been
unauthorized entry or attempted entry into the storage facilities or the
unauthorized removal of facilities or their contents.
Section 500.1270. Storage Records To Be Kept. [Ord. No. 4685 §1,
12-21-2015]
B. Any change, addition, or modification to an approved storage facility
shall not be made unless authorized by a new permit under Section
500.1230.
A. For purposes of this Article, there shall be five (5) Types of storage
facilities. These Types, together with the classes of explosive materials
which shall be stored therein, are as follows:
1. Type 1 storage facilities. Permanent storage facilities for the
storage of high explosives, subject to the limitations prescribed by
Sections 500.1290 and 500.1360. Other classes may also be stored
therein.
2. Type 2 storage facilities. Portable indoor and outdoor storage
facilities for the storage of high explosives, subject to the
limitations prescribed by Sections 500.1290, 500.1310(A)(2) and
500.1360. Other classes may also be stored therein.
3. Type 3 storage facilities. Portable outdoor facilities for the
temporary storage of high explosives while attended (for example,
a "day-box"), subject to the limitations prescribed by Sections
500.1290 and 500.1360. Other classes may also be stored therein.
4. Type 4 storage facilities. Facilities for the storage of low explosives,
subject to the limitations prescribed by Sections 500.1290(B)(2),
500.1330(A)(2) and 500.1360. Blasting agents may also be stored
therein.
5. Type 5 storage facilities. Facilities for the storage of blasting
agents, subject to the limitations prescribed by Sections
500.1290(A) and (B)(2), and 1340(A)(2) and 500.1360.
A. Records shall be kept of all Class A high explosives when such are kept
in or on any premises in the portions of the City covered by this Article
or when stored in facilities licensed under the terms of this Article.
Such records shall consist of:
Section
500.1240
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.1270
AO:818
Section 500.1280. Removal of Explosive Materials. [Ord. No. 4685
§1, 12-21-2015]
Section 500.1290. Location of Storage Facilities. [Ord. No. 4685 §1,
12-21-2015]
1. Quantities of all materials entering or leaving the facility.
2. Dates and times of all material entering or leaving the facility or
premises.
3. A description, brand name and serial number(s) of all involved
material.
4. Names of the person(s) removing any involved material and the
reason for the removal.
5. Any other information that the Director may require in a written
notification to the licensee or permittee.
B. Such written records shall be kept at or near the storage facility and
shall be available at all times to the Director or his agent.
A. All explosive materials must be kept in storage facilities meeting the
standards prescribed by this Article unless they are:
1. In the process of manufacture; or
2. Being physically handled in the operating process of a licensee or
user; or
3. Being used; or
4. Being transported to a place of storage or use by a permittee or by
a person who has lawfully acquired explosive materials in the
manner required by this Article.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Article, storage facilities in which
any explosive materials are stored shall be located at minimum
distances from inhabited buildings, passenger railways, public
highways, and from other storage facilities in which explosive materials
are stored as specified in the American Table of Distances (Appendix
B),131 provided, that this table shall not apply to any indoor storage
facility. When a storage facility is not barricaded, the distances shown
in the American Table of Distances shall be doubled. For purposes of
this Subsection, a storage facility shall be deemed barricaded when it is
effectually screened from inhabited buildings, passenger railways,
public highways, and other storage facilities in which explosive
materials are stored either by a natural or artificial barricade of such
height that a straight line from the top of any side wall of the storage
facility to the eave line of such other inhabited building or storage
131. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this Article.
Section
500.1270
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1290
AO:819
Section 500.1300. Construction of Type 1 Storage Facilities. [Ord.
No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
facility, or to a point twelve (12) feet above the center of a passenger
railway or public highway, will pass through such intervening
barricade.
B. If any two (2) or more storage facilities are separated from each other
by less than the distances specified in Appendix A, then such two (2) or
more storage facilities, as a group, shall be considered as one storage
facility, and the total quantity of explosive materials stored in such
group shall be treated as if stored in a single facility and shall comply
with the minimum of distances specified in Appendix A from other
storage facilities, inhabited buildings, passenger railways, and public
highways.
1. Storage facilities in which low explosives are stored shall be
located at minimum distances from inhabited buildings, passenger
railways, public highways, and from other storage facilities in
which explosive materials are stored as specified in the Table of
distances for storage of low explosives as set forth in 27 CFR
181.199, provided, that this table shall not apply to any indoor
storage facility. The distances shown therein shall not be reduced
by the presence of barricades.
2. Ammonium nitrate and storage facilities in which blasting agents
are stored shall be located at minimum distances from storage
facilities containing high explosives or blasting agents as specified
in the Table of recommended separation distances of ammonium
nitrate and blasting agents from explosives or blasting agents as
set forth in 27 CFR 181.200.
A. A Type 1 storage facility shall be a permanent structure: a building, an
igloo or Army-type structure, a tunnel, or a dugout. It shall be bulletresistant,
fire-resistant, weather-resistant, theft-resistant, and well
ventilated.
1. Buildings. All building-type storage facilities shall be constructed of
masonry, wood, metal, or a combination of these materials and shall
have no openings except for entrances and ventilation. Ground
around such storage facilities shall slope away for drainage.
a. Masonry wall construction. Masonry wall construction shall
consist of brick, concrete, tile, cement block, or cinder block
and shall be not less than six (6) inches in thickness. Hollow
masonry units used in construction shall have all hollow spaces
filled with well-tamped coarse dry sand or weak concrete (a
mixture of one (1) part cement and eight (8) parts of sand with
enough water to dampen the mixture while tamping in place).
Interior walls shall be covered with a non-sparking material.
Section
500.1290
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.1300
AO:820
b. Fabricated metal wall construction. Metal wall construction
shall consist of sectional sheets of steel or aluminum not less
than Number 14 gauge, securely fastened to a metal
framework. Such metal wall construction shall be either lined
inside with brick solid cement blocks, hardwood not less than
four (4) inches in thickness, or shall have at least a 6-inch sand
fill between interior and exterior walls. Interior walls shall be
constructed of or covered with a non-sparking material.
c. Wood frame wall construction. The exterior of outer wood walls
shall be covered with iron or aluminum not less than Number
26 gauge. An inner wall of non-sparking material shall be
constructed so as to provide a space of not less than six (6)
inches between the outer and inner walls, which space shall be
filled with coarse dry sand or weak concrete.
d. Floors. Floors shall be constructed of a non-sparking material
and shall be strong enough to bear the weight of the maximum
quantity to be stored.
e. Foundations. Foundations shall be constructed of brick,
concrete, cement block, stone, or wood posts. If piers or posts
are used, in lieu of a continuous foundation, the space under
the buildings shall be enclosed with metal.
f. Roof. Except for buildings with fabricated metal roofs, the
outer roof shall be covered with no less than Number 26 gauge
iron or aluminum fastened to seven-eighths-inch sheathing.
g. Bullet-resistant ceilings or roofs. Where it is possible for a
bullet to be fired directly through the roof and into the storage
facility at such an angle that the bullet would strike a point
below the top of inner walls, storage facilities shall be
protected by one (1) of the following methods:
(1) A sand tray shall be located at the tops of inner walls
covering the entire ceiling area, except that necessary for
ventilation, lined with a layer of building paper, and filled
with not less than four (4) inches of coarse dry sand.
(2) A fabricated metal roof shall be constructed of threesixteenths-
inch plate steel lined with four (4) inches of
hardwood. (For each additional one-sixteenth-inch of plate
steel, the hardwood lining may be decreased one (1) inch.)
h. Doors. All doors shall be constructed of one-fourth-inch plate
steel and lined with two (2) inches of hardwood. Hinges and
hasps shall be attached to the doors by welding, riveting or
bolting (nuts on inside of door). They shall be installed in such
a manner that the hinges and hasps cannot be removed when
the doors are closed and locked.
Section
500.1300
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1300
AO:821
Section 500.1310. Construction of Type 2 Storage Facilities. [Ord.
No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
i. Locks. Each door shall be equipped with two (2) mortise locks;
or with two (2) padlocks fastened in separate hasps and
staples; or with a combination of mortise lock and a padlock; or
with a mortise lock that requires two (2) keys to open; or a
three-point lock. Locks shall be five- tumbler proof. All
padlocks shall be protected with one-fourth-inch steel caps
constructed so as to prevent sawing or lever action on the locks
or hasps. All doors shall be kept locked at all times, except
during placement and removal of stocks of explosives, or
during repairs to storage facilities.
j. Ventilation. Except at doorways, a two-inch air space shall be
left around ceilings and the perimeter of floors. Foundation
ventilators shall be not less than four (4) inches by six (6)
inches. Vents in the foundation, roof, or gables shall be
screened and offset.
k. Exposed metal. No sparking metal construction shall be
exposed below the top of walls in the interior of storage
facilities, and all nails therein shall be blind-nailed or
countersunk.
2. Igloos, Army-type structures, tunnels, and dugouts. Igloo, Armytype
tunnel, and dugout storage facilities shall be constructed of
reinforced concrete, masonry, metal, or a combination of these
materials. They shall have an earth mound covering of not less than
twenty-four (24) inches on the top, sides and rear. Interior walls
and floors shall be covered with a non-sparking material. Storage
facilities of this Type shall also be constructed in conformity with
the requirements of Subsection (A)(1)(d) and (h) through (k) of this
Section.
A. A Type 2 storage facility shall be a box, a trailer, a semitrailer or other
mobile facility. It shall be bullet-resistant, fire-resistant, weatherresistant,
theft-resistant, and well ventilated. Except as provided in
Subsection (A)(3) of this Section, hinges and hasps shall be attached to
the covers or doors in the manner prescribed in Section
500.1300(A)(1)(h), and the locking system shall be that prescribed in
Section 500.1300(A)(1)(i).
1. Outdoor storage facilities. Outdoor storage facilities shall be at
least one (1) cubic yard in size and supported in such a manner so
as to prevent direct contact with the ground. The sides, bottoms,
tops, and covers or doors shall be constructed of one-fourth-inch
steel and shall be lined with two (2) inches of hardwood. Edges of
metal covers shall overlap sides at least one (1) inch. The ground
around such storage facilities shall slope away for drainage. When
unattended, vehicular storage facilities shall have wheels removed
Section
500.1300
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.1310
AO:822
Section 500.1320. Construction of Type 3 Storage Facilities. [Ord.
No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
A Type 3 storage facility shall be a day-box or other portable facility. It
shall be constructed in the same manner prescribed for Type 2 outdoor
storage facilities in Section 500.1310(A)(1), except that it may be less than
one cubic yard in size, and shall be bullet-resistant, fire-resistant, weatherresistant,
theft-resistant, and well ventilated. Hinges, hasps, locks, and
lock protection shall be in conformity with the requirements of Section
500.1300(A)(1)(h) and (i). The ground around such storage facilities shall
or shall be otherwise effectively immobilized by kingpin locking
devices or other methods approved by the Director.
2. Indoor storage facilities. No indoor facility for the storage of high
explosives shall be located in a residence or dwelling. When located
in a warehouse, wholesale, or retail establishment, such storage
facilities shall be provided with substantial wheels or casters to
facilitate removal therefrom. No more than two (2) indoor storage
facilities shall be kept in any one (1) building. Two (2) storage
facilities may be kept in the same building only when one (1) is
used for the storage of blasting caps, squibs, or similar items and
the other facility is used for the storage of other high explosives.
Each storage facility shall be located on the floor nearest the
ground level and within ten (10) feet of an outside exit. Indoor
storage facilities within one (1) building shall be separated by a
distance of not less than ten (10) feet. No indoor storage facility
shall contain a quantity of high explosives in excess of fifty (50)
pounds or more than five thousand (5,000) blasting caps. Indoor
facilities shall be of wood or metal construction as prescribed in
Subsection (A)(2)(a) or (b) of this Section.
i. Wood construction. Wood indoor storage facilities shall have
sides, bottoms, and covers or doors constructed of 2-inch
hardwood and shall be well braced at corners. They shall be
covered with sheet metal of not less than Number 20 gauge.
Nails exposed to the interior of such facilities shall be
countersunk.
ii. Metal construction. Metal indoor storage facilities shall have
sides, bottoms, and covers or doors constructed of Number 12
gauge metal and shall be lined inside with a non-sparking
material. Edges of metal covers shall overlap sides at least one
(1) inch.
3. Cap boxes. Storage facilities for blasting caps in quantities of one
hundred (100) or less shall have sides, bottoms, and covers
constructed of Number 12 gauge metal and lined with a nonsparking
material. Hinges and hasps shall be attached thereto by
welding. A single five-tumbler proof lock shall be sufficient for
locking purposes.
Section
500.1310
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1320
AO:823
slope away for drainage. No explosive materials shall be left in such
facilities if unattended. The explosive materials contained therein must be
removed to Type 1 or 2 storage facilities for unattended storage.
Section 500.1330. Construction of Type 4 Storage Facilities. [Ord.
No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
Section 500.1340. Construction of Type 5 Storage Facilities. [Ord.
No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
A. A Type 4 storage facility may be a building, an igloo or Army-type
structure, a tunnel, a dugout, a box, a trailer, or a semi-trailer or other
mobile facility and shall be fire-resistant, weather-resistant, and theftresistant.
It shall be constructed of masonry, metal-covered wood,
fabricated metal, or a combination of these materials. The walls and
floors of such storage facilities shall be lined with a non-sparking
material. The doors or covers shall be metal or solid wood covered with
metal. The foundations, locks, lock protection, hinges, hasps, and
interior shall be in conformity with the requirements of Section
500.1300(A)(1)(e), (h), (i) and (k).
1. Outdoor storage facilities. The ground around such storage
facilities shall slope away for drainage. When unattended,
vehicular storage facilities shall have wheels removed or shall be
otherwise effectively immobilized by kingpin locking devices or
other methods approved by the Director.
2. Indoor storage facilities. No indoor facility for the storage of low
explosives shall be located in a residence or dwelling. When located
in a warehouse, wholesale, or retail establishment, such storage
facilities shall be provided with substantial wheels or casters to
facilitate removal therefrom. No more than one indoor storage
facility shall be kept in any one building. It shall be located on the
floor nearest the ground level and within ten (10) feet of an outside
exit. No indoor storage facility shall contain a quantity of low
explosives in excess of fifty (50) pounds.
A. A Type 5 storage facility may be a building, an igloo or Army-type
structure, a tunnel, a dugout, a bin, a box, a trailer, or a semitrailer or
other mobile facility and shall be theft-resistant. The doors or covers
thereof shall be solid wood or metal. The hinges, hasps, locks, and lock
protection shall be in conformity with the requirements of Section
500.1300(A)(1)(h) and (i).
1. Outdoor storage facilities. The ground around such storage
facilities shall slope away for drainage. When unattended,
vehicular storage facilities shall have wheels removed or shall be
otherwise effectively immobilized by king-pin locking devices or
other methods approved by the Director.
Section
500.1320
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.1340
AO:824
Section 500.1350. Smoking and Open Flames. [Ord. No. 4685 §1,
12-21-2015]
Smoking, matches, open flames, and spark-producing devices shall not be
permitted in, or within fifty (50) feet of, any outdoor storage facility.
Section 500.1360. Storage of Blasting Caps. [Ord. No. 4685 §1,
12-21-2015]
Blasting caps shall not be stored with other explosive materials in the same
storage facility.
Section 500.1370. Storage Within Types 1, 2, 3, and 4 Facilities.
[Ord. No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
Section 500.1380. Transportation of Explosives in City — Duties of
Consignee. [Ord. No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
When explosives or blasting agents are brought into the City by railroad or
other conveyance or means of transportation, for delivery to a consignee,
the person in charge of such delivery for such railroad or public conveyance
shall notify the consignee immediately upon arrival of such explosives at a
railroad station or any other place customarily used by public conveyance
for receipt and delivery of shipments, and if said consignee does not remove
2. Indoor storage facilities. No indoor storage facility for the storage
of blasting agents shall be located in a residence or dwelling.
A. Explosive materials within a storage facility shall not be placed directly
against interior walls. Any devices constructed or placed within a
storage facility shall not interfere with ventilation.
B. Containers of explosive materials shall be stored by being laid flat with
top sides up. Corresponding classes, grades, and brands shall be stored
together within a storage facility in such a manner that class, grade,
and brand marks are easily visible upon inspection. Stocks of explosive
materials shall be stored so as to be easily counted and checked.
C. Except with respect to fiberboard containers, containers of explosive
materials shall not be unpacked or repacked inside a storage facility or
within fifty (50) feet thereof, and shall not be unpacked or repacked in
close proximity to other explosive materials. Containers of explosive
materials shall be securely closed while being stored.
D. Tools used for opening or closing containers of explosive materials shall
be of non-sparking materials, except that metal slitters may be used for
opening fiberboard containers. A wood wedge and a fiber, rubber, or
wooden mallet shall be used for opening or closing wood containers of
explosive materials. Metal tools other than non-sparking transfer
conveyors shall not be stored in any storage facility containing high
explosives.
Section
500.1340
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1380
AO:825
said explosives from said location within twenty-four (24) hours after such
notification, then the person in charge of such railroad station or other
conveyance shall immediately notify the Director, and shall remove said
explosives beyond the limits of the City, or to a magazine authorized by the
Director. The time allowance may be extended by special written permission
from the Director, when the Director determines that conditions beyond the
control of the consignee prevent the consignee from complying with the
provisions of this Section.
Section 500.1390. Failure to Remove Explosives on Arrival —
Unlawful. [Ord. No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
It shall be unlawful for any owner, consignee, agent or employee thereof,
having been notified of the arrival of the shipment of explosives as provided
in Section 500.1380 above, to fail to remove or cause the removal of said
explosives within twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of said notice or by
the time set by the Director, to some place meeting the requirements of this
Article.
Section 500.1400. Transportation of Explosives — General
Provisions. [Ord. No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
A. Explosives shall not be transported through any prohibited vehicular
tunnel, subway or over any prohibited bridge, roadway or elevated
highway.
B. No person shall smoke, carry matches or any other flame-producing
device, or carry any firearms or loaded cartridges while in or near a
motor vehicle transporting explosives; or drive, load or unload such
vehicle in a careless or reckless manner.
C. Explosives shall not be carried or transported in or upon a public
conveyance or vehicle carrying passengers for hire.
D. Explosives may be loaded into and transported on any truck and a full
trailer attached thereto, provided that there shall be no more than one
truck and one trailer comprising the combination.
E. Explosives shall not be transferred from one vehicle to another within
the City without first informing the Director and the Police Department.
In the event of breakdown or collision, the Director and the Police
Department shall be promptly notified to help safeguard such
emergencies. Explosives shall be transferred from the disabled vehicle
to another only when proper and qualified supervision is provided.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, haul or otherwise
convey blasting caps on the streets and highways of the City on the
same vehicle with explosives except that not more than fifty (50)
pounds of explosives and not more than twenty-five (25) blasting caps
may be transported on the same vehicle if the blasting caps are
transported in a container approved by the Director.
Section
500.1380
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.1410
AO:826
Section 500.1410. Transportation Vehicles — Requirements. [Ord.
No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
A. Vehicles used for transporting explosives shall be strong enough to
carry the load without difficulty and be in good mechanical condition. If
vehicles do not have a closed body, the body shall be covered with a
flame-proof and moisture-proof tarpaulin or other effective protection
against moisture and sparks. All vehicles used for the transportation of
explosives shall have tight floors and any exposed spark-producing
metal on the inside of the body shall be covered with wood or other nonsparking
materials to prevent contact with packages of explosives.
Packages of explosives shall not be loaded above the sides of an openbody
vehicle.
B. Every vehicle used for transporting explosives shall be marked or
placarded on both sides, front and rear with the word "Explosives" in
letters not less than three (3) inches in height in contrasting and clearly
readable colors. In addition to such marking or placarding, the vehicle
may display, in such a manner that it will be readily visible from all
directions, a red flag eighteen (18) inches by thirty (30) inches, with the
word "Explosives" painted, stamped or sewed thereon in white letters
at least six (6) inches in height.
C. Fire Extinguishers.
1. Every motor vehicle used for transporting explosives shall be
equipped with one of the following minimum fire extinguishing
units:
a. One (1) 2A 40BC fire extinguishing unit; or
b. Two (2) 2A 20BC fire extinguishing units.
2. Only extinguishers listed or approved by Underwriters'
Laboratories, Inc., Underwriters' Laboratories of Canada, Factory
Mutual Laboratories or by some other nationally recognized fire
equipment testing laboratory shall be deemed suitable for use on
explosive-carrying vehicles. Extinguishers shall be filled and ready
for immediate use and located near the driver's seat. Extinguishers
shall be examined periodically by a competent person.
D. All motor vehicles used for transporting explosives shall meet the
following requirements for safe transportation of explosives:
1. Fire extinguishers shall be filled and in working order.
2. All electrical wiring shall be completely protected and securely
fastened to prevent short circuiting.
3. Chassis, motor, pan and underside of body shall be reasonably
clean and free of excess oil and grease.
4. Fuel tank and feed line shall be secure and have no leaks.
Section
500.1410
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1410
AO:827
Section 500.1420. Permit To Explode or Blast Required, Blaster's
License. [Ord. No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
5. Brakes, lights, horn, windshield wipers and steering apparatus
shall function properly.
6. Tires shall be checked for proper inflation and defects.
7. The vehicle shall be in proper condition in every other respect and
acceptable for handling explosives.
E. Vehicles transporting explosives shall only be driven by, and be in
charge of, a driver who is physically fit, careful, capable, reliable, able
to read and write the English language, and not addicted to the use or
under the influence of intoxicants or narcotics, and not less than
twenty-one (21) years of age. He shall be familiar with the traffic
regulations, State laws and the provisions of this Article.
F. Except under emergency conditions, no vehicle transporting explosives
shall be parked before reaching its destination, even though attended,
on any public street adjacent to, or in proximity to, any bridge, tunnel,
dwelling, building or place where people work, congregate or assemble.
G. No spark-producing metal, spark-producing metal tools, oils, matches,
firearms, electric storage batteries, flammable substances, acids,
oxidizing materials or corrosive compounds shall be carried in the body
of any motor truck and/or vehicle transporting explosives.
H. Vehicles transporting explosives shall avoid congested areas and heavy
traffic. Where routes through congested areas have been designated,
such routes shall be followed.
I. Delivery shall only be made to authorized persons and/or into
authorized magazines or approved temporary storage or handling
areas.
A. It shall be unlawful, without first having received a permit from the
Director, to explode or cause to be exploded, any gunpowder, dynamite,
giant powder, gun cotton or other explosive for the purpose of blasting
out rock, gravel, earth or other like substance within the City.
B. No person shall use or detonate explosives unless he is in possession of
a valid license, obtained from the Director, to use explosives for blasting
purposes. This license shall be known as a blaster's license. For the
purpose of this Article, the Director is authorized to publish
qualifications necessary for an applicant to obtain a blaster's license.
Such qualifications shall take into consideration age, training,
education, and experience in the knowledge and use of explosives and
shall include a written examination. A license shall be issued by the
Director to any applicant meeting the requirements set forth by the
Director for such a license.
Section
500.1410
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.1420
AO:828
Section 500.1430. Application for Permit To Blast — Requirements.
[Ord. No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
C. The handling of explosives may be performed by other employees,
provided the work is done under the direct supervision of the person
holding the permit to use explosives and providing such employees are
at least twenty-one (21) years of age.
D. The person possessing a valid blaster's license shall be in charge of all
blasting operations. If there is more than one person possessing such a
license on any one operation, one will be designated as being blaster in
charge and shall be responsible for the entire operation.
A. Application for a permit to use explosives shall be made to the Director
at the courthouse on forms provided and shall contain the following
information:
1. Name of applicant.
2. Address of residence.
3. Place of business.
4. Occupation.
5. Age.
6. The location where the blasting is to be done, the Type of blasting
material to be used in each charge, the number and location of
charges and the manner in which the material is to be detonated.
7. The time and date of blasting when requested by the Director.
8. The name, age and address of the blaster or blasters who shall be
the person or persons who shall actually detonate or have actual
charge of the detonation of any explosive or blasting agent.
9. Blaster's license number.
10. When blasting operations are conducted on a continuous basis,
such as quarry blasting and construction work, the Director may, in
lieu of Subsection (A)(6), above, direct that the applicant furnish
the location where blasting is to be done, the Type of blasting
material generally used, the approximate frequency of detonations
based on past performance and the manner in which the explosives
are to be detonated.
B. In addition to the above information, there shall be attached to the
application for a permit to blast, the following: A certificate of liability
insurance in the minimum amount of five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) for injury to persons and property resulting from the
blasting operations. Such insurance shall be carried in a firm or
corporation which has been duly licensed or permitted to carry on such
Section
500.1420
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1430
AO:829
Section 500.1440. Blasting — Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No.
4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
business in the State of Missouri and shall be kept and maintained
continuously in force and effect for the duration of the blasting permit.
A. All blasting operations within the City shall be conducted in strict
accordance with the following rules and regulations, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to fail to observe and follow said rules and
regulations when blasting. In the event there is a violation of said rules
and regulations, the Director shall have the power and it shall be his
duty to revoke the blasting permit issued in connection with the
operation, revoke the license of the blaster in charge, all in accordance
with the terms of this Article, and, in addition, the violator or violators
may be punished as otherwise provided by this Article for violations
thereof.
1. Blasting operations shall be carried on with the smallest possible
number of persons present.
2. All drill holes shall be of sufficient size so that the cartridges of
explosives can be easily inserted to the bottom of the hole without
forcing or ramming.
3. Explosives should not be removed from the original wrapper before
being loaded into bore holes except when irregularities of the hole
make it impossible to load whole cartridges with safety or in blockholing
where small charges are desirable. This rule shall not apply
to free running explosives.
4. Excessive ramming should be avoided in loading or tamping
explosives in a bore hole, and wooden tools only, with no exposed
metal parts, shall be used for this purpose. In tamping, only
hardwood rods without metal parts, other than non-ferrous metal
ferrules for extending the length thereof, shall be used.
5. When loading free running or bulk explosives, a bronze, wooden or
heavy paper funnel should be used unless the explosives can be
poured directly from a container into the hole in such a manner as
to prevent scattering of loose explosives around the collar of the
hole.
6. When priming with electric caps, said caps shall be tested with a
blasting galvanometer after being loaded but before the hole is
stemmed. Primers shall be made up just prior to loading. The cap
must be properly embedded in the cartridge and the primer seated
in the charge without rough handling.
7. When firing with a blasting machine, the blasting machine shall be
located at a safe distance to be determined by the blaster.
Section
500.1430
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.1440
AO:830
8. When firing by means of a blasting machine, the leading wires shall
be kept short-circuited until the shot is ready for firing and shall
not be connected to the blasting machine until immediately before
the time of firing and shall be disconnected from the blasting
machine and short-circuited immediately after firing.
9. Electric detonators and blasting circuits shall be tested only by
means of a blasting galvanometer designed for this purpose.
10. Before firing any blast, all means of access to the danger zone (the
extent of which shall be determined by the blaster, but in no case to
be closer to the explosion than the blaster himself), shall be
effectively guarded to exclude all unauthorized personnel. When
practical, the blaster shall then sound a warning of sufficient
intensity and duration to be distinctly audible to all persons within
the danger zone, and all such persons shall retire beyond the
danger zone. The danger zone shall then be examined by the
blaster to make certain that all persons have retired therefrom to a
place of safety. No blast shall be fired while any person is in the
danger zone.
11. When the point of explosion is within three hundred (300) feet of a
roadway, the blaster shall, just prior to the blast, designate a
sufficient number of employees of the operator, each carrying a red
warning flag, to stop all vehicular and pedestrian traffic on each
possible route of travel within three hundred and fifty (350) feet of
the point of explosion until the blast has been fired.
12. No person shall return to the danger zone until permitted to do so
by the blaster as announced by audible or visual signal.
13. Immediately following the blast the area shall be examined by the
blaster for evidence of misfired charges.
14. All misfires shall be reported at once to the superintendent or
manager who shall then determine the safe and proper method of
disposal. The unexploded charge shall be detonated if such can be
accomplished without risk of injury to personnel or damage to
property. If repriming is necessary, any stemming present in the
hole may be removed by a jet of water. The jetting tool should be of
non-sparking metal, rubber or plastic. If electric blasting caps are
used for in-the-hole initiation, an air jet should not be used.
15. Drilling in any hole that is known to contain or have contained
explosives is prohibited until complete neutralization is effected.
16. A complete record shall be kept by the blaster showing all misfires
and method of disposal.
17. In case a charge fires but does not bring down the burden, it is
permissible to reload the bore hole, if in suitable condition, but only
after the temperature of the hole has been reduced by water or
Section
500.1440
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1440
AO:831
otherwise to not more than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150° F.).
18. Each blast hole shall be stemmed to the collar or to a point high
enough to provide efficient confinement of the charge and to
minimize the chance of injury to personnel from flying material.
Block holes shall contain at least eighty-five percent (85%) of
stemming material. For toe holes, the collar stemming shall in no
case be less than one-third the depth of the hole.
19. When electric blasting caps are transported in a motor vehicle
equipped with a radio transmitter, they shall either be in their
original package or stored in a closed metal box that is lined with a
cushioning material such as wood or sponge rubber. When the
electric caps are being placed into or removed from the box, the
transmitter shall not be used.
20. Unless otherwise expressly authorized in writing by the Director,
all blasting operations shall be conducted at no less distance from
any fixed or mobile radio transmitter than indicated in the
following table:
Transmitter Power
Output
(watts)
Minimum Distance From Blasting
Operations Using Electric Blasting
Caps
(feet)
5 to 25 100
25 to 50 150
50 to 100 220
100 to 250 350
250 to 500 450
500 to 1,000 650
1,000 to 2,500 1,000
2,500 to 5,000 1,500
5,000 to 10,000 2,200
10,000 to 25,000 3,500
25,000 to 50,000 5,000
50,000 to 100,000 7,000
Section
500.1440
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.1440
AO:832
When it can be demonstrated by means of approved tests that
electric blasting may be carried out at lesser distances from the
transmitter than required by the table shown, the Director may
allow a variation from the requirements of said table.
When blasting operations are located near highways or other
public ways, signs shall be erected at least five hundred (500) feet
from the blast areas reading: "BLAST AREA-SHUT OFF ALL TWOWAY
RADIOS." The letters of these signs shall be not less than four
inches in height on a contrasting background.
21. In no case shall drilling be conducted closer than twenty-five (25)
feet to a loaded hole or a hole that is being loaded.
22. Holes shall be checked prior to loading to determine depth and
condition. Holes may be checked with a dolly or tamping block or
by visual inspection with the aid of a mirror. After any explosives
have been loaded, all measuring shall be done with a cloth tape or
non-ferrous measuring device and lead plumb bob, or a wooden
tamping pole or wooden dolly free of exposed metal parts.
23. Under no circumstances shall the amount of explosives taken
within three hundred (300) feet of a potential point of explosion
exceed the amount estimated by the blaster as necessary for the
blast. Such explosives shall be stacked in piles at least twenty-five
(25) feet from the nearest holes being loaded and at such distances
apart, as provided in Subsection (A)(32), that any premature
explosion will not be likely to propagate from one (1) pile to
another.
24. The explosives containers, if any, shall be opened at the pile and
carried up to the hole, one (1) case or unit at a time for immediate
loading or placed at a loading station not less than six (6) feet from
the hole except that not more than one hundred (100) pounds of
explosives shall be allowed at the loading station at any one time.
All empty explosives containers (boxes, bags, crates, etc.) shall be
properly disposed of, daily, in a safe manner.
25. Explosives shall be distributed in such a manner that the distances
from storage piles to the allowable maximum quantity of one
hundred (100) pounds of explosives at the loading station or
between such one-hundred-pound loading station piles shall not be
less than the quantities shown in the following quantity-distance
table:
Explosives
(pounds)
Distance Between Piles of
Explosives
(feet)
Up to 50 21
100 25
Section
500.1440
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1440
AO:833
Explosives
(pounds)
Distance Between Piles of
Explosives
(feet)
200 32
300 37
400 41
500 44
750 50
1,000 55
1,500 64
2,000 70
2,500 75
5,000 96
10,000 123
26. Drill holes shall not be sprung when they are less than one hundred
(100) feet from the nearest hole containing explosives. Holes that
have been sprung shall not be charged with explosives until the
maximum temperature in any portion of such holes has been
reduced to one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150° F.). Where
possible, water is to be used for cooling purposes.
27. When loading a blast primed with detonating fuse, the detonator or
detonators required for firing the blast shall not be brought within
fifty (50) feet of the hole area nor attached to the detonating fuse
until all persons, except the blaster and his assistants, have been
cleared from the danger zone.
28. In all blasting where the firing of any one (1) hole is likely to break
into or damage another hole in the vicinity or where the firing of
any hole may propagate the charge in a loaded hole in the vicinity,
all holes which have been loaded shall be included and fired in the
blast.
29. Water standing in blast holes should be bailed out, if possible, or
the holes shall be loaded with an explosive of adequate water
resistance.
30. Blasting crews shall consist of the minimum number of experienced
men to do the work in an efficient manner and should be organized
carefully and each man assigned to definite tasks to avoid
confusion.
31. A blast shall be planned before the loading is started. The planned
charge for each hole shall be recorded prior to the blast.
Section
500.1440
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.1440
AO:834
32. The condition of each hole to be loaded and the amount, height, and
position of the explosives charge or charges placed in the hole shall
be recorded on a loading chart prior to the blast.
33. Members of loading crews engaged in loading blast holes should be
prohibited from wearing hobnail or steel-plated shoes to avoid
striking sparks on rocks.
34. Large dynamite cartridges may be dropped in blast holes only
when the hole is free from obstructions to the depth at which the
cartridge is to rest.
35. Large dynamite cartridges shall not be dropped in blast holes
containing excessive water until the charge is above the water
level.
36. Large dynamite cartridges that have been wedged in a blast hole
shall not be tamped with a dolly. After pouring water into the hole,
attempts to dislodge or pierce them shall be made with a spearshaped
wooden tamping block or a small-diameter wooden pole.
37. Rough or ragged holes and holes partly closed by an obstruction
that cannot be readily removed shall be loaded with cartridged
dynamite lowered with a rope, with free running powder or
dynamite cut in small pieces.
38. When loading a long line of holes with more than one (1) loading
crew, the crews shall be separated by the greatest practical
distance which can be maintained as the loading operations
progress and which is consistent with efficient operation and
supervision of the crews. Every effort shall be made to keep the
loading crews a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet apart and to
prevent the simultaneous loading of adjacent holes.
39. Excessively large amounts of explosives shall not be delivered to
the loading area at one (1) time. If deliveries of explosives are made
by truck, the quantity permitted at or near the loading operations
shall be limited to one (1) truckload. Other trucks loaded with
explosives shall wait or be unloaded in separate safe places away
from the loading operations.
40. Explosives should be delivered first to the holes farthest from the
truck to avoid driving or walking among piles of explosives.
41. Explosives in excess of immediate requirements when removed
from the main storage magazine and delivered in the vicinity of a
blasting operation shall be stored in a Class II magazine.
42. The required stemming or tamping material shall be placed by each
hole before the delivery of explosives to the holes is started.
Stemming material shall be screened or free from excessively
coarse pieces.
Section
500.1440
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1440
AO:835
43. Stemming shall be placed in each hole to avoid damage to the
detonating fuse or leg wires of electric detonators.
44. A single hole or any number of holes in a row should not be fired
when adjacent to or near one (1) or more other holes which are
loaded and which are not intended to be fired.
45. All detonating fuses shall be covered with adequate stemming
where physically possible to reduce noise.
46. The detonating fuse shall extend from the hole a distance of one (1)
feet or two (2) feet more than sufficient to compensate for any
subsidence, should be drawn taut and made secure on the top
where it will not interfere with loading operations or come in
contact with explosives on the ground.
47. The detonating fuse shall be checked each time before stemming
material is used to see that it has not been broken; if it has, it shall
be repaired before proceeding.
48. When a detonating fuse is used, main or trunk line splices shall be
factory splices or tight square knots. No splices or knots shall be
used in the drill hole.
49. All branch line connections and all connections in the main line
other than splices shall be tight and at right angles.
50. The main or trunk line shall be laid out free of kinks or coils, and all
connections shall be inspected before firing the blast.
51. When connecting an electric blasting cap to a detonating fuse, a
connector for the purpose shall be used in accordance with the
Director's instructions. The cap may also be securely taped to the
detonating fuse.
52. Caps shall not be brought to the loading area nor attached to the
detonating fuse until all is in readiness to fire the blast.
53. Plain detonating fuse may be used for trunk lines or in shallow drill
holes, but reinforced or wire protected Types shall be used in deep
or ragged holes.
54. "Toe hole blasting" is defined as the removing of ledges or high
bottoms that remain after a main or primary shot or blast using
moderate quantities of explosives loaded in small diameter holes.
In toe hole blasting, the charge of explosives shall be pushed to the
end of the hole with a wooden pole using care not to block the hole,
or suitable free-running blasting agents may be blown into the hole
with an approved pneumatic loader.
55. "Secondary blasting" is defined as the reduction of oversize
material by the use of explosives to facilitate shovel operations or
to be accompanied by the crusher. It shall include mud-capping and
Section
500.1440
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.1440
AO:836
blockholing. In secondary blasting, wherever practicable, oversize
fragments shall be reduced to shovel or crusher size by use of the
drop-ball method, except as otherwise directed by the Director.
56. Charges of explosives shall be confined in all cases (drill holes) by
suitable, inert stemming material.
57. No person, except the blaster and any others directly engaged in
loading block holes, shall be permitted within the immediate area
while loading is being performed. Loading of any block hole shall
be completed in one continuous operation, including insertion of
the primer and the stemming.
58. Blast matting (which may include earth) shall be required when
blast operations and/or geological conditions create fly rock that
could damage or injure persons or property, or at the decision of
the Director.
59. In all blasting operations, except as hereinafter otherwise
provided, the maximum peak particle velocity of any one (1) of
three (3) mutually perpendicular components of the ground motion
in the vertical and horizontal directions shall not exceed two (2)
inches per second.
60. Instrumentation shall be in good operating condition and be
properly calibrated with a current (within one (1) year of date of
use) calibration sticker affixed to each instrument. If an
instrument(s) is found to be not operating properly or out of
calibration, blasting operations shall be halted until the
appropriate repairs or recalibration are performed or a proper
instrument(s) is provided. The seismograph operator shall be
trained in the use of that instrument(s).
61. Seismographic instrumentation shall be required on any blast site
where the nearest uncontrolled structure or public utility is located
within a scaled distance of sixty-five (65) (as defined in Rule 69) or
at the request of the Director. An "uncontrolled structure" is
defined as any occupied building not owned or controlled by the
explosives user. The seismograph shall be placed at or near the
closest uncontrolled structure(s).
62. Blasting operations without instrumentation will be considered as
being within the limits set forth in this Subsection if at a specified
location on at least five (5) blasts instrumentation has shown that
the maximum peak particle velocity at the specified location is fifty
percent (50%) or less of the limit set forth in this Subsection, and
with written permission from the Director; provided, that for all
future blasts the scaled distance is equal to or greater than the
scaled distance for the instrumental blast. However, if a scaled
distance less than thirty-five (35) is employed, a seismograph is
required regardless of the seismic readings of previous blasts.
"Scaled distance" means the actual distance in feet divided by the
Section
500.1440
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1440
AO:837
square root of the maximum explosive weight in pounds that is
detonated per delay period for delay intervals of eight (8)
milliseconds or greater. If delay intervals less than eight (8)
milliseconds are employed or if instantaneous blasting is employed,
scaled distance shall be computed by dividing the actual distance
in feet by the square root of the total explosive weight in pounds.
When blasting operations are contemplated which would result in
ground vibrations that would have a particle velocity of any one (1)
of three (3) mutually perpendicular components in excess of two (2)
inches per second, blasting operations may proceed after receiving
written consent from the property owner or owners affected and
the Director.
63. Airblast limitations and measurements.
a. Airblast shall be controlled so that it does not exceed the
maximum limits specified below at any uncontrolled structure
[as defined in rule 68(A)].
Lower Frequency Limits of
Measuring System, Hz (+
3dB) Maximum Level in dB
0.1 Hz or lower — flat response 134 peak
2 Hz or lower — flat response 133 peak
6 Hz or lower — flat response 129 peak
C-weighted, slow response 105 peak dBc
b. All measuring systems used shall have a flat frequency
response of at least 200 Hz at the upper end.
c. The permittee may satisfy the provisions of this Section by
meeting any of the four (4) specifications in the chart in Rule
73 of this Section; provided, however, the 0.1 Hz or lower-flat
response or C-weighted slow response can only be used if
approved by the Director.
64. When blasting in the vicinity of uncontrolled structures [as defined
in Rule 59(A)] the explosives user will determine the structures
lying within a scaled distance of thirty-five (35). The distance will
be determined by the following:
D = 35 (W2)
Where D is the distance limit and W is the maximum charge weight
per 8 ms delay interval. The explosives user will make a good
faith effort to contact the owners of structures within the distance
limit and offer to have a preblast inspection performed on their
structures at no cost to the owners.
Section
500.1440
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.1450
AO:838
Section 500.1450. Blasting Agents — Transportation, Storage and
Use. [Ord. No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
Unless otherwise set forth in this Article, blasting agents shall be
transported, stored and used in the same manner as explosives.
Section 500.1460. Buildings Used for Mixing of Blasting Agents —
Location. [Ord. No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
Section 500.1470. Buildings Used for Mixing of Blasting Agents —
Construction. [Ord. No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
A. Buildings or other facilities used for mixing blasting agents shall be
located, with respect to inhabited buildings, passenger railroads and
public highways, in accordance with the American Table of Distance
(Appendix B).
1. Any oxidizer stored at a closer distance to the blasting agent
storage area than as provided in Subsection (A)(2) below shall be
added to the quantity of blasting agents to calculate the total
quantity involved for application of the aforementioned Table.
2. Minimum intra-plant separation (distances between mixing units
and the oxidizer) storage areas and blasting agent storage areas
shall be determined by competent persons, and these distances
shall be approved by the Director.
A. Buildings used for the mixing of blasting agents shall conform to the
requirements of this Section unless otherwise specifically approved by
the Director.
1. Buildings should preferably be of noncombustible construction or
sheet metal on wood studs.
2. The layout of the mixing building shall be such as to provide
physical separation between the finished product storage and the
mixing and packaging operation.
3. Floors in storage areas and in the processing plant should be of
concrete. Isolated fuel storage shall be provided to avoid contact
between molten oxidizer and fuel in case of fire.
4. The building shall be well ventilated.
5. Heat shall be provided exclusively from a unit outside the building.
B. The design of the mixer should minimize the possibility of frictional
heating, compaction and, especially, confinement. Open mixers are
preferable to enclosed mixers. Bearings and gears should be protected
against the accumulation of oxidizer dust. All surfaces should be
accessible for cleaning. Mixing and packaging equipment should be
constructed of materials compatible with the fuel-oxidizer composition.
Mobile equipment, such as ready-mix concrete trucks, shall not be used
Section
500.1450
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1470
AO:839
for blending fuels with oxidizers while in transit on public highways.
The provisions of this Section shall be considered when determining
blasting agent composition. The sensitivity of the blasting agent shall
be determined by means of a No. 8 test blasting cap at regular intervals
and after every change in ingredients or composition, or as may be
requested by the Director.
C. Oxidizers of small particle size, such as crushed prills or fines, may be
more sensitive and hazardous than the ordinary prills and should be
handled with greater care.
D. No liquid fuel with higher volatility than that of No. 2 diesel fuel
(minimum flash point of one hundred forty-five degrees Fahrenheit
(145° F.), ASTM closed-up procedure) shall be used.
E. Crude oil and crankcase oil should not be used because they may
contain light ends that offer increased vapor-explosion hazards or gritty
particles that tend to sensitize the resulting blasting agent.
F. If solid fuels are used, they shall be chosen so as to minimize dustexplosion
hazard.
G. Metal dusts (aluminum powder, etc.), peroxides, chlorates, or
perchlorates shall not be used unless such operations are conducted in
a manner approved by the Director.
H. Unusual compositions shall not be attempted except under the
supervision of competent personnel equipped to determine the overall
hazard of the resulting compositions.
I. All electrical switches, controls, motors and lights, if allocated in the
mixing room, should conform to the requirements of Article 502, Class
II, Division 2 of the Electrical Code of the City; otherwise they should be
located outside the mixing room. The frame of the mixer and all other
equipment that may be used shall be electrically bonded and provided
with a continuous path to the ground.
J. Washdown facilities should be provided. An automatic water-deluge
system with adequate capacity is recommended to protect mixers and
the finished-explosives storage area in the plant. Floors shall be
constructed so as to eliminate open floor drains and piping into which
molten materials could flow and be confined in case of fire. The floors
and equipment of the mixing and packaging room shall be washed down
frequently to prevent accumulation of oxidizers or fuels and other
sensitizers. The entire mixing and packaging plant shall be washed
down periodically to prevent excessive accumulation of dust.
K. Smoking or open flames shall not be permitted in or within fifty (50)
feet of any building or facility used for the mixing of blasting agents.
L. Empty oxidizer bags shall be disposed of daily in a safe manner.
Section
500.1470
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.1470
AO:840
Section 500.1480. Transportation of Blasting Agents. [Ord. No.
4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
Section 500.1490. Use of Blasting Agents. [Ord. No. 4685 §1,
12-21-2015]
Persons using blasting agents shall comply with all of the applicable
provisions of this Article for the use of explosives.
Section 500.1500. Records. [Ord. No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
M. Not more than one (1) day's production of blasting agents or the limit
determined by the American Table of Distances (Appendix A),132
whichever is less, shall be permitted in or near the mixing and
packaging plant or area. Larger quantities shall be stored in separate
warehouses or magazines.
A. When blasting agents are transported in the same vehicle with
explosives, all of the requirements of Section 500.1400 of this Article
shall be complied with.
B. Vehicles transporting blasting agents shall only be driven by and be in
charge of a driver at least twenty-one (21) years of age who is capable,
careful, reliable and in possession of a valid motor vehicle operator's
license. Such a person shall also be familiar with the State vehicle and
traffic laws.
C. No sparking metal, sparking metal tools, oils, matches, firearms, acids
or other corrosive liquids shall be carried in the bed or body of any
vehicle containing blasting agents.
D. No person shall be permitted to ride upon, drive, load or unload a
vehicle containing blasting agents while smoking or under the influence
of intoxicants or narcotics.
E. It is prohibited for any person to transport or carry any blasting agents
upon any public vehicle carrying passengers for hire.
F. Vehicles transporting blasting agents shall be in safe operating
condition at all times.
G. When offering blasting agents for transportation on City roads and
highways, they shall be packaged in a manner to render them safe for
transportation and handling and marked or labeled so as to be readily
identifiable.
A. A record known as a "log" shall be kept for every primary blast in an
approved manner and for such other blasting as the Director may
require.
132. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this Article.
Section
500.1470
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1500
AO:841
Section 500.1510. Fees. [Ord. No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
The fee for an annual blaster's license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). The
fees for blasting and storage of explosives permits required by this Article
shall be as prescribed in Sections 1100.210, 1100.220 and 1100.230,
SLCRO 1974, as amended.
B. A blasting record, known as a "log," shall be kept on the site of any
blasting operations. This log shall be made available to the Director or
his authorized agents upon demand. This record shall be maintained
available for inspection for a period of six (6) months after such blasting
operations are completed.
C. Minimum recorded data shall be as follows:
1. Plan of the involved portion of the blasting site showing location of
holes and spacing of holes.
2. A cross-section of each hole showing overburden; burden at top of
face and toe; height of face; depth of hole; kind and quantity of
explosives, including distribution of explosives load as deck
charges, or otherwise as appropriate; length and kind of stemming
material.
3. Drilling record showing unusual joint or seam conditions in the
rock.
4. Amount of explosives used (weight).
5. Kind of blasting caps, distribution of instantaneous or short-period
delay blasting caps, or both; delay interval used; order of firing by
switch.
6. Comments by blaster in charge regarding character of breakage;
height of breakage; length of throw; effectiveness of shot; unusual
results of effects.
7. Weather conditions, including direction and approximate velocity
of wind; atmospheric temperature; relative humidity; cloud
conditions.
8. Date and time of firing of blast.
9. Name of person in responsible charge of loading and firing;
blaster's permit number.
10. Name and location of blasting site.
11. Signature and title of person making report.
D. Any falsification, alterations or misrepresentation of any records of
blasting operations will be cause for suspension or revocation of
blasting permits and blaster's license.
Section
500.1500
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.1520
AO:842
Section 500.1520. Hours During Which Blasting Prohibited. [Ord.
No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
It shall be unlawful for any person to explode, or cause to be exploded,
any gunpowder, dynamite, giant powder, gun cotton or other explosives as
herein defined for any purpose during the hours of 6:00 P.M. to 8:00 A.M.,
except that a special permit to use explosives during the hours of 6:00 P.M.
to 8:00 A.M. may be issued by the Director when the Director determines
that conditions beyond the control of the person seeking a special permit
prevent such person from using explosives during regular hours permitted.
Section 500.1530. Permit — Licenses — Duration. [Ord. No. 4685
§1, 12-21-2015]
Section 500.1540. Right of Inspection. [Ord. No. 4685 §1,
12-21-2015]
A. Blaster's licenses shall expire at the expiration of twelve (12) months
from date of issuance, but may be renewed at the discretion of the
Director without written examination.
B. Permits to store explosives or blasting agents shall expire at the
expiration of twelve (12) months from date of issuance, or when
location of magazine is changed.
C. Permit to blast shall expire on the date specified on the permit issued by
the Director, but may be extended by the Director.
D. All permits and licenses issued pursuant to this Article may be
suspended by the Director for good cause shown as hereinafter
provided.
A. The Director or any authorized Police Officer may, at any reasonable
time, inspect premises, buildings and installations used for storage or
sale of explosives or blasting agents, or any premises on which blasting
operations are being conducted for the purpose of determining whether
the provisions of this Article are being complied with.
B. The Director or any authorized Police Officer may, during normal
business hours, enter and inspect the premises, including places of
storage, of any licensed importer, licensed manufacturer, licensed
manufacturer-limited, licensed dealer, or permittee for the purpose of
inspecting or examining any documents and records required to be kept
by such person by law and any explosive materials kept or stored by
such person.
C. Any person who shall hinder or obstruct the Director or any Police
Officer in the performance of his official duties shall be guilty of a
violation of the provisions of this Article and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished as provided in Section 500.1630.
Section
500.1520
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1550
AO:843
Section 500.1550. Inspection of Fire or Accident Scene. [Ord. No.
4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
The Director or any authorized Police Officer may inspect the site of any
accident or fire in which there is reason to believe any explosive materials
were involved. The Director or any authorized Police Officer may, at any
reasonable time, enter into or upon any property where explosive materials
have been used or are suspected of having been used, or have been found
in an otherwise unauthorized location.
Section 500.1560. Violation of Inspection — Notice to Violator.
[Ord. No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
Section 500.1570. Conflict With State or Federal Regulation of
Explosives — Suspension. [Ord. No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
During such time as any provision herein shall conflict with any State or
Federal statute or regulation, such provision herein conflicting shall be
suspended.
A. If, upon inspection by the Director or his agents, a violation of this
Article is found to exist, the Director shall file with the person holding
the permit a notice citing the violation and ordering its correction. If
such order is not complied with within the time period specified in the
notice, which may require immediate compliance, the Director may
suspend any permit or license issued to the person involved. Nothing
herein relating to revocation of permits shall be construed to abrogate
or suspend any proceedings against or prosecution of the violator which
may be instituted against the violator under the provisions of this
Article.
B. Immediately after the suspension of the permit to store or to blast, the
Director shall give the permittee written notice of the complaint or
charge and shall fix the date for a hearing to be held within five (5) days
of said notice, at which hearing the permittee shall have the right to
counsel and to produce witnesses and other evidence in his behalf. For
the purpose of said hearing, the Director is empowered to issue
subpoenas and all necessary processes, administer oaths and take
testimony at said hearing. All evidence offered at the hearing shall be
preserved by the Director, and oral testimony shall be recorded
verbatim.
C. If the Director shall, after such hearing, decide that the operation for
which the permit was issued was in violation of any provision of this
Article, he may revoke any permit or license of the person involved
permanently or for such lesser period of time as he shall determine.
Section
500.1550
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.1580
AO:844
Section 500.1580. Reckless and Wanton Handling of Explosives —
Prohibited. [Ord. No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
No person shall load, unload or otherwise handle explosives in a reckless
and wanton manner, thereby endangering the life, limb or property of any
person.
Section 500.1590. Stolen Explosives. [Ord. No. 4685 §1,
12-21-2015]
No person shall, with the intent of depriving the owner of lawful possession
thereof, use, possess, receive, conceal, transport, sell or dispose of any
stolen explosive materials knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
such materials were stolen. (O. No. 2703)
Section 500.1600. Sale to Minors — Prohibited. [Ord. No. 4685 §1,
12-21-2015]
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, vend, give away or otherwise
supply any explosive as defined herein in any quantity to any person under
the age of twenty-one (21) years.
Section 500.1610. Theft or Loss of Explosives. [Ord. No. 4685 §1,
12-21-2015]
Any person who has knowledge of the theft or loss of any explosive
materials shall immediately report such theft or loss to the Director and the
Police Department.
Section 500.1620. Vendor to Keep Record of Sales — Duties. [Ord.
No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
A. Every person who has a permit to store, stock or store for resale
explosives as defined herein shall be required to maintain a bound
ledger and shall record or cause to be recorded therein the following
information in connection with every sale, vending or other
disbursement of explosives:
1. Name of vendee.
2. Address of vendee.
3. Date and time of sale.
4. Type of explosive.
5. Quantity of explosive.
B. Such record shall be open to inspection by the Director or his agent
during usual business hours. No licensed user of explosives or blasting
agents shall be allowed to resell explosives or blasting agents except by
the written authorization of the Director.
Section
500.1580
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1630
AO:845
Section 500.1630. Penalties. [Ord. No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00) or imprisoned not to exceed 1-year, or both, and each such
violation shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalties
prescribed herein, the Board of Aldermen may take such other action, either
legal or equitable, that it deems necessary in order to execute and enforce
the provisions of this Article.
Section 500.1640. Right to Appeal. [Ord. No. 4685 §1, 12-21-2015]
A. Any applicant, permittee or other person aggrieved by any order of the
Director issued pursuant to this Article, except the revocation of a
permit which is covered elsewhere in this Article, may file an appeal
with the Director within ten (10) days of such order, and the Director
shall fix a time and place for hearing to be held not less than five (5)
days nor more than ten (10) days of the filing of appeal at which hearing
the permittee shall have the right to counsel and to produce witnesses
and other evidence in his behalf. For the purpose of said hearing, the
Director is empowered to issue subpoenas and all necessary processes,
administer oaths and take testimony at said hearings. All evidence
offered at the hearing shall be preserved by the Director, and oral
testimony shall be recorded verbatim.
B. The decision and action of the Director at the hearing to revoke the
permit shall be reviewable in a court of competent jurisdiction by a writ
of certiorari filed by the permittee so affected or by any other person
aggrieved by the action of the Director, within ten (10) days after said
decision in writing has been made and forwarded to said permittee.
Section
500.1630
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
500.1640
AO:846
Chapter 505
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
Cross References — As to street vendors, §§605.1910 et seq.; as to motor
vehicles and traffic, Title III; as to signs, ch. 410; as to trees and shrubs, ch.
230.
State Law Reference — Public works and special assessments, ch. 88,
RSMo.
Section
500.1640
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.1640
AO:847

ARTICLE I
In General
Section 505.010. Closing of Streets. [R.O. 2009 §21-1; Code 1969
§35-3]
The Chief of Police, with the approval of the Mayor or Public Works
Committee, shall be authorized to close any street, alley, public place or
highway and withdraw the same from public use temporarily and during
such period as public work thereon or other public emergency or
expediency shall make such action necessary. No person shall use or
attempt to use such street, alley, public place or highway so withdrawn from
public use or drive or attempt to drive any vehicle or animal thereon. The
Chief of Police shall place a sign or placard at each end of the portion of
the street withdrawn from public use, the same to have the following words
printed thereon in letters three (3) inches high: "Street Closed. This Street
Is Closed To Public Use By Authority Of Section 505.010, Brentwood City
Code".
Section 505.020. Breaking or Removing Street Warning Lights.
[R.O. 2009 §21-2; Code 1969 §35-16]
No person without authority shall remove, break or extinguish any lantern
or danger signal which has been placed on any street or alley to protect the
lives and property of others from injury or accident.
Section 505.030. Destruction of Street Curbs. [R.O. 2009 §21-3;
Code 1969 §35-8]
No person shall willfully or intentionally destroy, break, damage or injure,
or procure or induce another to do so, any curb or curbing on any roadway
or street within this City.
Section 505.040. Encroachments and Obstructions. [R.O. 2009
§21-4; Code 1969 §35-7]
All encroachment into or upon any sidewalk, street, avenue, alley or other
public place in this City is hereby prohibited. No obstruction such as
awnings, hitching posts, lampposts, awning posts, telephone, telegraph and
electric light poles shall be erected or placed into or upon any street,
sidewalk, avenue, alley or other public place without first obtaining a
written permit from the Department of Planning and Development or other
persons authorized to issue such permit.
Section 505.050. Placing Articles on Sidewalks During Delivery.
[R.O. 2009 §21-5; Code 1969 §35-13]
Nothing in this Article shall be construed as to prevent any merchant or
other person from placing any articles on the sidewalk while receiving,
delivering or forwarding the same; provided that such articles shall not
Section
505.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.050
AO:849
occupy more than one-half (½) of the sidewalk from the edge of the
curbstone next to the street and shall not be permitted to remain on such
sidewalk longer than two (2) hours.
Section 505.060. Water From Vehicle Washing Business in Public
Places. [R.O. 2009 §21-6; Code 1969 §35-2]
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall conduct a business of or
provide a service for washing automobiles, trucks or other motor vehicles
for charge or fee to cause or allow drain water resulting from such washing
operations to flow, stand or accumulate on any public sidewalk, alley, street
or other public place within this City. Every person who shall conduct such
business or provide such service for washing automobiles, trucks or other
motor vehicles for charge or fee shall provide adequate and workable means
for diverting all drain water resulting from such business or service to
the storm sewer nearest the location where such business or service is
conducted or provided.
Section 505.070. Shrubbery Impeding Sidewalks and Public
Ways.133 [R.O. 2009 §21-7; Code 1969 §35-14(a)]
No person shall allow any hedge, bush or shrubbery on his/her premises
adjacent to any street or sidewalk to attain a height of more than four (4)
feet and to encroach upon or extend over and onto any street or sidewalk so
as to interfere with or impede passage thereon.
Section 505.080. Unsafe Walkway or Sidewalk. [R.O. 2009 §21-8;
Code 1969 §35-14(b)]
Any section or portion of a walkway or sidewalk raised, depressed or having
any obstruction over one (1) inch in height shall be deemed to be unsafe
and imperiling the safety of persons walking over and along such walkways
or sidewalks.
Section 505.090. Tree Branches Impeding Travel. [R.O. 2009 §21-9;
Code 1969 §35-15]
A. Every resident property owner, or in the case of leased or rented
premises, the occupants thereof, shall remove all branches of trees in
front of their respective properties or residences which overhang the
public sidewalk or street in such a manner and to such an extent that
the branches of such trees shall not interfere or impede the free flow of
vehicle or pedestrian traffic thereupon and shall remove or cause to be
removed any tree or other object which may be a source of danger to
persons using the sidewalk or public highway and shall remove all dead
limbs of trees that overhang public property.
B. If any such person violating the provisions of this Section shall correct
and remedy the condition complained of within ten (10) days after a
133. Cross Reference — As to trees and shrubs, ch. 230.
Section
505.050
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
505.090
AO:850
Section 505.100. Removal of Snow From Sidewalks. [R.O. 2009
§21-10; Code 1969 §35-17]
The owner of premises or tenements or vacant lots shall keep the sidewalks
in front of and adjoining the property owned swept and clear of snow and
ice at all times.
Section 505.110. through Section 505.150. (Reserved)
service of a written notice so to do upon him/her, then no punishment
shall be assessed or imposed against such person. If such conditions
are not remedied within ten (10) days after the service of such written
notice, such person shall be arrested and prosecuted upon the charges
prescribed and provided for in this Section.
Section
505.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.110
AO:851

ARTICLE II
Construction, Alteration And Repair
DIVISION 1
Generally
Section 505.160. Definition. [R.O. 2009 §21-21; Code 1969 §35-25]
In this Article "approaches" or "sidewalk approaches" means the extension
of sidewalks at corner lots from the property line each way to the street
curb and being, in fact, the connection across the parkway or intervening
space between the corner of the property and the crossing in the street.
Section 505.170. Duty of Owner to Keep Sidewalk in Repair —
Failure to Repair After Notice. [R.O. 2009 §21-22; Ord. No. 2741 §§1
— 2, 6-3-1985]
Section 505.180. Work to Be Done Expeditiously. [R.O. 2009 §21-23;
Code 1969 §35-37]
Every property owner, his/her agent or contractor, who shall commence
the work of constructing or reconstructing any sidewalk, shall carry on
such work with all reasonable dispatch so that the public use shall not be
obstructed beyond a reasonable time.
Section 505.190. Line and Grade — Work to Be Supervised by
Public Works Official. [R.O. 2009 §21-24; Code 1969 §35-31]
All sidewalks shall be constructed to the line and grade as determined by
the Public Works Department. The Public Works Official shall have charge
of all sidewalk work.
Section 505.200. "Contractor" Defined — Grading and Terracing by
Contractor. [R.O. 2009 §21-25; Code 1969 §35-32]
A. Every owner of any premises fronting or abutting on any sidewalk in the
City shall keep the sidewalk in front of or abutting on such premises in
good repair. Every owner of any such premises fronting or abutting on
any such sidewalk which shall be out of repair, failing, neglecting or
refusing to repair such sidewalk within thirty (30) days after notice to
repair the same given by the Director of Planning and Development
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. This Article shall not apply to:
1. Sidewalks where the damage done is due to growth or development
of trees belonging to the City;
2. Sidewalks controlled by the County or the State.
Section
505.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.200
AO:853
Section 505.210. Compliance by Contractors With Laws and
Ordinances. [R.O. 2009 §21-26; Code 1969 §35-39]
The contractor shall observe all provisions of this Code and other
ordinances of the City in relation to the obstructing of sidewalks,
maintaining signals, keeping open passageways and protecting the same
when exposed and shall observe all laws and ordinances controlling or
limiting those engaged in the work.
Section 505.220. Filling — Disposition of Surplus Excavation. [R.O.
2009 §21-27; Code 1969 §35-33]
Fill shall be made by depositing in layers of not more than six (6) inches and
thoroughly tamping. Surplus excavation shall be removed by the contractor
and deposited on City streets within a distance of fifteen hundred (1,500)
feet without extra charge. If no such place is designated by the City, the
material shall belong to the contractor and shall be disposed of by him/
her. Surplus excavation material shall be removed and disposed of by the
contractor.
Section 505.230. Defective Work to Be Corrected. [R.O. 2009
§21-28; Code 1969 §35-38]
If any sidewalk shall become out of repair within one (1) year after the work
has been accepted, on account of faulty construction, the contractor shall
replace or repair the same when ordered to do so by the City within fifteen
(15) days after having been notified. If not so done, the City shall cause such
work to be done and the contractor and his/her sureties upon his/her bond
shall be liable for the cost thereof and, in addition thereto, his/her license
may be revoked by the Board of Aldermen.
Section 505.240. through Section 505.280. (Reserved)
A. The word "contractor", as used in these specifications, shall be taken to
mean the person who is doing the work under contract with the City or
the property owner or his/her authorized agents.
B. The contractor shall grade and terrace all of the space from the
property line to the curb line to the line and grade as given by the
Public Works Official.
Section
505.200
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
505.240
AO:854
DIVISION 2
Permit
Section 505.290. Required. [R.O. 2009 §21-41; Code 1969 §35-18-1]
No person shall begin to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter or grade any
street, sidewalk, curb, curb cut or driveway on the public streets without
first obtaining a permit from the Department of Planning and Development
as provided by this Article.
Section 505.300. Application. [R.O. 2009 §21-42; Code 1969 §35-19]
Section 505.310. Fee. [R.O. 2009 §21-43; Code 1969 §35-20]
The filing fee for a permit and inspection under this Article shall be as on
file in the office of the City Clerk/Administrator.
Section 505.320. Memorandum of Understanding. [R.O. 2009
§21-44; Code 1969 §35-22]
The applicant shall enter into a memorandum of understanding on a form
approved by the City governing the use and release of deposits.
Section 505.330. Submission of Plans and Specifications —
Issuance. [R.O. 2009 §21-45; Code 1969 §35-21]
A. An applicant for a permit under this Article shall file with the
Department of Planning and Development an application showing:
1. The name and address of the owner or agent in charge;
2. Name and address of the party doing the work;
3. Location of the work area;
4. Attached plans showing details of the proposed alteration;
5. Such other information as the City shall find reasonably necessary
to assist in making recommendation to the Board of Aldermen
whether or not a permit should be issued.
A. At the next regular meeting of the Board of Aldermen following the
filing of an application for a street permit under this Article, the City
Clerk/Administrator shall submit such application to the Board of
Aldermen together with such other matters as have been required in
this Article. The Board of Aldermen shall thereupon cause the applicant
to submit detailed plans and specifications to establish that such
alterations shall not unreasonably impair the health, safety and welfare
of the public; will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and
pedestrian traffic nor means of ingress and egress to and from adjacent
property and property affected and shall be done according to standard
specifications of the City for public work of like character.
Section
505.290
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.330
AO:855
Section 505.340. Completion of Work by City. [R.O. 2009 §21-46;
Code 1969 §35-23]
In any case, where a permittee under this Article shall fail to comply with
the requirements of this Article or shall be in default, the City Administrator
shall order the completion of the work by the City and shall recover the cost
from the permittee as required by law.
Section 505.350. through Section 505.390. (Reserved)
B. If it is the opinion of the Board of Aldermen, after giving consideration
to the recommendation of the City Clerk/Administrator, that the
applicant has complied with the provisions of this Article and if such
detailed plans and specifications are in full conformity with the
provisions of this Article, the Board of Aldermen shall authorize and
direct the City Clerk/Administrator to issue such permit.
Section
505.330
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
505.350
AO:856
DIVISION 3
Sidewalk, Driveway, Etc., Construction Standards
Section 505.400. Compliance With Division. [R.O. 2009 §21-54;
Code 1969 §35-24]
All sidewalks, including approaches and parkways, within this City shall be
constructed, reconstructed or repaired in accordance with the provisions of
this Division.
Section 505.410. Construction to Be of Concrete — Width,
Thickness, Slope. [R.O. 2009 §21-55; Code 1969 §35-34]
The sidewalks constructed within the City shall be built of concrete, unless
otherwise ordered by ordinance and shall be not less than four (4) feet wide
and four (4) inches thick and shall slope toward the street one-fourth (¼)
inch per foot.
Section 505.420. Standards for Concrete for Sidewalks. [R.O. 2009
§21-56; Code 1969 §35-35]
Concrete for sidewalks shall be at a minimum of six (6) sack cement mix
with a "Missouri" type river sand and stone or gravel, maximum four (4)
inch slump. Concrete will be placed between four (4) inch forms, the top
troweled to a semi-rough finish or broom finish to prevent slips. An edging
tool shall be run along the sides and at cross joints. Three-fourths (¾) inch
expansion joints shall be placed the full width and depth of concrete walk at
a maximum of fifteen (15) feet. The top of the concrete walk shall be marked
with cross joints (dummy joints) a minimum of one-half (½) inch deep, five
(5) foot on center and shall be at right angles to the edge of the forms.
Section 505.430. Driveways Across Sidewalks. [R.O. 2009 §21-57;
Code 1969 §35-36]
Private driveways across sidewalks shall be six (6) inches in depth and
composed of the same materials and mixed in the same proportions as
specified for concrete walks. The driveway shall be dipped in the center not
more than two (2) inches below the grade of the walk so as to conduct the
water to the street.
Section 505.440. through Section 505.480. (Reserved)
Section
505.400
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.440
AO:857

ARTICLE III
Excavations134
Section 505.490. Permit — Inspection — Reconstruction. [R.O. 2009
§21-76; Code 1969 §35-63]
It shall be unlawful for any person, except when otherwise provided in
contract ordinances, in which case the provisions of the same shall control,
to excavate in or under any right-of-way, street, highway, boulevard, avenue,
roadway, sidewalk, alley or any other public thoroughfare without first
having obtained a permit from the City. The Director of Planning and
Development shall consider all applications for permits of such nature
and shall issue same if in his/her opinion the party applying therefore
has complied with all the provisions of this Code or other ordinances
and regulations of the City relating thereto and if, in his/her opinion, the
excavation is necessary. A City representative shall inspect all such
excavations as often as necessary. After earth and ballast have been
replaced in the manner provided by Section 505.520 by the person making
an excavation under this Article, the City shall reconstruct the excavation.
Section 505.500. Permits for Pole Installations. [R.O. 2009 §21-77;
Code 1969 §35-64]
Each application for a permit for the purpose of setting poles on any
street, highway, boulevard, roadway, avenue, sidewalk, alley or other public
thoroughfare shall give the location of each of such poles and each of such
permits shall include as many poles as are included in the application.
Section 505.510. Permit Fees. [R.O. 2009 §21-78; Code 1969
§35-65]
The Director of Planning and Development shall collect for the granting of
all permits under this Article a fee in accordance with the fee schedule on
file in City Hall.
Section 505.520. Deposit of Materials Removed — Refilling —
Liability of Permittee. [R.O. 2009 §21-79; Code 1969 §35-68; Ord.
No. 3156 §1, 8-5-1991]
In making an excavation in streets, alleys or sidewalks for laying service
pipes or making repairs or for any other purpose, the material excavated
shall be removed from the site in a manner least likely to inconvenience
the public and so as to provide for the passage of water along the gutters.
Street, alley and sidewalk excavations shall be repaired with the same type
of material as existed previously to the excavation. Concrete streets, alley
and sidewalks shall have total slab replacement. Asphalt street and alley
excavations shall be filled with one (1) inch minus rock compacted, six (6)
inches of concrete and two (2) inches of asphalt overlay. All excavations
134. Cross Reference — As To Open And Abandoned Excavations, §215.370.
Section
505.490
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.520
AO:859
must be replaced to the satisfaction of the Public Works Official. All
excavations must be replaced within one (1) week unless otherwise
approved by the City. The permittee for the excavation shall be liable for
any or all damages resulting from the excavation.
Section 505.530. Warning Lights and Covers. [R.O. 2009 §21-80;
Code 1969 §35-69]
Whoever shall, in this City, dig or cause to be dug, any excavation adjacent
to and bordering on any highway, thoroughfare or public place, shall, during
the night, cause same to be protected properly and shall cause a red light
to be kept burning thereon during the night. Whoever shall dig or cause to
be dug in any highway, thoroughfare or sidewalk a vault shall arch or cover
same over and secure the grating or covering of the opening thereof in such
manner as to prevent persons, animals and vehicles from falling therein.
Section 505.540. Conflict With Other Provisions of This Code. [R.O.
2009 §21-81; Code 1969 §35-70]
If any of the duties imposed upon the Director of Planning and Development
by this Article have been conferred upon the Building Official by any
provision of this Code, then such latter provisions shall control over the
provisions of this Article.
Section 505.550. through Section 505.590. (Reserved)
Section
505.520
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
505.550
AO:860
ARTICLE IV
Deposits For Restoration
Section 505.600. Purpose of Deposits. [R.O. 2009 §21-130; Ord. No.
3090 §1, 10-1-1990]
The deposits required by this Article shall serve as security for the repair of
any damage to or removal of any litter from the public streets and sidewalks
in the City caused by the depositor's employees, agents, contractors,
subcontractors or materialmen, either directly or indirectly, in connection
with the depositor's project.
Section 505.610. Article Not Applicable to City Projects. [R.O. 2009
§21-131; Ord. No. 3090 §1, 10-1-1990]
The provisions of this Article shall not be applicable to any project under
the direction of City Officials by employees of the City or by any contractor
or subcontractor of the City performing work for and in behalf of the City.
Section 505.620. Article Supplemental to Other Regulations. [R.O.
2009 §21-132; Ord. No. 3090 §1, 10-1-1990]
This Article is not intended to, nor shall it supplant, any existing ordinance
or other regulation of the City, but shall be complementary to such
ordinances and regulations.
Section 505.630. Deposits Required When Project May Damage or
Litter Streets or Sidewalks. [R.O. 2009 §21-133; Ord. No. 3090 §1,
10-1-1990]
A. Every person using City streets or sidewalks in connection with the
improvement of real or personal property, including the erection and
construction of buildings and public or private streets, and every
person engaged in any project which may reasonably be expected to
cause damage to or cause any earth, mud, ice, rocks, gravel, sand,
cement, concrete, mortar, plaster or any other construction material or
debris to be deposited upon any public street or sidewalk in the City
shall, prior to beginning such project, in addition to any permit fees or
other deposits, deposit with the City cash in the amount of two percent
(2%) of the estimated cost of the project.
B. When the cash deposit is in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00),
the person making the improvement may, in lieu of the cash deposit set
forth in this Section, file with the City Clerk/Administrator a surety
bond to secure repairs to the City streets and sidewalks and the
removal of any earth, mud, ice, rocks, gravel, sand, cement, concrete,
mortar, plaster or any other construction material, debris or litter in a
manner satisfactory to the City. Such bond shall run to the benefit of the
City, shall provide for the guarantee of performance of the depositor's
Section
505.600
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.630
AO:861
Section 505.640. When Deposit to Be Made. [R.O. 2009 §21-134;
Ord. No. 3090 §1, 10-1-1990]
Any deposit required under the provisions of this Article shall be made
at the time of application for any permit which may be required for such
project or, in the event no permit is required, at least twenty-four (24) hours
prior to the time such project is begun. The applicant shall enter into a
memorandum of understanding on a form approved by the City governing
the use and release of deposits.
Section 505.650. Permits Not Valid Unless Deposit Made. [R.O.
2009 §21-135; Ord. No. 3090 §1, 10-1-1990]
No permit shall be valid unless the cash deposit required under the
provisions of this Article has been made and a receipt therefor attached to
or noted upon such permit.
Section 505.660. Deposits to Be Deposited in Separate Account.
[R.O. 2009 §21-136; Ord. No. 3090 §1, 10-1-1990]
All cash deposits required to be made under the provisions of this Article
shall be deposited by the City in a separate account established to receive
only such deposits.
Section 505.670. Damages to Be Repaired by Depositor — When
Work Done by the City. [R.O. 2009 §21-138; Ord. No. 3090 §1,
10-1-1990]
Section 505.680. Deposit or Residue to Be Returned. [R.O. 2009
§21-139; Ord. No. 3090 §1, 10-1-1990]
Any deposit, or the remainder thereof in the event of deduction for damage
to or cleaning of City streets or sidewalks, shall be returned to the depositor
upon order of the Board of Aldermen following application therefor in
writing by the depositor after the completion of the depositor's project and
obligations herein and shall have such sureties as are satisfactory to the
City.
A. All damage done to City streets and sidewalks during the progress of a
depositor's project shall be repaired by the depositor. Materials and
standards for such repair shall conform with the requirements of any
applicable City ordinance or specification.
B. If the depositor, after being requested by the Director of Planning and
Development or his/her designee, fails to furnish the necessary labor
and materials for such repair, the Director of Planning and
Development is empowered to cause the necessary labor and materials
to be furnished by the City and the cost thereof shall be charged against
and paid for from the deposit required and established under the
provisions of this Article.
Section
505.630
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
505.680
AO:862
after certification in writing by the Director of Planning and Development or
his/her designee that all repairs or cleaning required of the depositor have
been satisfactorily completed.
Section
505.680
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.680
AO:863
Chapter 510
SWIMMING POOLS
Cross References — As to plumbing, §§500.740 et seq.
Section
505.680
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
505.680
AO:864
ARTICLE I
In General
Section 510.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §23-1; Code 1969 §38-1]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
FAMILY POOL — A swimming pool used or intended to be used solely by
the owner, lessee or tenant of single-family residential property upon which
such pool is located and his/her family and by friends invited to use it
without payment of any fee.
SWIMMING POOL — A body of water in an artificial or semi-artificial
receptacle or other container, whether located indoors or outdoors, used
or intended to be used for public, semi-public or private swimming by
adults or children or both adults and children, whether or not any charge
or fee is imposed upon such adults or children, operated and maintained
by any person, whether he/she is an owner, lessee, operator, licensee or
concessionaire, exclusive of a family pool as defined in this Section and shall
include all structures, appurtenances, equipment, appliances and other
facilities appurtenant to and intended for the operation and maintenance of
a swimming pool and also all swimming pools operated and maintained in
conjunction with or by clubs, motels, hotels and community associations.
WADING POOL — Any artificial body of water not less than four (4) nor
more than thirty-six (36) inches in depth and not containing over six
hundred seventy-five (675) cubic feet of water which is intended to be used
for wading purposes.
Section 510.020. Permit — Approval of Application by Building
Official. [R.O. 2009 §23-2; Code 1969 §38-2]
A. Before work is commenced on the construction of a swimming pool or
on any alteration, addition, remodeling or other improvement to a
swimming pool, an application for a permit to construct and the plans
and specifications and pertinent explanatory data shall be submitted to
the Building Official for approval, and no part of the work shall be
commenced until the Building Official has granted such approval by a
written permit to construct and has further evidenced its approval by a
suitable endorsement upon such plans and specifications. No
department of the City charged with the duty of issuing permits for
building, plumbing or electrical work, for sewer connections or for
other work in connection with the construction of a swimming pool or
the construction of any alteration, addition, remodeling or other
improvement to a swimming pool shall issue a permit for a swimming
pool until the plans and specifications therefor have been thus endorsed
by the Building Official. The Building Official shall review such plans
and specifications to determine whether they comply with the
provisions of this Chapter and with reasonable standards of swimming
Section
510.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.020
AO:865
Section 510.030. Permit — Contents of Plans. [R.O. 2009 §23-3;
Code 1969 §38-3]
pool construction for the protection of the public safety, health and
morals as prescribed by this Code or other ordinance and by any rules
and regulations promulgated by the Building Official pursuant to this
Chapter.
B. The application to the Building Official for a permit to construct a
swimming pool or family pool or to construct any alteration, addition,
remodeling or other improvement to a swimming pool or family pool
shall be submitted in such forms and be supported with such
information and data, as well as plans, specifications and pertinent
explanatory data, as required in this Section or by any rules and
regulations promulgated under this Chapter.
A. Plans, specifications and pertinent explanatory data required to be
submitted in connection with an application for a permit to construct a
swimming pool or any alteration, addition, remodeling or other
improvement to a swimming pool shall comply with the following
requirements and include the following plans and information as well as
such other data as may be reasonably required by the Building Official:
1. Plans shall be drawn to scale indicating all dimensions, including
the length, width, depth and width of the pool deck, and shall
include a plot plan showing the proposed location;
2. A profile plan showing the same information shall also be required;
3. A cross section and description of scum gutters or skimmers, or
both;
4. Pipe diagrams showing size of all pipes, inlets, outlets, make-up
water lines, vacuum lines, wastes and discharge lines, circulation
and other piping;
5. The pool equipment room layout showing filters, their location,
pumps, chlorinators, chemical feeders, flow meter gauges, sight
glass, strainers, hair and lint interceptors, dimensions of filter
room, its location, floor drain, sumps and other pertinent
information;
6. The liquid capacity of the pool;
7. The liquid capacity of any wading pool;
8. The kind, number and size of filters, including the square footage of
the filter area in each unit;
9. Top capacity in gallons per minute;
10. A description of chemical feeders for soda ash and alum;
Section
510.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
510.030
AO:866
Section 510.040. Permit — Suspension, Revocation. [R.O. 2009
§23-4; Code 1969 §38-4]
Any permit granted under this Chapter may be suspended or revoked by the
Building Official for failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions
of this Chapter, any rules or regulations promulgated under this Chapter or
of any other applicable ordinances of the City; provided that such permittee
may appeal such suspension or revocation to the Board of Aldermen by
notice in writing to the Board of Aldermen requesting a hearing, at the
next regular meeting of the Board, upon the determination made by the
department.
Section 510.050. Certain Provisions Applicable to Family Pools and
Wading Pools. [R.O. 2009 §23-5; Code 1969 §38-6]
The provisions of Sections 510.020 through 510.040, 510.110 through
510.140, 510.160, 510.190 through 510.240, 510.290, 510.300, 510.380,
510.390, 510.440, 510.530 and 510.540 shall apply to family pools and
wading pools.
Section 510.060. through Section 510.100. (Reserved)
11. The type, kind and description of chlorinator;
12. A description of the gauges and water flow meter; and
13. The type and range of testing equipment, including chlorine.
Section
510.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.060
AO:867

ARTICLE II
Design And Construction Standards
DIVISION 1
Generally
Section 510.110. Compliance With Article. [R.O. 2009 §23-21; Code
1969 §38-7]
In addition to such other requirements as may be reasonably imposed
by the Building Official through rules and regulations promulgated under
this Article, the Building Official shall not issue a permit to construct or
approve the construction of any swimming pool or any alteration, addition,
remodeling or other improvement to a swimming pool unless the minimum
design and construction requirements specified in this Article are observed
in such construction. Swimming pools shall be constructed and maintained
in conformity with the minimum requirements of this Article.
Section 510.120. Construction Standards Generally. [R.O. 2009
§23-22; Code 1969 §38-8]
All swimming pools shall be so constructed as to, upon findings of the
Building Official, provide a tight, leak-proof tank designed to withstand the
expected forces to which it will be subjected.
Section 510.130. Type. [R.O. 2009 §23-23; Code 1969 §38-9]
All swimming pools shall be of the "flow through" recirculating type.
Section 510.140. Location. [R.O. 2009 §23-24; Code 1969 §38-10]
No swimming pool or ancillary buildings related thereto or any part thereof
shall be situated closer than ten (10) feet from any lot line.
Section 510.150. Depth. [R.O. 2009 §23-25; Code 1969 §38-30]
A. Depth for swimming pools with skimmers shall be measured from the
maximum level as established by the skimmer or lip of the overflow
gutter. The depth of the shallow end of a swimming pool shall not
exceed three (3) feet six (6) inches. The minimum depth at the deepest
end of a swimming pool without a diving board shall be six (6) feet.
There shall be a gradual slope in all swimming pools six (6) to eight and
one-half (8½) feet in depth. This slope shall be equivalent to not more
than three (3) inches per foot from the deepest point of the pool to the
grade break. Pools with diving boards not over thirty (30) inches above
the water and extending not over three (3) feet into the pool area shall
be not less than eight (8) feet six (6) inches deep, twelve (12) feet from
the edge of the pool where the diving board is located.
Section
510.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.150
AO:869
Section 510.160. Protective Measures for Abandoned, Unused or
Incomplete Pools. [R.O. 2009 §23-26; Code 1969 §30-31]
Section 510.170. Depth Markings. [R.O. 2009 §23-27; Code 1969
§38-28]
Depth markings in one (1) foot increments shall be provided for the shallow
portion of the pool to the point where the slope exceeds one (1) foot in
twelve (12) feet, at the deepest water point and at the deep end of the pool.
The depth markings shall be easily seen and be a minimum size of four (4)
inches high and be located on the pool walls above the lip of the overflow
trough and shall be on both sides of the pool. The depth markings shall
contrast sharply in color with the swimming pool lining.
Section 510.180. Slopes and Radii. [R.O. 2009 §23-28; Code 1969
§38-29]
B. Swimming pools with diving boards not over one (1) meter above the
water shall be not less than eight (8) feet six (6) inches deep, fifteen
(15) feet from the edge of the pool where the diving board is located.
C. Swimming pools with three (3) meter diving boards shall be not less
than ten (10) feet deep, fifteen (15) feet from the edge of the pool where
the diving board is located.
D. When diving boards are provided, there shall be a gradual slope for a
horizontal distance at least twelve (12) feet from the deepest part of the
bottom of the pool to the grade break at the four (4) foot six (6) inch
depth.
E. Pools designed and intended exclusively for training, diving or other
special use, need not meet the minimum depth requirements when
approved by the Building Official.
A. Abandoned or unused swimming pools and abandoned or unused
wading pools situated on residential premises which are not occupied
or dwelt in for periods of thirty (30) days or more shall be drained or
equipped with a pool cover approved by the Building Official as being
adequate to prevent accidental drownings.
B. All wading pools shall be drained at all times when not in use for a
prolonged period of time.
C. Contractors shall have the responsibility of properly protecting
excavation sites in the course of construction, so that no undue hazard
is created by periods of rainfall or work stoppage.
D. Any time that a swimming pool or wading pool are not in use, the gate
or opening through the enclosure shall be securely locked in such
manner to require a key or combination for opening.
Section
510.150
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
510.180
AO:870
Section 510.190. Lining Material. [R.O. 2009 §23-29; Code 1969
§38-12]
Swimming pools shall be lined with concrete, tile or other material
approved by the Building Commissioner, having a white or light-colored,
water-proof finish which is smooth, durable and easily cleanable.
Section 510.200. Shape. [R.O. 2009 §23-30; Code 1969 §38-13]
Swimming pools shall be free of any recessed areas which are not
completely within the view, from the front, of the lifeguard or person in
charge of the pool.
Section 510.210. Inner Surface. [R.O. 2009 §23-31; Code 1969
§38-14]
The inner surface of the swimming pool shall be covered, rounded or
bullnosed at all joints, corners, angles of bases, walls, floors or curbs. Sharp
corners or projections shall not be permitted. Floor drains shall be flush
with the finished surface.
Section 510.220. Overflow Gutters. [R.O. 2009 §23-32; Code 1969
§38-15]
A. The slope of the bottom of any part of a swimming pool which is less
than four (4) feet six (6) inches deep shall not be steeper than one (1)
foot in twelve (12) feet. A rope with floats not over five (5) feet apart
shall be attached to corrosion-resistant fastenings on opposite sides of
the pool, securely installed and completely recessed into the wall.
These fastenings shall be placed not less than two (2) feet toward the
shallow end from the point where the slope of the bottom begins to
exceed one (1) foot in twelve (12) feet.
B. Side walls of a pool shall be vertical to a minimum of three (3) feet or
shall have a slope or curvature meeting one (1) of the following
conditions:
1. The pool wall may be vertical for two and one-half (2½) feet from
the water level below which the wall may be curved to the bottom
with a radius at any point equal to the difference between the
depth, at that point, and two and one-half (2½) feet.
2. To a depth of four (4) feet, except as in Subsection (B)(1) above, the
wall slope shall not be less than one (1) foot horizontal in four (4)
feet vertical.
A. For all swimming pools, except pools with six thousand (6,000) square
feet or less of surface area, there shall be built into the walls, at the
water surface, extending completely around the pool, an overflow
gutter which shall also serve as a handhold. This gutter shall
continuously remove water and return it to the filter. The gutter shall be
Section
510.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.220
AO:871
Section 510.230. Skimmers. [R.O. 2009 §23-33; Code 1969 §38-16]
designed to remove all overflow water and shall be at least three (3)
inches deep with the overflow edge rounded and not thicker than two
and one-half (2½) inches for the top two (2) inches. The opening into
the gutter beneath the coping shall be not less than four (4) inches high
and the interior of the gutter shall be not less than three (3) inches
wide. The gutter and deck design shall be such that the gutter does
not serve as the top edge of the pool. The bottom of the gutters shall
slope to drains located at the deepest points, not over twelve (12) feet
apart if the pitch to the floor of the gutter is less than one-eighth (?)
of an inch per foot or not over twenty-five (25) feet apart if the pitch to
the floor of the gutter is one-eighth (?) of an inch per foot or greater
and located to completely drain all portions of such gutter. The drains
shall be provided with outlet pipes at least two (2) inches in diameter
and shall have a clear opening in the grating at least equal to the
cross sectional area of the outlet pipe. Where overflow recirculation
gutters are used which are designed to handle the total filter capacity
of the pool, a change in the number of drains may be considered. All
overflow gutters shall be connected to the recirculation system through
a properly designed surge tank.
B. Overflow gutters shall be constructed so that elbows and knee joints of
bathers climbing out shall not become wedged.
A. Skimmers may be permitted in lieu of overflow gutters on swimming
pools with not more than six thousand (6,000) square feet of surface
area; provided that acceptable handholds are installed and the
skimming devices are approved by the Building Official. At least one (1)
skimming device shall be provided for each eight hundred (800) square
feet of surface area or fraction thereof. Skimmers shall be located at
least thirty (30) feet apart. Handholds shall consist of a bullnosed
coping not over two and one-half (2½) inches thick for the outer two (2)
inches or an equivalent approved handhold. The handhold shall be no
more than nine (9) inches above the normal water line. Skimming
devices shall be built into the pool wall, shall adequately remove
floating oils and waste and shall meet the following general
specifications:
1. Each skimmer shall be designed for a flow-through rate of at least
thirty (30) gallons per minute and a total capacity of all skimmers
on any pool shall be at least fifty percent (50%) of the required filter
flow of the recirculation system.
2. They shall be automatically adjustable to variations in waste level
over a range of at least three (3) inches.
3. An easily removable and cleanable basket or screen through which
all overflow water must pass shall be provided to trap large solids.
Section
510.220
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
510.230
AO:872
Section 510.240. Drainage. [R.O. 2009 §23-34; Code 1969 §38-11]
Drainage from swimming pools shall be by gravity or by pumps, if approved
by the Building Official. Swimming pool wastewater shall not be drained
into a storm water sewer or drainage ditch unless approved by the St. Louis
Metropolitan Sewer District. An indirect waste connection with a storm
sewer shall require a permit issued by the Metropolitan Sewer District. A
true copy of such permit shall be attached to the application for a permit;
provided that the Building Official may issue such permit in the event of
the failure or refusal of the Metropolitan Sewer District to do so. Where no
hazard, nuisance or unsanitary condition would result therefrom and with
the approval of the City Engineer, the Building Official may approve the
use of swimming pool wastewater for irrigation by surface or subsurface
spreading.
Section 510.250. Pool Fittings and Piping. [R.O. 2009 §23-35; Code
1969 §38-24]
4. The skimmer shall be provided with a device to prevent airlock in
the suction line. If an equalizer pipe is used, it shall provide an
adequate amount of make-up water for pump suction should the
water of the pool drop below the weir level. This pipe shall be at
least two (2) inches outside diameter and shall be located at least
one (1) foot below the lowest overflow level of skimmer.
5. An equalizer line shall be provided with a valve that will remain
tightly closed under normal operating conditions, but will
automatically open at a differential of not more than four (4) inches
between the pool level and level of overflow tank.
6. The overflow weir shall be of sufficient length to maintain a rate of
flow of at least twenty (20) gallons per minute per lineal foot to
weir lip.
A. There shall be provided a pool outlet or main drain at the lowest point of
each pool. Outlet fittings and gratings shall have an open, unobstructed
area of at least twice the area of the pipe to which they discharge. Each
drain fitting shall be provided with a sturdy, corrosion-resistant grating
with openings not greater than three-eighths (?) of an inch wide. When
the main drain is also the suction supply to the system, at least two (2)
outlet fittings shall be installed in pools more than thirty-five (35) feet
wide.
B. Pipes receiving water from overflow gutter drains shall have a slope of
at least one-fourth (¼) of an inch per foot and shall be of adequate
capacity to completely drain the gutters to handle pool overflow of short
duration without flooding the overflow gutters.
C. Materials used for pool piping and fittings shall meet the Plumbing
Code requirements for water piping.
Section
510.230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.260
AO:873
Section 510.260. Cross-Connections. [R.O. 2009 §23-36; Code 1969
§38-25]
All cross-connections between the public water supply or the sewer system
shall be construed in a manner approved by the Building Official.
Section 510.270. Water Inlets. [R.O. 2009 §23-37; Code 1969
§38-26]
All swimming pools shall be designed so that fresh water may be added to
the pool or recirculated through a fixed air-gap conforming to the provisions
of the Plumbing Code.
Section 510.280. Decks. [R.O. 2009 §23-38; Code 1969 §38-27]
Section 510.290. Shielding Lights. [R.O. 2009 §23-39; Code 1969
§38-34]
Lights used to illuminate any swimming pool shall be so arranged and
shaded as to reflect light away from adjoining premises.
Section 510.300. Electrical Inspection. [R.O. 2009 §23-40; Code
1969 §38-35]
No swimming pool or wading pool shall be filled with water until the pool
and all appurtenances shall have been inspected and approved as complying
with all provisions of this Chapter and of the Electrical Code of the City by
the Electrical Inspector of the City.
Section 510.310. Heating. [R.O. 2009 §23-41; Code 1969 §38-36]
A. There shall be provided completely around every swimming pool and
wading pool a paved walk or deck which shall be not less than five (5)
feet wide for swimming pools and not less than four (4) feet wide for
wading pools, both measured from the pool side edge or coping of the
pool to the edge of the walk or to the fence or wall, whichever is closer.
At all swimming pools there shall be a clear, unobstructed, paved area
extending at least four (4) feet from both sides of the diving board or its
appurtenances.
B. The surface of the paved walk or deck shall not drain into the swimming
pool or wading pool or the overflow gutter thereof. The drainage shall
be conducted away from the pool area in a manner that will not create a
ponding or muddy condition. If floor drains are provided, these shall be
spaced and arranged so not more than six hundred twenty-five (625)
square feet of area is tributary to each drain and drains shall be not
over twenty-five (25) feet apart.
A. Where water heaters are used, they shall be regulated so that water
entering the pool is at a temperature of not over one hundred degrees
Fahrenheit (100°F).
Section
510.260
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
510.310
AO:874
Section 510.320. Towers and Steps. [R.O. 2009 §23-42; Code 1969
§38-37]
Section 510.330. through Section 510.370. (Reserved)
B. All indoor pools when in use, when the outside temperature is below
sixty degrees Fahrenheit (60°F), shall be provided with facilities for
uniform and adequate heating of the water, pool room area and
dressing rooms.
A. Diving towers and steps shall be of substantial construction and
sufficient structural strength to safely carry the maximum anticipated
loads. Steps shall be of corrosion-resistant material, of easily cleanable
and non-slip design. Suitable handrails shall be provided at all steps
and ladders leading to diving towers. The decks of diving towers which
are over one (1) meter high shall be protected with suitable railings to
prevent falling, except into the water. If the vertical distance from the
bottom of the pool to the deck or walk is over two (2) feet, steps or
ladders shall be provided. If the width of the pool exceeds thirty (30)
feet, such steps or ladders shall be provided at each side of the deep
portion of the pool.
B. Steps leading into pools shall have a minimum tread of twelve (12)
inches and a maximum rise or height of not exceeding twelve (12)
inches. Pool ladders shall be corrosion-resistant and shall be equipped
with non-slip treads. All ladders shall be so designed as to provide a
suitable handhold and shall be rigidly installed. There shall be a
clearing of not more than five (5) inches nor less than three (3) inches
between any ladder and pool wall.
Section
510.310
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.330
AO:875

DIVISION 2
Filtration
Section 510.380. Recirculation System Generally. [R.O. 2009
§23-56; Code 1969 §38-17]
Section 510.390. Pumps, Filters, Etc., Generally. [R.O. 2009 §23-57;
Code 1969 §38-19]
Pump filter, disinfecting systems, chemical equipment for treating the
water, rate-controlling devices and operating valves shall be of a size and
type as approved by the Building Official. All valves, pumps and equipment
shall be installed so as to be readily accessible for operation, maintenance
and inspection. Filters and pumps shall be provided with air-release valves.
Section 510.400. Sand Filters. [R.O. 2009 §23-58; Code 1969
§38-20]
A. All swimming pools shall be equipped with a recirculating filtration and
chemical disinfecting system as approved by the Building Official and
necessary to maintain the pool water in a clear, clean, sanitary
condition.
B. A satisfactory recirculating system for the pool shall be installed
consisting of circulating pumps, chemical dosing equipment, alum and
alkali or surge tank, float valve control on water supply if surge tank is
used, hair and lint catcher, chlorinator, indicator, flow meters, pressure
gauges and piping connections to inlets and outlets; and all other
necessary fixtures and connections.
C. All swimming pools shall have a recirculating system with an hourly
capacity equal to the pool volume divided by eight (8).
A. Filter sand shall be a hard, uniformly graded, silica material with
effective particle sizes, between one and forty-five hundredths (1.45)
and one and fifty-five hundredths (1.55) millimeters in diameter, with a
uniformity coefficient of one and forty-five hundredths (1.45) to one and
sixty-nine hundredths (1.69). There shall be no limestone, clay or
deleterious matter present.
B. Filter sand shall be no less than nineteen (19) inches in depth with a
freeboard of no less than nine (9) inches or more than twelve (12)
inches.
C. There shall be no less than four (4) grades of rock which shall be clean,
non-crushed, rounded, non-porous, non-calcareous material.
D. The total depth of the rock-supporting bed shall be no less than fifteen
(15) inches and each grade shall be two (2) inches or greater in depth.
Each layer of rock shall be leveled to prevent intermixing of adjacent
grades.
Section
510.380
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.400
AO:877
Section 510.410. Diatomite Type Filters. [R.O. 2009 §23-59; Code
1969 §38-21]
E. The top layer shall vary in size between one-eighth (?) of an inch and
one-fourth (¼) of an inch. The next layer shall vary in size between onefourth
(¼) of an inch and one-half (½) of an inch. The next layer shall
vary in size between one-half (½) of an inch and three-fourths (¾) of an
inch. The bottom layer shall vary in size between one (1) inch and one
and one-half (1½) inches.
A. Diatomite type filters shall be designed for operation under either
pressure or vacuum. The design capacity shall not exceed three (3)
gallons per minute per square foot of effective filter area for pressure
filters and not exceed two and one-fourth (2¼) gallons per minute per
square foot of effective filter area for vacuum filters.
B. The determination of the filter area shall be made on the basis of a true
and effective supported septum surface. In the case of fabric septums,
the area computation shall be made on the basis of measurements of
the septum support in a reasonable constant plane. Area allowance
shall not be granted for folds in the septum fabric or deviations in the
septum surface which would easily bridge.
C. The tank containing the filter elements shall be constructed of steel,
plastic or other suitable material, which will satisfactorily provide
resistance to corrosion, with or without coating. Pressure filters shall
be designed for a working pressure equal to the shutoff head of the
pump, with a factor safety of four (4). Vacuum filters shall be designed
to withstand the pressure developed by the weight of the water
contained herein and closed vacuum filters shall, in addition, be
designed to withstand the crushing pressure developed under a vacuum
of twenty-five (25) inches of mercury, both with a factor safety of three
and five-tenths (3.5).
D. In either type filter where the tank is fabricated from material which
may be corroded by water, then a suitable corrosion-resistant coating
shall be applied to retard such attack.
E. The filter elements shall be fabricated of corrosion-resistant materials
throughout. They shall be designed to be adequately resistant to a
differential pressure between influent and effluent of not less than the
maximum pressure, which can be developed by the circulating pump
and shall be of adequate strength to resist any additional stresses
developed during the cleaning operation. The filter septum, on which
the filter aid cake is deposited, shall be provided with openings, the
minimum dimensions of which shall be not greater than fivethousandths
(.005) of an inch.
F. Provision shall be made to introduce filter aid into the filter in such a
way as to evenly precoat the filter septum before the filter is placed in
operation. The amount of filter aid shall be selected to provide at least
Section
510.400
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
510.410
AO:878
Section 510.420. Cartridge Type Filter. [R.O. 2009 §23-60; Code
1969 §38-22]
the same protection to the filter septum as would be provided by the
use of one-tenth (1/10) of a pound of diatomite filter aid per square foot
of filter area. Use of additional equipment to provide body feed to the
filter influent is optional. Where provided, such equipment shall have
the capacity to continuously and uniformly feed at a rate of not less than
one-tenth (1/10) of a pound of filter aid per square foot of filter area per
twenty-four (24) hours.
G. The filter piping shall be so designed that during the precoating
operation the effluent from the filter shall be recirculated or run to
waste and shall not be fed into the pool until free of filter aid. An
exception to this requirement may be made if the filter septum is of
such construction that no perceptible quantity of filter aid is introduced
into the pool when the effluent discharges therein.
H. Where dissimilar metals are used in the construction of the filter, which
may set up galvanic currents, then suitable provision shall be made to
resist electrolytic corrosion.
I. Filters shall be so designed and installed that they can be readily
disassembled and the filter elements removed.
A. "Cartridge type filters" are those where the cartridge itself is the filter
aid. Cartridge filters can be either pressure or vacuum type and are
subject to the same general piping and tank specifications as diatomite
type filters. Replacement cartridges are divided into two (2) types:
depth and area. General specifications, however, are the same for both.
Cartridge filters shall not require the addition of any flocculating agents
such as ammonium alum, aluminum sulfate or potassium alum. All types
of cartridges shall have sufficient structural strength to resist
rupturing, channeling, collapsing or bursting at a maximum pressure
differential of fifty (50) pounds per square inch. Cartridge seals shall be
so designed as to prevent any by-passing of unfiltered water. If
provision is made for backwashing, it shall be so arranged as to not
permit any backwash water to enter the recirculating system. No
residue shall be permitted to remain in the filter housing that could be
picked up in the next filtering cycle. Cartridge elements shall be divided
into two (2) types:
1. "Depth type cartridges" are elements where the porosity varies
from the inlet to the discharge surface. They shall have sufficient
depth to provide adequate dirt-holding capacity and be designed
for a flow of no more than one (1) gallon per minute per five (5)
cubic inches of volume with a pressure drop not to exceed two (2)
pounds per square inch across clean cartridges and not to pass any
particulate matter larger than twenty-five (25) microns.
Section
510.410
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.420
AO:879
Section 510.430. Hair and Lint Interceptors. [R.O. 2009 §23-61;
Code 1969 §38-23]
All swimming pools shall have hair and lint interceptors so installed that all
water drawn from the pool for recirculation shall pass through them before
reaching the filter.
Section 510.440. Recirculation Inlet Fittings and Piping. [R.O. 2009
§23-62; Code 1969 §38-18]
Section 510.450. through Section 510.490. (Reserved)
2. "Area or surface type cartridges" are those which rely on the
surface area for their dirt-holding capacity and they shall follow the
same flow per square foot of area as diatomite filters, namely: three
(3) gallons per minute per square foot of area for pressure filters
and two and one-fourth (2¼) gallons per minute per square foot of
filter area for vacuum filters.
B. Filters shall be capable of filtering entire contents in eighteen (18)
hours or less.
C. Filter capacity shall be such that it need not be cleaned more frequently
than once every four (4) days under proper conditions of water and
operation.
D. All filters shall be designed so as to permit easy removal of the
cartridges.
A. The recirculation inlet fittings shall be sized and spaced so as to
produce uniform circulation of water throughout all parts of the
swimming pool. The inlets from the recirculating system shall be
submerged at least eighteen (18) inches below the rim of the pool. The
inlets shall be designed for the following maximum capacity:
Maximum Flow Rates
(In Gallons Per Minute)
Size 1 inch 1¼ inch 2 inch 2½ inch 3 inch
G.P.M. 10 20 30 90 150
B. There shall be at least one (1) inlet for each three hundred fifty (350)
square feet of pool water surface area with a minimum of two (2) inlets
for the smallest pool. For a pool of an average width of not more than
twenty-five (25) feet, inlets shall be provided not more than twenty (20)
feet apart and there shall be an inlet not more than ten (10) feet from
each corner of the pool. Arrangements shall be provided to adjust the
flow to various portions of the pool with either of the adjustable-orifice
inlet fittings. The entire recirculation inlet piping system shall be of
such size that with design flows velocities do not exceed ten (10) feet
per second.
Section
510.420
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
510.450
AO:880
ARTICLE III
Sanitation And Safety Regulations
DIVISION 1
Generally
Section 510.500. Protection of Bathers. [R.O. 2009 §23-76; Code
1969 §38-41]
Section 510.510. Diving. [R.O. 2009 §23-77; Code 1969 §38-49]
Persons on diving towers shall make forward dives except when pool is
being used for exhibition or competition and is free of other swimmers. No
one shall be permitted on guard towers except guards. Towers shall be kept
in good condition and anchored firmly to prevent toppling when a dive is
made. Guards shall not be permitted to carry on conversations with bathers.
A. All reasonable precautions shall be taken to protect the users of and
bathers in swimming pools and wading pools from injury or accident.
Safety appliances such as life buoys, life hooks, bamboo poles or ropes
and equipment including first aid kits in such number and of such
design as shall be approved by the Building Official shall be provided
and be readily accessible. When any swimming pool or wading pool is in
use, a sufficient number of attendants shall be on duty who shall be
capable swimmers, competent in life saving methods and artificial
resuscitation.
B. The following safety and sanitation rules shall be enforced by all
operators of swimming pools or wading pools:
1. Only one (1) person at a time shall be permitted on a diving board.
2. No bouncing shall be permitted on diving boards.
3. No glass, crockery or earthenware containers of any kind shall be
permitted in the pool enclosure.
4. No gymnastics or running shall be permitted in the pool enclosure.
5. No person wearing oil base suntan or other lotions or bobby pins or
hair pins of any type shall be permitted to enter the pool.
6. No person having any skin eruption or abrasion, sore or infected
eyes, a cold, nasal or ear discharge or any communicable disease
shall be permitted in the pool enclosure.
7. No spitting, spouting water or blowing the nose shall be permitted
in the pool.
Section
510.500
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.520
AO:881
Section 510.520. Cleaning Pools. [R.O. 2009 §23-78; Code 1969
§38-42]
Visible dirt on the bottom of swimming pools or wading pools and visible
scum or floating matter on the surface of such pools shall be removed at
least once daily with a vacuum cleaner of a type approved by the Building
Official. All swimming pools shall be thoroughly cleansed at least once each
week in a manner and by the use of such disinfecting agents or cleansing
materials as may be approved by the Building Official.
Section 510.530. Chlorination. [R.O. 2009 §23-79; Code 1969
§38-39]
Chlorination plants shall be operated in such manner that the amount of
excess or residual chlorine in all parts of the pool at all times when the pool
is in use shall not be less than four-tenths (.4) parts per million or register
a pH lower than seven (7). The chlorinator and tanks shall be installed in a
special closet, with vent to the exterior of the building and with a fan, unless
considered unnecessary by the Building Official. A sufficient number of daily
tests for available chlorine and pH shall be made by the pool operator and a
record kept of these tests to ensure proper operation.
Section 510.540. Quality of Water. [R.O. 2009 §23-80; Code 1969
§38-40]
The water in swimming pools shall show an alkaline reaction at all times
when the swimming pool is in use. Whenever alum or sulphate of alumina is
used, frequent tests shall be made to ensure that the water has an alkaline
reaction. At all times when the pool is in use, the water shall be sufficiently
clear to permit the entire bottom of the pool to be clearly visible from the
walkways. The water in the pool shall meet the requirements of the Building
Official for safe drinking water supply.
Section 510.550. Sanitation of Premises. [R.O. 2009 §23-81; Code
1969 §38-43]
The buildings, grounds, dressing rooms and all other swimming pool and
wading pool facilities shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition and
maintained free from garbage, trash and other refuse. All persons in street
clothes or street shoes shall be prohibited from the pool enclosure.
Section 510.560. Drinking Water. [R.O. 2009 §23-82; Code 1969
§38-44]
The facilities of each swimming pool or wading pool shall include not less
than two (2) drinking fountains within easy access of the pool users.
Section 510.570. through Section 510.610. (Reserved)
Section
510.520
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
510.570
AO:882
DIVISION 2
Bathhouse Facilities
Section 510.620. Required — Quantity. [R.O. 2009 §23-91; Code
1969 §38-45]
Section 510.630. Arrangement. [R.O. 2009 §23-92; Code 1969
§38-46]
The locker, shower and dressing rooms and passageways shall be arranged
so that bathers are routed from dressing and locker rooms, through shower
and toilet rooms to the entrance to the pool area, such entrance to be at or
near the shallow end of the pool.
Section 510.640. Windows and View Screens. [R.O. 2009 §23-93;
Code 1969 §38-47]
All shower and toilet rooms shall be equipped with openable windows or
mechanical ventilation system. Windows and doors of toilet, shower and
dressing rooms shall be so located or protected by view screens, as to
protect occupants of such rooms from view from portions of the building
used by the opposite sex and from the outdoors.
Section 510.650. Floors, Walks and Walls. [R.O. 2009 §23-94; Code
1969 §38-48]
The floors and walls of shower, locker, dressing and toilet rooms shall be
of smooth, washable material which is capable of withstanding repeated
flushing with a hose. Floors and walks at swimming or wading pools used
by bathers shall be of concrete, fire clay tile, ceramic tile or masonry having
a non-slip but smooth finish. Such floors and walks shall have a slope of
not less than one-eighth (?) inch per foot nor more than one-half (½) inch
per foot toward a drain or to an area suitable for receiving such drainage
without creating ponding or muddy condition and not in violation of any
provision of this Code or other ordinances of the City. Partitions shall be
water-proof to a height of one (1) foot above the floor or they shall terminate
at least eight (8) inches above the floor.
A. Bathhouse facilities shall be maintained at all swimming pools and shall
include separate dressing rooms, showers, toilets and lavatories for
each sex whenever both sexes will be permitted to use the pool
simultaneously.
B. All persons entering the pool shall be required to take a cleansing
shower bath and liquid soap therefor shall be provided.
C. There shall be provided one (1) toilet for each sixty (60) women bathers
and one (1) toilet or one (1) urinal for each sixty (60) men bathers at the
time of maximum load; provided that the ratio of urinals to toilets
provided for men bathers shall not exceed four (4) to one (1).
Section
510.620
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.650
AO:883
Chapter 515
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY USE REGULATIONS
Section 515.010. Definitions. [Ord. No. 4089 §3, 10-15-2007]
A. Definitions. The following terms shall have the following meanings
unless otherwise defined by context:
CITY ADMINISTRATOR — The manager or administrator of the City or
such other person designated by the City to hear appeals as provided in
Section 515.050 of this Chapter.
CITY FACILITIES — Any facilities located within the public rights-ofway
and owned by the City.
DIRECTOR — The City's Director of Planning and Development or such
other person designated to administer and enforce this Chapter.
EMERGENCY RIGHTS-OF-WAY (OR "ROW") WORK — Includes, but is
not limited to, ROW work made necessary by exigent circumstances to
repair, control, stabilize, rectify, or correct an unexpected or unplanned
outage, cut, rupture, leak, or any other failure of a facility when such
failure results or could result in danger to the public or a material delay
or hindrance to the provision of service.
FACILITIES — A network or system, or any part thereof, used for
providing or delivering a service and consisting of one (1) or more lines,
pipes, wires, cables, fibers, conduit facilities, cabinets, poles, vaults,
pedestals, boxes, appliances, antennas, transmitters, radios, towers,
gates, meters, appurtenances, or other equipment.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, limited liability corporation or
partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, organization,
corporation, or other entity, or any lawful successor thereto or
transferee thereof.
PERSON(S) HAVING FACILITIES WITHIN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY —
Any person having ownership or control of facilities located within the
rights-of-way.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY or ROW — Unless otherwise restricted herein, the
surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface
of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard,
drive, bridge, tunnel, parkway, waterway, public easement, or sidewalk
in which the City now or hereafter holds any interest, which, consistent
with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the
purpose of installing and maintaining facilities. "Rights-of-way" shall
not include:
City facilities or the City's property other than ROW, such as Cityowned
or operated buildings, parks, or other similar property;
1.
Section
510.650
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
515.010
AO:884
Section 515.020. ROW Permits. [Ord. No. 4089 §3, 10-15-2007]
RIGHTS-OF-WAY (OR "ROW") PERMIT — A permit granted by the City
to a ROW user for ROW work.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY (OR "ROW") USER — A person performing ROW work
within the rights-of-way. A ROW user shall not include ordinary
vehicular or pedestrian use.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY (OR "ROW") WORK — Action by a ROW user to:
SERVICE — Providing or delivering an economic good or an article
of commerce, including, but not limited to, gas, telephone, cable
television, Internet, open video systems, video services, alarm systems,
steam, electricity, water, telegraph, data transmission, petroleum
pipelines, sanitary or storm water sewerage or any similar or related
service, to one (1) or more persons located within or outside of the City
by use of facilities located within the rights-of-way.
WITHIN — In, along, under, over, or across rights-of-way.
Airwaves used for cellular, non-wire telecommunications or
broadcast services;
2.
3. Easements obtained by ROW users on private property;
4. Railroad rights-of-way or ground used or acquired for railroads; or
Facilities owned and used by the City for the transmission of one
(1) or more services. No reference herein to "rights-of-way" shall
be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the City that
its interest or other right to control the use of such property is
sufficient to permit its use for the delivery of service.
5.
Install, change, replace, relocate, remove, maintain or repair
facilities within the rights-of-way, or
1.
To conduct work of any kind within or adjacent to the rights-ofway
that results in an excavation, obstruction, disruption, damage
or physical invasion or impact of any kind to the rights-of-way or
the use thereof. The routine inspection of facilities shall not be
considered ROW work unless the inspection requires the conduct
of any of the activities or actions noted herein.
2.
A. Application Requirements.
1. Any person desiring to perform ROW work must first apply for and
obtain a ROW permit, addition to any other building permit,
license, easement, franchise, or authorization required by law. In
the event of a need for emergency ROW work, the person
conducting the work shall as soon as practicable notify the City of
the location of the work and shall apply for the required ROW
permit as soon as practicable following the commencement of the
work, not to exceed the third (3rd) business day thereafter. The
Section
515.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.020
AO:885
Director may design and issue general permits for emergency ROW
work for several different locations or throughout the City.
2. An application for a ROW permit shall be submitted to the Director.
The Director may design and make available standard forms for
such applications, requiring such information as allowed by law
and as the Director determines in his or her discretion to be
necessary and consistent with the provisions of this Chapter and to
accomplish the purposes of this Chapter. Each application shall at
minimum contain the following information for the proposed ROW
work, unless otherwise waived by the Director:
a. The name, address and telephone number of a representative
whom the City may notify or contact at any time (i.e., twentyfour
(24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week) concerning
the work;
b. If different from the applicant, the name, address, and
telephone number of the person on whose behalf the proposed
work is to be performed;
c. A description of the proposed work, including a conceptual
master plan and an engineering site plan or other technical
drawing or depiction showing the nature, dimensions, location,
and description of the applicant's proposed work or facilities,
their proximity to other facilities that may be affected by the
proposed work, and the number of street crossings and their
locations and dimensions, if applicable;
d. Projected commencement and termination dates and
anticipated duration of the work or, if such dates are unknown,
a representation that the applicant shall provide the Director
with reasonable advance notice of such dates once they are
determined;
e. Copies of any required certificates of insurance or
performance and maintenance bonds.
3. The information required by the application may be submitted in
the form maintained by the applicant, provided it is responsive to
the application's requirements, and the applicant shall be allowed a
reasonable amount of time to complete the application based on
the amount of data or information requested or required.
4. Each such application shall be accompanied by the following
payments:
a. an application fee approved by the City to cover the cost of
processing the application;
b. Any other amounts due to the City from the applicant,
including, but not limited to, prior delinquent fees, costs, and
Section
515.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
515.020
AO:886
any loss, damage, or expense suffered by the City because
of the applicant's prior work in the rights-of-way or for any
emergency actions taken by the City, but the Director may
modify this requirement to the extent the Director determines
any such fees to be in good-faith dispute.
5. Applicants shall participate in any joint planning, construction and
advance notification of such work, including coordination and
consolidation of any excavation of or disturbance to the rights-ofway,
as directed by the Director. When deemed necessary to
accomplish the goals of this Chapter and to the extent permitted by
law, the City reserves the right, when feasible and reasonable, to
require the sharing of facilities by ROW users. Applicants shall
cooperate with each other and other ROW users and the City for
the best, most efficient, least intrusive, most aesthetic, and least
obtrusive use of the rights-of-way.
6. The Director shall establish procedures allowing applicants to
ascertain whether existing capacity may be available from other
persons utilizing the rights-of-way along the intended path of any
proposed work. The Director shall also maintain indexes of all ROW
permits issued, both by the ROW user and by the affected rights-ofway.
B. Application Review And Determination.
1. The Director shall promptly review each completed application for
a ROW permit and shall grant or deny all such applications as
provided herein within thirty-one (31) days of receipt thereof.
Unless the application is denied, the Director shall issue a ROW
permit upon determining that the applicant:
a. Has submitted all necessary information;
b. Has paid the appropriate fees; and
c. Is in full compliance with this Chapter and all other City
ordinances. The Director may establish procedures for bulk
processing of applications and periodic payment of fees to
avoid excessive processing and accounting costs.
2. It is the intention of the City that interference with, damage to,
excavation or disruption of, or the placement of facilities within the
City's rights-of-way should be minimized and limited in scope to the
extent allowed by law to achieve the purposes of this Chapter.
When reasonable and necessary to accomplish such purposes, the
Director may require as alternatives to the proposed ROW work
either less disruptive methods or different locations for facilities,
provided that any required alternative:
a. Shall not increase expenses by more than ten percent (10%) of
the applicant's costs for the work as proposed;
Section
515.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.020
AO:887
b. Shall not result in a decline of service quality; and
c. Shall be competitively neutral and non-discriminatory. The
Director shall justify to the applicant that the required
alternative is reasonable and necessary.
3. Upon receipt of an application, the Director shall determine
whether any portion of the rights-of-way will be affected by the
proposed work and whether the interference, disruption, or
placement of facilities will be more than minor in nature. In
determining whether the proposed work is more than minor in
nature, the Director shall consider the nature and scope of the
work, its location and duration, and its effect on the rights-of-way,
the use thereof, and neighboring properties.
a. If the applicant can show to the Director's reasonable
satisfaction that the work involves no interference, disruption,
excavation, or damage to, or only minor interference with the
rights-of-way, or that the work does not involve the placement
of facilities or involves time-sensitive maintenance, then the
Director shall promptly grant the ROW permit.
b. If the Director determines that the effect on the rights-of-way
will be more than minor in nature and no exemption under the
above paragraph (c)(1) or any other provision of this Chapter
applies, the Director shall schedule and coordinate the work
and grant the ROW permit accordingly. When reasonable and
necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter, the
Director may postpone issuance of a ROW permit, and may
give public notice of the application in an attempt to identify
whether other person(s) intend to do work in the same area
within a reasonable period of time, so that all ROW work in the
area can be coordinated. Due regard shall be accorded
applicants that are required by any law, rule, regulation,
license, or franchise to provide service to the area defined in
the application. The Director shall not impose any coordination
or scheduling requirements that prevent or unreasonably delay
an applicant's access to the ROW or that create a barrier to
entry.
4. Each ROW permit issued by the Director shall include:
a. Projected commencement and termination dates or, if such
dates are unknown at the time the permit is issued, a provision
requiring the ROW user to provide the Director with
reasonable advance notice of such dates once they are
determined;
b. Length of affected rights-of-way, number of road crossings, and
identification and description of any pavement or curb cuts
included in the work;
Section
515.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
515.020
AO:888
c. Information regarding scheduling and coordination of work, if
necessary;
d. The location of any of the applicant's facilities, both those
proposed and existing, and the location of any known facilities
owned by another person that may be affected by the proposed
work;
e. An acknowledgment and representation by the applicant to
comply with the terms and conditions of the ROW permit and
this Chapter; and
f. Such conditions and requirements as are deemed reasonably
necessary by the Director to protect structures and other
facilities in the rights-of-way from damage, to restore such
rights-of-way, and any structures or facilities, to ensure the
reasonable continuity and sight lines of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, and to protect property values, the aesthetics
of adjoining properties and neighborhoods, and the public
health, safety and welfare.
5. The Director may deny an application, if denial is deemed to be in
the public interest, for the following reasons:
a. Delinquent fees, costs or expenses owed by the applicant;
b. Failure to provide information required by the application or
this Chapter;
c. The applicant being in violation of the provisions of this
Chapter or other pertinent and applicable City ordinances;
d. Failure to return the ROW to its previous condition under
previously issued ROW permits or after prior excavations by
the applicant;
e. For reasons of environmental, historic or cultural sensitivity, as
defined by applicable Federal, State or local law;
f. For the applicant's refusal to comply with alternative ROW
work methods, locations, or other reasonable conditions
required by the Director; and
g. For any other reason to protect the public health, safety and
welfare, provided that such denial does not fall within the
exclusive authority of the Missouri Public Service Commission
or interfere with a ROW user's right of eminent domain of
private property, and provided further that such denial is
imposed on a competitively neutral and non-discriminatory
basis.
C. Permit Revocation And Ordinance Violations.
Section
515.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.020
AO:889
Section 515.030. Work in the ROW. [Ord. No. 4089 §3, 10-15-2007]
1. The Director may revoke a ROW permit without fee refund after
notice and an opportunity to cure, but only in the event of a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of the permit or this
Chapter. Prior to revocation the Director shall provide written
notice to the ROW user identifying any substantial breach and
allowing a reasonable period of time not longer than thirty (30)
days to cure the problem, which cure period may be immediate if
certain activities must be stopped to protect the public safety. The
cure period shall be extended by the Director on good cause shown
by the ROW user. A substantial breach includes, but is not limited
to, the following:
a. A material violation of a provision of the ROW permit or this
Chapter;
b. An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the
ROW permit or this Chapter, or the perpetration or attempt to
perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the City or its residents;
c. A material misrepresentation of fact in the ROW permit
application;
d. A failure to complete ROW work by the date specified in the
ROW permit, unless an extension is obtained or unless the
failure to complete the work is due to reasons beyond the ROW
user's control; and
e. A failure to correct, upon reasonable notice and opportunity to
cure as specified by the Director, work that does not conform to
applicable national safety ordinances, industry construction
standards, this Chapter or any other applicable ordinances,
provided that City standards are no more stringent than those
of a national safety ordinance.
2. Any breach of the terms and conditions of a ROW permit shall also
be deemed a violation of this Chapter, and in lieu of revocation the
Director may initiate prosecution of the ROW user for such
violation.
A. Jurisdiction, Inspection And Stop Work Orders.
1. All facilities and ROW work shall be subject to inspection by the
City and the supervision all Federal, State and local authorities
having jurisdiction in such matters to ensure compliance with all
applicable laws, ordinances, departmental rules and regulations,
and the ROW permit.
2. The Director shall have full access to all portions of the ROW work
and may issue stop work orders and corrective orders to prevent
Section
515.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
515.030
AO:890
unauthorized work or substandard work as established in
Subsection (G) hereof. Such orders:
a. May be delivered personally or by certified mail to the
address(es) listed on the application for the ROW permit or the
person in charge of the construction site at the time of
delivery;
b. Shall state that substandard work or work not authorized by
the ROW permit is being carried out, summarize the
substandard or unauthorized work and provide a period of not
longer than thirty (30) days to cure the problem, which cure
period may be immediate if certain activities must be stopped
to protect the public safety; and
c. May be enforced by equitable action in the Circuit Court of St.
Louis County, Missouri, and in such case the person
responsible for the substandard or unauthorized work shall be
liable for all costs and expenses incurred by the City in
enforcing such orders, including reasonable attorney's fees, in
addition to any and all penalties established in this Chapter.
B. Underground Facilities.
1. In conjunction with the City's long-standing policy favoring
underground construction, no person may erect, construct or
install new poles or other facilities above the surface of the rightsof-
way without the written permission of the City, unless the City's
authority has been pre-empted by State or Federal law. Such
permission may be granted through a ROW permit when other
similar facilities exist above ground or when conditions are such
that underground construction is impossible, impractical or
economically unfeasible, as determined by the City, and when in the
City's judgment the above ground construction has minimal
aesthetic impact on the area where the construction is proposed.
2. During installation of facilities and to the extent authorized by law,
existing underground conduits shall be used whenever feasible and
permitted by the owner thereof.
3. In the case of new construction or property development, the
developer or property owner shall give reasonable written notice,
to other potential ROW users as directed by the City, of the
particular date on which open trenching will be available for
installation of facilities. Costs of trenching and easements required
to bring facilities within the development shall be borne by the
developer or property owner; except that if the facilities are not
installed within five (5) working days of the date the trenches are
available, as designated in the notice given by the developer or
property owner, then once the trenches are thereafter closed, the
cost of new trenching shall be borne by the person installing the
facilities.
Section
515.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.030
AO:891
C. Above Ground Facilities.
1. The Director may designate certain locations or facilities in the
ROW to be excluded from use by the applicant for its facilities,
including, but not limited to:
a. Ornamental or similar specially designed street lights;
b. Designated historic areas;
c. Facilities, equipment, structures, or locations that do not have
electrical service adequate or appropriate for the proposed
facilities or cannot safely bear the weight or wind loading
thereof;
d. Facilities, equipment, structures, or locations that in the
reasonable judgment of the Director are incompatible with the
proposed facilities or would be rendered unsafe or unstable by
the installation; and
e. Facilities, equipment, structures, or locations that have been
designated or planned for other use or are not otherwise
available for use by the applicant due to engineering,
technological, proprietary, legal, or other limitations or
restrictions.
2. Above ground facilities shall be a neutral color and shall not be
bright, reflective, or metallic. Black, gray and tan shall be
considered neutral colors, as shall any color that blends with the
surrounding dominant color and helps to camouflage the facilities.
Facilities shall be located in such a manner as to reduce or
eliminate their visibility. A sight-proof landscape screen may be
required for any authorized above ground facilities taller than
three (3) feet in height or covering in excess of four (4) square feet
in size. Such screening shall be sufficient to reasonably conceal the
facility. A landscape plan identifying the size and species of
landscaping materials shall be approved by the Director prior to
installation of any facility requiring landscape screening. The
person having facilities within the ROW shall be responsible for the
installation, repair, or replacement of screening materials.
Alternative screening or concealment may be approved by the
Director to the extent it meets or exceeds the purposes of these
requirements.
3. Above ground facilities shall be constructed and maintained in such
a manner so as not to emit any unnecessary or intrusive noise and
shall comply with all other applicable regulations and standards
established by the City or State or Federal law.
4. If the application of this Subsection excludes locations for above
ground facilities to the extent that the exclusion conflicts with the
reasonable requirements of the applicant, the Director shall
Section
515.030
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
515.030
AO:892
cooperate in good faith with the applicant to attempt to find
suitable alternatives, but such alternatives may exceed the cost
increase limitation established by Section 515.020(B)(2) and the
City shall not be required to incur any financial cost or to acquire
new locations for the applicant.
D. Relocation Of Equipment And Facilities.
1. In the event of an emergency, or where construction equipment or
facilities create or are contributing to an imminent danger to
health, safety, or property, the City may, to the extent allowed by
law, remove, re-lay, or relocate such construction equipment, or the
pertinent parts of such facilities, without charge to the City for
such action or for restoration or repair. The City shall attempt to
notify the person having facilities within the ROW prior to taking
such action, but the inability to do so shall not prevent same.
Thereafter, the City shall notify the person having facilities within
the ROW as soon as practicable.
2. At the City's direction, all facilities shall be moved underground
and the cost shall be solely the obligation of the person having
facilities within the ROW (or as otherwise allowed or required by
law).
3. At the City's direction, a person having facilities within the ROW
shall protect, support, disconnect, relocate, or remove facilities, at
its own cost and expense, when necessary to accommodate the
construction, improvement, expansion, relocation, or maintenance
of streets or other public works or to protect the ROW or the public
health, safety, or welfare.
4. A person having facilities within the ROW shall, on the reasonable
request of any person and after reasonable advance written notice,
protect, support, disconnect, relocate, or remove facilities to
accommodate such person, and the actual cost, reasonably
incurred, of such actions shall be paid by the person requesting
such action. The person having facilities within the ROW taking
such action may require such payment in advance.
5. Rather than relocate facilities as requested or directed, a ROW
user may abandon the facilities if approved by the City as provided
in Subsection (F) of this Section.
6. No action hereunder shall be deemed a taking of property, and no
person shall be entitled to any compensation therefor. No location
of any facilities within the rights-of-way shall be a vested interest.
E. Property Repair And Alterations.
1. During any ROW work, the person doing the work shall protect
from damage any and all existing structures and property
belonging to the City and any other person. Any and all rights-of-
Section
515.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.030
AO:893
way, public property, or private property disturbed or damaged
during the work shall be repaired or replaced by the person doing
the work or the person on whose behalf the work is being done,
and such person shall immediately notify the owner of the fact
of any damaged property. Such repair or replacement shall be
completed within a reasonable time specified by the Director and
to the Director's satisfaction.
2. Any alteration to the existing water mains, sewerage or drainage
system or to any City, State or other public structures or facilities in
the rights-of-way required on account of the construction,
installation, repair or maintenance of facilities within the rights-ofway
shall be made at the sole cost and expense of the owner of such
facilities.
F. Removal, Abandonment, Transfer, And Relocation Of Facilities.
1. If a person having facilities within the ROW:
a. Installs the facilities within the ROW without having complied
with the requirements of this Chapter; or
b. Abandons the facilities, the City may require the removal of the
facilities, remove the facilities at the expense of the person
having facilities within the ROW, or require the transfer of the
facilities as provided herein.
2. If the City requires removal of the facilities, the person shall obtain
a ROW permit and shall abide by all requirements of this Chapter.
The liability, indemnity, insurance and bonding requirements
required herein shall continue in full force and effect during and
after the period of removal and restoration and until full
compliance by the person with the terms and conditions of the
ROW permit and the requirements of this Chapter.
3. If the person fails to remove the facilities after having been
directed to do so, the City may, to the extent permitted by law, have
the removal done at the person's expense. Alternatively, the City
may permit the abandonment, without removal, of the facilities if
the Director determines that abandonment is not likely to prevent
or significantly impair the future use, repair, excavation,
maintenance, or construction of the ROW.
4. If the person fails to remove the facilities after having been
directed to do so, the City may, to the extent permitted by law,
decide that the ownership of the facilities should be transferred to
the City, or to such person as directed by the City. In either case the
owner of the facilities shall submit a written instrument,
satisfactory in form to City, transferring to the City, or to such
person as directed by the City, ownership of the facilities. The City
may sell, assign, or transfer all or part of the facilities so
transferred.
Section
515.030
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
515.030
AO:894
5. The City shall not remove or seek to possess or transfer the
facilities until thirty (30) days have passed following written notice
by the Director to the person having facilities within the ROW of
the City's intent to so act. The Director may choose not to act on
good cause shown by the person having facilities within the ROW.
G. Standards For ROW Work.
1. Except for emergency ROW work as provided in Section
515.020(A)(1), ROW work shall be performed only upon issuance
and in accordance with the requirements of a ROW permit. At all
times during the work, ROW permits shall be conspicuously
displayed at the work site and shall be available for inspection by
the Director.
2. If at any time it appears that the duration or scope of the ROW work
is or will become materially different from that allowed by the ROW
permit, the ROW user shall inform the Director. The Director may
issue a waiver, an extension or a revised ROW permit, or require
that the ROW user reapply for a ROW permit in accordance with all
requirements of this Chapter.
3. ROW users shall not open or encumber more of the rights-of-way
than is reasonably necessary to complete the ROW work in the
most expeditious manner or allow excavations to remain open
longer than is necessary to complete the work.
4. All ROW work that affects vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be
properly signed, barricaded, and otherwise protected at the ROW
user's expense. The ROW user shall be responsible for providing
adequate traffic control to the area surrounding the work as
determined by the Director.
5. The ROW user shall perform the ROW work at such times that will
allow the least interference with the normal flow of traffic and the
peace and quiet of the neighborhood, as permitted by the Director.
Unless otherwise provided by the Director in the permit, nonemergency
ROW work on arterial and collector streets may not be
accomplished during the hours of 7:00 A.M. to 8:30 A.M. and 4:00
P.M. to 6:00 P.M. in order to minimize disruption of traffic flow.
6. The ROW user shall notify the City no less than three (3) working
days in advance of any ROW work that would require any street
closure or would reduce traffic flow to less than two (2) lanes of
moving traffic for more than four (4) hours. Except in the event of
emergency ROW work, no such closure shall take place without
notice and prior authorization from the City.
7. All ROW work shall be in accordance with all applicable Sections of
the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, the National
Electrical Safety Code, and other Federal, State, or local laws and
regulations that may apply, including, without limitation, local
Section
515.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.030
AO:895
health, safety, construction and zoning ordinances, and laws and
accepted industry practices, all as hereafter may be amended or
adopted. In the event of a conflict among ordinances and
standards, the most stringent ordinance or standard shall apply
(except insofar as that ordinance or standard, if followed, would
result in facilities that could not meet requirements of Federal,
State or local law).
8. All facilities shall be installed and located to cause minimum
interference with the rights and convenience of property owners,
other ROW users and the City. Facilities shall not be placed where
they will disrupt or interfere with other facilities or public
improvements, or obstruct or hinder in any manner the various
utilities serving the residents and businesses in the City or public
improvements.
9. All facilities shall be of good and durable quality.
10. All ROW work shall be conducted in accordance with good
engineering practices, performed by experienced and properly
trained personnel so as not to endanger any person or property or
to unreasonably interfere in any manner with the rights-of-way or
legal rights of any property owner, including the City, or
unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
11. All safety practices required by law shall be used during ROW
work, including commonly accepted methods and devices to
prevent failures and accidents that are likely to cause damage,
injury, or nuisance to the public.
12. Any contractor or subcontractor of a ROW user must be properly
licensed under laws of the State and all applicable local ordinances,
and each contractor or subcontractor shall have the same
obligations with respect to its work as a ROW user would have
pursuant to this Chapter. A ROW user:
a. Must ensure that contractors, subcontractors and all
employees performing ROW work are trained and experienced;
b. Shall be responsible for ensuring that all work is performed
consistent with the ROW permit and applicable law;
c. Shall be fully responsible for all acts or omissions of
contractors or subcontractors;
d. Shall be responsible for promptly correcting acts or omissions
by any contractor or subcontractor; and
e. Shall implement a quality control program to ensure that the
work is properly performed.
13. A ROW user shall not place or cause to be placed any sort of signs,
advertisements or other extraneous markings on the facilities or in
Section
515.030
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
515.030
AO:896
the ROW, whether relating to the ROW user or any other person,
except such necessary minimal markings approved by the City as
necessary to identify the facilities for service, repair, maintenance
or emergency purposes or as may be otherwise required to be
affixed by applicable law or regulation.
14. Unless otherwise approved in writing by the City, a ROW user shall
not remove, cut, or damage any trees, or their roots, within the
ROW.
15. Street crossings will be bored at the direction of the Director.
H. Restoring And Maintaining The Rights-Of-Way.
1. To complete any ROW work, the ROW user shall restore the ROW
and surrounding areas, including, but not limited to, any pavement,
foundation, concrete slabs or curbs, screening, landscaping, or
vegetation, and shall comply with other reasonable conditions of
the Director. Restoration of the ROW shall be completed within the
dates specified in the ROW permit unless the Director issues a
waiver, extension or a new or revised ROW permit.
2. It shall be the duty of any person making an excavation in the ROW
to backfill such excavations and restore the surface in accordance
with the City's minimum prescribed standards for such surfaces or
the following standards, as determined by the Director.
a. If the excavations are made in the improved portion of the
ROW, twelve (12) inches of granular backfill will be placed over
exposed facilities, and controlled low strength material
(CLSM) will fill the hole within eight (8) inches of the finished
surface for concrete pavements. There will be a plastic
membrane placed between the rock base and the CLSM to
prevent the material from bleeding into the rock base. The
remaining eight (8) inches will be restored by placing a twentyeight
(28) day minimum strength, four thousand five hundred
(4,500) psi concrete mix.
b. If the excavations are made in the improved portion of an
asphalt or combination street, twelve (12) inches of granular
backfill will be placed over exposed facilities, and CLSM will fill
the hole within nine (9) inches of the finished surface. There
will be a plastic membrane placed between the rock base and
the CLSM to prevent the material from bleeding into the rock
base. The remaining nine (9) inches will be restored by placing
a six (6) inch thick, twenty-eight (28) day minimum strength,
four thousand five hundred (4,500) psi concrete mix under a
three (3) inch asphalt concrete lift of type C mix to meet
existing grades
c. Construction of asphalt driveway entrances in residential ROW
will be constructed of six (6) inches of compacted rock base
Section
515.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.030
AO:897
Section 515.040. Bonds — Insurance — Surety — Indemnification —
Penalties. [Ord. No. 4089 §3, 10-15-2007]
and three (3) inches of type C asphalt concrete mix.
Construction of asphalt driveway entrances in commercial
ROW will be constructed of four (4) inches of compacted rock
base, seven and one-half (7.5) inches of type X and three
(3) inches of type C asphalt concrete mix. Concrete driveway
approaches will consist of a four (4) inch compacted rock base
and be a minimum of six (6) inches thick in residential ROW
and eight (8) inches thick in commercial ROW.
3. If a ROW user fails to restore the ROW within the date specified
either by the ROW permit, or any extension thereof as granted by
the Director, the City may perform its own restoration. The City
may also opt to perform its own restoration regardless of any
failure by the ROW user, in which case the ROW permit, or any
amendment or revision thereto, shall note such option. In either
event, if the City performs the restoration, the ROW user shall be
responsible for reimbursing the City's reasonable actual
restoration costs within thirty (30) days of invoice.
4. Every ROW user to whom a ROW permit has been granted shall
guarantee for a period of four (4) years the restoration of the ROW
in the area where the ROW user conducted excavation. During this
period the ROW user shall, upon notification from the Director,
correct all restoration work to the extent necessary as required by
the Director. Said work shall be completed within a reasonable
time, not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days from receipt of the
Director's notice unless otherwise permitted by the Director. If a
ROW user fails to restore the ROW within the time specified, the
City may perform the work and the ROW user shall be responsible
for reimbursing the City's reasonable actual restoration costs
within thirty (30) days of invoice. The Director may extend the cure
period on good cause shown.
5. A ROW user shall not be relieved of the obligation to complete the
necessary right-of-way restoration and maintenance because of the
existence of any performance bond required by this Chapter.
I. Any person performing ROW work shall provide written notice to all
property owners within one hundred eighty-five (185) feet of the site at
least forty-eight (48) hours prior to any installation, replacement or
expansion of its facilities. Notice shall include a reasonably detailed
description of work to be done, the location of work, and the time and
duration of the work.
A. Performance And Maintenance Bonds.
1. Prior to any ROW work a ROW user shall establish in the City's
favor a performance and maintenance bond in an amount to be
Section
515.030
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
515.040
AO:898
determined by the Director to ensure the restoration of the rightsof-
way. The bond shall continue in full force and effect for a period
of twenty-four (24) months following completion of the work. The
Director shall have the authority to extend the maintenance bond
period for up to an additional twenty four (24) months. The Director
may waive this requirement when the work involves no or only
minor disruption or damage to the rights-of-way. The Director shall
waive this requirement when the ROW user has twenty-five million
dollars ($25,000,000.00) in net assets and does not have a history
of non-compliance with State and local regulations.
2. If a ROW user fails to complete the ROW work in a safe, timely, and
competent manner, or if the completed restorative work fails
without remediation within the time period for the bond (as
determined by the Director), then after notice and a reasonable
opportunity to cure there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally
from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss
suffered by the City as a result, including the full amount of any
compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment
of any property of the ROW user and the cost of completing work
within or restoring the rights-of-way, plus a reasonable allowance
for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the bond. The City may
also recover against the bond any amount recoverable against a
security fund or letter of credit where such amount exceeds that
available under a security fund or letter of credit.
3. Upon completion of ROW work to the satisfaction of the Director
and upon lapse of the bond period, including any extension by the
Director, the City shall release the bond.
4. The bond shall be issued by a surety with an "A" or better rating of
insurance in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition,
shall be subject to the approval of the City's attorney and shall
contain the following endorsement:
"This bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until sixty
(60) days after receipt by the City, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent
to cancel or not to renew."
5. In lieu of the bond required herein, the ROW user may establish in
the City's favor such other security as the Director may determine
to be commensurate with the noted bonding requirements,
including, but not limited to, an annual bond to be maintained in
the minimum amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
B. Insurance.
1. All ROW users shall maintain, for the duration of any ROW work
and, when applicable, for as long as the ROW user has facilities
within the rights-of-way, at least the following liability insurance
coverage: Workers' Compensation and employer liability insurance
Section
515.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.040
AO:899
to meet all requirements of Missouri law and commercial general
liability insurance with respect to the construction, operation, and
maintenance of the facilities, and the conduct of the ROW user's
business in the City, in the minimum amounts of:
a. Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one (1) accident;
b. Five millions dollars ($5,000,000.00) for personal bodily injury
or death resulting from any one (1) accident; and
c. Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability.
These insurance requirements shall not be construed
to limit the liability of any person or to impose any
liability on the City or to waive any sovereign immunity.
2. All insurance policies shall be with sureties qualified to do business
in the State of Missouri with an "A" or better rating of insurance by
Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition, and in a form
approved by the City.
3. All insurance policies shall be available for review by the City, and a
ROW user having facilities within the rights-of-way shall keep on
file with the City current certificates of insurance.
4. All general liability insurance policies shall name the City, its
officers, boards, board members, commissions, commissioners,
agents, and employees as additional insureds and shall further
provide that any cancellation or reduction in coverage shall not be
effective unless thirty (30) days' prior written notice thereof has
been given to the Director. A ROW user shall not cancel any
required insurance policy without submission of proof that it has
obtained alternative insurance that complies with this Chapter.
5. The Director may exempt in writing from these insurance
requirements any self-insured ROW user, provided that the ROW
user demonstrates to the Director's satisfaction that the ROW
user's self-insurance plan is commensurate with said requirements
and that the ROW user has sufficient resources to meet all potential
risks, liabilities and obligations contemplated by the requirements
of this Chapter. The Director may require a security fund or letter
of credit as a condition to a self-insured's exemption. The Director
shall waive this requirement when the ROW user has twenty-five
million dollars ($25,000,000.00) in net assets and does not have a
history of non-compliance with applicable regulatory law.
C. Indemnification.
1. Any ROW user granted a ROW permit, and any person having
facilities within the rights-of-way, as partial consideration for the
Section
515.040
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
515.040
AO:900
Section 515.050. Dispute Resolutions, Appeals and Arbitration.
[Ord. No. 4089 §3, 10-15-2007]
privilege granted, shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify,
hold harmless, and defend the City, its officials, boards, board
members, commissions, commissioners, agents, and employees
against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, and
judgments for damages or equitable relief arising out of:
a. Any ROW work, including, but not limited to, the construction,
maintenance, repair, or replacement of the facilities;
b. The operation of its facilities;
c. Failure to secure consents from landowners; or
d. Any actions taken or omissions made by the person pursuant to
the authority of this Chapter.
2. The foregoing indemnity provisions include, but are not limited to,
the City's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in defending against
any such claim, suit, or proceeding prior to the person assuming
such defense. The City shall notify a person of claims and suits
within seven (7) business days of its actual knowledge of the
existence of such claim, suit, or proceeding. Once a person
assumes such defense, the City may at its option continue to
participate in the defense at its own expense.
3. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this
Chapter, the City shall not be so indemnified or reimbursed in
relation to any amounts attributable to (i) the City's own
negligence, willful misconduct, intentional or criminal acts, or (ii)
the City acting in a proprietary capacity to deliver service(s) within
the City.
4. Recovery by the City of any amounts under insurance, a
performance bond, or otherwise does not limit a person's duty to
indemnify the City in any way; nor shall such recovery relieve a
person of amounts owed to the City, or in any respect prevent the
City from exercising any other right or remedy it may have.
D. Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall, upon
conviction by the City's Municipal Court, be punished by a fine not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to
exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each
day the violation continues may be charged as a separate offense.
A. The Director shall make a final determination as to any matter
concerning the grant, denial or revocation of a ROW permit as provided
in this Chapter. On the request of an applicant or a ROW user and
within a reasonable period of time, the Director also shall make a final
determination as to any other issue relating to the use of the ROW, the
Section
515.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.050
AO:901
Section 515.060. Miscellaneous. [Ord. No. 4089 §3, 10-15-2007]
imposition of any fee or the application of any provision of this Chapter,
provided however, that this review shall not apply to matters being
prosecuted in the Municipal Court. Any final determination of the
Director shall be subject to review as provided herein.
B. Any person aggrieved by a final determination of the Director may
appeal in writing to the City Administrator within five business (5) days
thereof. The appeal shall assert specific grounds for review, and the
City Administrator shall render a decision on the appeal within fifteen
(15) business days of receipt affirming, reversing, or modifying the
determination of the Director. The City Administrator may extend this
time period for the purpose of any investigation or hearing deemed
necessary. A decision affirming the Director's determination shall be in
writing and supported by findings establishing the reasonableness of
the decision.
C. Any person aggrieved by the final determination of the City
Administrator may file a petition for review pursuant to Chapter 536,
RSMo., as amended, in the Circuit Court of the County of St. Louis.
Such petition shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the City
Administrator's final determination.
D. Arbitration And Mediation.
1. On agreement of the parties and in addition to any other remedies,
any final decision of the City Administrator may be submitted to
mediation or binding arbitration.
2. In the event of mediation, the City Administrator and the applicant
or ROW user shall agree to a mediator. The costs and fees of the
mediator shall be borne equally by the parties, and each party shall
pay its own costs, disbursements and attorney fees.
3. In the event of arbitration, the City Administrator and the applicant
or ROW user shall agree to a single arbitrator. The costs and fees of
the arbitrator shall be borne equally by the parties. If the parties
cannot agree on an arbitrator, the matter shall be resolved by a
three (3) person arbitration panel consisting of one (1) arbitrator
selected by the City Administrator, one (1) arbitrator selected by
the applicant or ROW user, and one (1) person selected by the other
two (2) arbitrators, in which case each party shall bear the expense
of its own arbitrator and shall jointly and equally bear with the
other party the expense of the third (3rd) arbitrator and of the
arbitration. Each party shall also pay its own costs, disbursements
and attorney fees.
A. After the completion of ROW work the ROW user shall provide to the
City as-built drawings, maps or other comparable records as
determined by the Director, drawn to scale and certified to the City as
Section
515.050
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
515.060
AO:902
Section 515.070. Violation and Penalty. [Ord. No. 4089 §5,
10-15-2007]
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Chapter shall be
punished as set out in Section 100.080 of the City Code, and each day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 600
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Cross References — As to offenses involving smoking, §§215.1820 et seq.;
as to alcohol-related traffic offenses, ch. 342.
Section 600.010. Citation of Chapter. [R.O. 2009 §3-1; Ord. No.
3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000]
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Alcoholic Beverages
Code".
reasonably depicting the location of all facilities constructed pursuant
to the ROW permit. Such records may be provided to the Director in the
form maintained by the ROW user, but when available to the ROW user,
shall be submitted in automated formats that are compatible with City
systems, as determined by the Director, or in hard copy otherwise.
B. Upon failure of a ROW user to commence, pursue or complete any ROW
work required by law or by the provisions of this Chapter to be done in
any street, within the time prescribed and to the reasonable satisfaction
of the City, the City may, at its option, after thirty (30) days' notice,
cause such work to be done and the ROW user shall pay to the City the
cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the City to the ROW
user within thirty (30) days after receipt of such itemized report.
C. Upon ten (10) days' written notice and with the supervision of the City,
or as otherwise provided by law, a ROW user shall have the authority to
trim trees that overhang rights-of-way of the City so as to prevent the
branches of such trees from coming in contact with its facilities, at its
own expense subject to the supervision and direction of the City.
Nothing in this paragraph shall authorize the trimming of trees on
private property without permission of the property owner. All cut
materials shall be properly disposed.
D. During ROW work by a ROW user the City shall have the right to install,
and to thereafter maintain, at its own cost in any excavation to or other
applicable disturbance of the ROW any parallel facilities of its own that
do not unreasonably interfere with the operations of other facilities.
E. Nothing in this Chapter shall be in preference or hindrance to the right
of the City and any board, authority, commission or public service
corporation of the City to use or occupy the rights-of-way or to perform
or carry on any public works or public improvements of any description.
Section
515.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.020
AO:903
Section 600.020. Scope. [R.O. 2009 §3-2; Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh. A),
2-7-2000]
Sections 600.010 through 600.440 of this Chapter shall apply to the City of
Brentwood, State of Missouri.
Section 600.030. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §3-3; Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh.
A), 2-7-2000]
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this
Code shall be construed according to the definitions given below:
BEER — Malt liquor containing in excess of three and two-tenths percent
(3.2%) by weight, manufactured from pure hops or pure extract of hops or
pure barley malt or wholesome yeast and pure water.
EXCISE COMMISSIONER — The Excise Commissioner for the City of
Brentwood, Missouri.
INTOXICATING LIQUOR — As used in this Chapter shall mean and include
alcohol for beverage purposes, alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented,
malt, or other liquors, or combination of liquors, a part of which is
spirituous, vinous, or fermented, and all preparations or mixtures for
beverage purposes, containing in excess of one-half of one percent (.5%)
by volume. All beverages having an alcoholic content of less than one-half
of one percent (.5%) by volume shall be exempt from the provisions of
this Chapter, but subject to inspection as provided by Sections 196.365 to
196.445, RSMo.
LIGHT WINE — Wine containing not in excess of fourteen percent (14%)
of alcohol by weight exclusively from grapes, berries and other fruits and
vegetables.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE — Any package sealed or otherwise closed by the
manufacturer so as to consist of a self-contained unit, and consisting of
one (1) or more bottles or other containers of intoxicating liquor, where the
package and/or container(s) describes the contents thereof as intoxicating
liquor. "Original package" shall also be construed and held to refer to any
package containing one (1) or more standard bottles, cans or pouches of
beer.
PERSON — As used in this Chapter shall mean and include any individual,
association, joint stock company, syndicate, copartnership, corporation,
receiver, trustee, conservator, or other officer appointed by any State or
Federal court.
PREMISES — Includes the place or places within a specified structure
where intoxicating liquor is sold and consumed, provided however, that
said premises and the place or places where intoxicating liquor is sold
and consumed shall, at the time of application for any liquor hereunder,
be fully described in such application, the place or places described in
the application need not be adjoining and contiguous rooms or areas.
"Premises" does not include the surrounding property, including the parking
lot and other property not enclosed within the specified structure.
Section
600.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
600.030
AO:904
RESTAURANT-BAR — Any establishment having a restaurant or similar
facility on the premises at least fifty percent (50%) of the gross income
of which is derived from the sale of prepared meals or food consumed on
such premises or which has an annual gross income of at least two hundred
thousand dollars ($200,000.00) from the sale of prepared meals or food
consumed on such premises.
SALE BY DRINK — The sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for
consumption on the premises where sold. The sale of any intoxicating liquor,
except malt liquor, in the original package, in any quantity less than fifty
(50) milliliters shall be deemed "sale by the drink" and may be made only by
a holder of a retail liquor dealer's license as hereinafter provided and when
so made, the container in every instance shall be emptied and the contents
thereof served as other intoxicating liquors sold by the drink are served.
Section 600.040. Sale or Consumption in Certain Places Prohibited.
[R.O. 2009 §3-3.1; Ord. No. 4024 §1, 5-1-2006]
Section 600.050. License or Permit Required. [R.O. 2009 §3-4; Ord.
No. 3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000]
Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person
to manufacture, sell or expose for sale any intoxicating liquor in this City
without first having obtained from the City a license or permit therefor.
A. The sale or consumption, either in a vehicle or otherwise, of any
intoxicating liquors, including all beer, whether the same be three and
two-tenths percent (3.2%) or otherwise, wines or liquors, upon any
public street, highway, thoroughfare, sidewalk, alley, or upon any
private property without the permission of the owner or occupant of
such property or in any place open to the public (other than an
establishment specifically licensed to sell beer or intoxicating liquors) is
hereby declared to be unlawful. This Section shall have no application
to the sale or consumption of beer on special occasions when the Board
of Aldermen prior to such special occasion has duly passed a resolution
wherein the date, occasion and location are explicitly set forth in such
resolution. [Ord. No. 4721 § 2, 7-18-2016]
B. Notwithstanding anything provided in Subsection (A) of this Section, no
person shall be allowed to bring any intoxicating liquors, including all
beer, whether the same be three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) or
otherwise, wines or liquors without prior Board of Aldermen approval
into Brentwood Park, or breakable glass into any public park, City park,
public recreational facility, City owned recreational facility, public
parking lot, upon any private property without the permission of the
owner or occupant of such property, or to any place open to the public.
Section
600.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.060
AO:905
Section 600.060. License Limited. [R.O. 2009 §3-5; Ord. No. 3679
§1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000]
Each licensee shall apply only to the class for which issued and for the
premises specifically described in the license and shall not be transferable
or assignable.
Section 600.070. License to Be Kept Posted. [R.O. 2009 §3-6; Ord.
No. 3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000]
All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this Code shall be kept
conspicuously posted in the premises for which such license was issued.
Section 600.080. General Requirements for License Application.
[R.O. 2009 §3-7; Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000]
A. Applications for license either to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink or
to sell beer and light wine by the drink and in the original package shall
be filed with the Excise Commissioner on forms furnished by him/her.
Each application shall be signed by the applicant. If the applicant is a
joint venture, partnership or group other than a corporation, the
application shall be made by all individuals who are members of such
joint venture, partnership or group. If the applicant is a corporation, the
application shall be made by a managing officer of the corporation. A
corporate applicant shall state the names and addresses of its
registered agents, officers and directors, the number of shares in the
corporation owned by each and the percentage those shares bear to the
total outstanding shares of the corporation, the names and addresses of
the ten (10) principal stockholders of the corporation and the names
and addresses of each stockholder owning one percent (1%) or more of
the total outstanding shares of the corporation. The signature of the
applicant shall constitute an agreement that the applicant will assume
responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this Code and the
laws of the State of Missouri regulating the sale of intoxicating liquor by
the drink and the sale of beer or light wine by the drink and in the
original package. Applications for Sunday license to sell intoxicating
liquor at retail by the drink or to sell beer and light wine by the drink
and in the original package, in addition to the above mentioned
requirements must show that the premises for which the license is
desired satisfies the requirements for such a license and that the
applicant already possesses a license to sell intoxicating liquor by the
drink or to sell beer and light wine by the drink and in the original
package.
B. If, during the term for which a license is issued, there is a change of
managing officer of a corporate licensee, a new application shall be
filed with the Excise Commissioner and shall be accompanied by a filing
fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). The Excise Commissioner
shall take no action on said application unless the filing fee has been
paid.
Section
600.060
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
600.090
AO:906
Section 600.090. Information Required for License Application.
[R.O. 2009 §3-8; Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000]
Section 600.100. Sunday License Generally. [R.O. 2009 §3-8.1; Ord.
No. 3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 4133 §1, 6-16-2008]
Section 600.110. (Reserved)135
A. Each application for a license either to sell intoxicating liquor by the
drink or to sell beer and light wine by the drink and in the original
package shall contain the following information and any additional
information which may be required by Section 600.050:
1. The exact location and description of the premises to be covered by
the license;
2. The kind of business which the applicant proposes to conduct on
such premises in addition to the sale of intoxicating liquor and the
hours which the applicant plans to keep his/her place open for such
other business; and
3. Whether or not the applicant has ever been arrested, charged,
indicted or convicted of any Federal law, law of the State of
Missouri or any other State or City or County ordinances involving
moral turpitude or any violation of law regulating control or
prohibiting the sale of intoxicating liquor.
B. The Excise Commissioner is authorized to require such additional
information necessary to carry out the intent and purposes of this Code.
A. Any person who possesses the qualifications required by this Chapter
and who now or hereafter meets the requirements of this Chapter may
apply for, and the Excise Commissioner may issue, either a license to
sell intoxicating liquor on Sunday by the drink for consumption on the
premises between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and Midnight on Sundays,
including any establishment having at least forty (40) rooms for the
overnight accommodations of transient guests, or a license to sell beer
and light wine by the drink and in the original package as authorized by
this Chapter.
B. There shall be separate applications for:
1. Either a license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink or a license
to sell beer and light wine by the drink and in the original package,
and
2. A Sunday license either to sell intoxicating liquor at retail by the
drink or a license to sell beer and light wine by the drink and in the
original package. Each application filed with the Excise
Commissioner shall be accompanied by a filing fee of one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00). The Excise Commissioner shall take no
action on an application unless the filing fee has been paid.
Section
600.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.120
AO:907
Section 600.120. Sunday Restaurant-Bar License. [R.O. 2009 §3-8.3;
Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000]
A. Each application for a Sunday restaurant-bar license to sell liquor at
retail by the drink shall contain the following additional information:
Plans showing the relationship of dining and kitchen facilities to the
licensed premises and a certificate signed by the applicant showing
that at least fifty percent (50%) of the gross income of the restaurantbar
for the past year immediately preceding its application was derived
from the sale of prepared meals or foods consumed on the premises,
or that the annual gross income of the restaurant-bar derived from
the sale of prepared meals or foods consumed on the premises during
the past year immediately preceding its application was at least two
hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00). Applicants who have not been
in business one (1) year shall furnish a certificate, either:
1. Showing that at least fifty percent (50%) of gross income of the
restaurant-bar during the preceding ninety (90) day period was
derived from the sale of prepared meals or foods consumed on the
premises; or
2. Expressing the opinion, based on the gross income of the
restaurant-bar during the preceding ninety (90) day period which
was derived from the sale of prepared meals or foods consumed on
the premises, that the annual gross income derived from the sale of
prepared meals or foods consumed on the premises will be at least
two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00); or
3. Expressing the opinion, based on experience with specific
comparable facilities, that more than fifty percent (50%) of gross
income of the restaurant-bar or that an annual gross income of at
least two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) will be derived
from the sale of prepared meals or food consumed on the premises.
For the purposes of this Section, an applicant may submit a
copy of the certificate which he/she submitted to obtain the
State Sunday license to sell intoxicating liquor at retail by the
drink.
B. Any person granted a Sunday restaurant-bar license to sell liquor at
retail by the drink based on the certified projection under clause (3) of
Subsection (A) shall file with the Excise Commissioner not later than
one hundred (100) days after the issuance of such license the certificate
showing either that at least fifty percent (50%) of gross income during
the first (1st) ninety (90) days of operation under the license was
derived from the sale of prepared meals or food consumed on the
135. Editor's Note — Section 600.110 "Sunday place of entertainment license" was removed
since the similar statutory provisions of section 311.102, RSMo. were repealed by HB
1498 in 2012. Section 600.110 formerly derived from previous code §3-8.2 and ord. no.
3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000.
Section
600.120
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
600.120
AO:908
Section 600.130. (Reserved)136
Section 600.140. Sunday Charitable Organization License. [R.O.
2009 §3-8.5; Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000]
Section 600.150. Sunday Distiller's Retail License. [R.O. 2009
§3-8.6; Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000]
A distiller having a Sunday distiller's retail license issued by the Excise
Commissioner pursuant to Section 600.350(A) may sell all types of
intoxicating liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold
between the hours of 11:00 A.M. and 9:00 P.M. on Sunday.
Section 600.160. Applications. [R.O. 2009 §3-8.7; Ord. No. 3679
§1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 3693 §1, 4-17-2000]
premises or, that based on the first (1st) ninety (90) days of operation
under the license, it is projected that an annual gross income of at
least two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) will be derived from
the sale of prepared meals or food consumed on the premises. The
Excise Commissioner shall suspend or revoke any such license where
the certificate is not filed or where the certificate fails to demonstrate
operation of the premises as a restaurant-bar.
C. A person having a Sunday restaurant-bar license issued pursuant to this
Section may sell all types of intoxicating liquor at retail by the drink to
be consumed upon the premises of a restaurant-bar in the City of
Brentwood between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and Midnight on Sunday.
A. Each application for a Sunday charitable organization license shall
contain the following additional information:
1. A copy of the Internal Revenue Service approval of the
organization's exemption from the payment of Federal income
taxes as a charitable, fraternal, religious, service or veterans'
organization under Section 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4), 501(c)(5),
501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), 501(c)(19), or 501(d) of the United
States Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended.
B. A person having a Sunday charitable organization license issued
pursuant to this Section may sell any type of intoxicating liquor at retail
by the drink to be consumed upon the premises of a charitable
organization in the City of Brentwood between the hours of 9:00 A.M.
and Midnight on Sunday.
A. All applications for licenses and applications for renewals of licenses
required by these Sections shall be obtained from the City Collector and
136. Editor's Note — Section 600.130 "Sunday amusement place license" was removed since
the similar statutory provisions of section 311.098, RSMo. were repealed by HB 1498 in
2012. Section 600.130 formerly derived from previous code §3-8.4 and ord. no. 3679
§1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000.
Section
600.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.160
AO:909
Section 600.165. Wine and Malt Beverages Tasting Permit. [Ord.
No. 4277 §1, 4-4-2011]
Section 600.170. Investigation of Application. [R.O. 2009 §3-9; Ord.
No. 3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000]
The Excise Commissioner shall investigate all applications for license for
sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink, all applications for license to sell
beer and light wine by the drink and in the original package and all
applications for Sunday license to sell intoxicating liquor at retail by the
drink and shall report, in writing, to the Board of Aldermen the results
of such investigations and make recommendations concerning the
applications.
Section 600.180. Approval of Application of Board of Aldermen.
[R.O. 2009 §3-10; Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000]
such applications, when completed by applicants, shall be filed with the
City Collector together with:
1. A properly executed agreement providing that the licensee shall
indemnify and hold the City harmless for, from and against any and
all liability, loss or damage the City may suffer as a result of claims,
demands, costs or judgments against it arising from any action,
neglect, omission or default of the licensee in the manufacturing,
brewing, sale, distribution, dispensing or serving of alcoholic
beverages from the premises in which the licensee has his/her
place of business or from any action, neglect, omission or default of
the licensee in maintaining, controlling or supervising the premises
in which the licensee has his/her place of business; and
2. A certificate of insurance showing proof of liability insurance
coverage in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
insuring against claims, demands or actions arising from any
action, neglect, omission or default of the licensee as set forth in
Subsection (1) herein.
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter to the contrary,
any person possessing the qualifications and meeting the requirements
of this Chapter, who is licensed to sell intoxicating liquor in the original
package at retail pursuant to this Chapter, may apply to the City
Collector for a special permit to conduct wine, malt beverage and
distilled spirit tastings on the licensed premises. A licensee under this
Section shall pay an additional twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year
payable at the same time and in the same manner as other license fees.
B. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to permit the licensee to sell
wine, malt beverages or distilled spirits for on-premise consumption.
A. Each application for the sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink or to sell
beer or light wine by the drink and in the original package and each
Section
600.160
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
600.180
AO:910
Section 600.190. Issuance of Licenses by the Excise Commissioner
— License Year. [R.O. 2009 §3-11; Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh. A),
2-7-2000]
application for a Sunday license to sell intoxicating liquor at retail by
the drink shall be approved or disapproved by order of the Board of
Aldermen. No person has a natural or inherent right or privilege to
engage in the sale of liquor by the drink and the approval or disapproval
of each application shall be within the sole discretion of the Board of
Aldermen.
B. Prior to the approval of the application by the Board of Aldermen, any
person objecting to the issuance of such license may request a public
hearing. The request shall be in writing and specifically state why the
license should not be granted. The Board of Aldermen may, in its
discretion, grant or deny such a request for a public hearing.
C. Timely written notice of the hearing shall be given by the City
Administrator or Clerk to the applicant and the party requesting the
hearing.
D. Upon approval of the Board of Aldermen the Excise Commissioner shall
issue a letter directed to the State Supervisors of Liquor Control of such
approval.
A. The Excise Commissioner shall issue a license to the applicant when the
following requirements have been met:
1. Approval by the Board of Aldermen of the license application.
2. Issuance of a license from the State of Missouri.
3. Payment of a license fee in the amount set forth herein in Section
600.380.
B. Each license issued under the provisions of this Code shall particularly
describe the premises at which intoxicating liquor by the drink may be
sold and shall not be deemed to authorize or permit the sale of
intoxicating liquor by the drink at any place other than that described
therein.
C. Whenever a license is issued by the Excise Commissioner pursuant to
Section 600.190(A) and said license covers premises which describe
two (2) or more places where intoxicating liquors are to be sold and
consumed, which places are composed of non-adjoining or noncontiguous
rooms or areas, the annual license fee set forth in Section
600.190(A) shall be paid for each such non-adjoining or non-contiguous
place specified in the license, except, however, that if any charitable,
fraternal, religious, service or veterans' organization has a license to
sell intoxicating liquor on its premises and such premises includes two
(2) or more buildings in close proximity, then only one (1) annual license
fee need be paid.
Section
600.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.190
AO:911
Section 600.200. Suspension or Revocation of Liquor License —
Cause. [R.O. 2009 §3-11.1; Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000; Ord.
No. 3693 §2, 4-17-2000; Ord. No. 4711 §1, 5-2-2016]
D. The license year shall run from July first (1st) to June thirtieth (30th).
New applicants who shall apply for licenses to commence business and
shall commence business before July first (1st) shall pay for such
license one-twelfth (1/12) of the annual fee for every month or part
thereof from the date of issuance to the beginning of the ensuing
license year.
A. The Excise Commissioner may suspend or revoke any license issued
under this Code for any one (1) or more of the following violations by
the licensee or his/her employee(s):
1. Failure to prevent or suppress any violent quarrel, disorder, brawl,
fight or other improper or unlawful conduct of any person who is
upon the licensed premises;
2. Failure to immediately report to the proper law enforcement
authorities an illegal or violent act that has been committed on or
about the licensed premises when the licensee or his/her employee
knew or should have known that said act occurred upon the
licensed premises;
3. Failure to cooperate fully with law enforcement authorities during
the course of an investigation into an illegal or violent act that was
committed on or about the licensed premises;
4. Permitting the performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual
intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation,
flagellation or any sex acts which are prohibited by law;
5. Permitting upon the licensed premises the display of any portion of
the areola of a female breast or permitting a failure to cover the
entire areola and entire front of a female breast with opaque
clothing;
6. Permitting upon the licensed premises the actual or simulated
touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or
genitals of a person;
7. Permitting upon the licensed premises the actual or simulated
display of the anus, vulva, genital or pubic hair or permitting a
failure to cover pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals with opaque
clothing;
8. Permitting any person to remain on the licensed premises after that
person has exposed to public view any portion of his/her genitals or
anus or has failed at any time to have and keep opaque clothing
over all parts of his/her genitals and anus;
Section
600.190
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
600.200
AO:912
Section 600.210. Suspension and Revocation of License —
Procedure. [R.O. 2009 §3-12; Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000]
Section 600.220. Renewal of License. [R.O. 2009 §3-13; Ord. No.
3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 3693 §3, 4-17-2000]
9. Permitting upon the licensed premises the display of films, video
programs or pictures depicting acts which are prohibited by this
Chapter or are offenses involving indecency and obscenity as set
forth in the City of Brentwood Code, as amended;
10. Any violation of the provisions of this Code, including those
provisions of this Code relating to the issuance of licenses, or the
State laws and regulations governing the sale of intoxicating liquor
by the drink.
A. The Excise Commissioner, after public hearing, may suspend or revoke
any license issued under this Code for violations of the provisions of this
Code, subject to and only upon the approval of the Board of Aldermen.
B. The Excise Commissioner shall provide a minimum of ten (10) days'
notice in writing to the licensee setting forth the date, time and place of
the hearing.
C. The notice shall state the purpose of the hearing and the specific nature
of the violation that is the subject of the hearing.
D. The Excise Commissioner shall render his/her decision within five (5)
days from the hearing date and shall forthwith notify the licensee in
writing of his/her decision. Any decision of the Excise Commissioner
suspending or revoking a license shall become effective not later than
five (5) days from the date of decision.
E. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked by the Excise
Commissioner may appeal such suspension or revocation to the Board
of Aldermen by filing a written notice of such appeal with the Board of
Aldermen within fifteen (15) days after notice of the Excise
Commissioner's decision. The appeal shall not stay the enforcement of
the Excise Commissioner's decision.
A. Licensees desiring to renew current licenses shall, prior to the
expiration of the license, file with the Excise Commissioner an
application for renewal by the third (3rd) Monday of May of the year in
which the license expires. Upon payment of the license fee, the Excise
Commissioner shall renew the license for an additional license year if
the conditions under which the original license was issued have not
changed. The Excise Commissioner shall notify the Board of Aldermen
of all renewed licenses.
B. In the event the Excise Commissioner determines that the conditions
under which the original license was issued have changed, the license
shall not be renewed and the Excise Commissioner shall within ten (10)
Section
600.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.220
AO:913
Section 600.230. License Standards for Issuance. [R.O. 2009 §3-14;
Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000]
Section 600.240. Sale to Minor — Certain Other Persons,
Misdemeanor — Exceptions — Permitting Drinking or Possession by
a Minor, Penalty, Exception — Defenses.
days after receipt of the application for renewal forward it to the Board
of Aldermen stating that the license has not been renewed and the
reasons therefor.
C. The Board of Aldermen may in its discretion renew or reject the license
for an additional license year and may prescribe conditions for the
renewal thereof.
D. The licensee may request a public hearing before the Board of
Aldermen concerning the renewal of the license.
A. No license shall be issued to:
1. A person or managing officer who is not a resident of the State; who
is not of good moral character and reputation; has been convicted
of a felony; a person or managing officer of a corporation who is not
of good moral character and a qualified legal voter and a taxpaying
citizen of the County, town, City or Village wherein he/she resides
in the State of Missouri; or a person, managing officer or
corporation not meeting the requirements of Section 311.060,
RSMo., or whose license under this Code has been revoked for
cause; or who at the time of application for renewal of any license
hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first (1st)
application.
2. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or
State law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of
alcoholic liquor or of any of the provisions of this Code or any
offense involving moral turpitude or who shall have forfeited his/
her bond to appear in court to answer charges of any such
violation.
3. A person for sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink or for the sale of
beer and light wine by the drink and in the original package, on
premises where such activity is not permitted by the City of
Brentwood Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 400, as amended, nor shall
any license be issued for premises which would be detrimental or
incompatible with the character and welfare of the surrounding
neighborhood.
A. Any licensee under this Chapter, or his/her employee, who shall sell,
vend, give away or otherwise supply any intoxicating liquor in any
quantity whatsoever to any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years, or to any person intoxicated or appearing to be in a state of
Section
600.220
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
600.240
AO:914
Section 600.250. Persons Eighteen Years of Age or Older May Sell
or Handle Intoxicating Liquor, When.
intoxication, or to a habitual drunkard, and any person whomsoever
except his/her parent or guardian who shall procure for, sell, give
away or otherwise supply intoxicating liquor to any person under the
age of twenty-one (21) years, or to any intoxicated person or any
person appearing to be in a state of intoxication, or to a habitual
drunkard, shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance violation, except that
this Section shall not apply to the supplying of intoxicating liquor to
a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years for medical purposes
only, or to the administering of such intoxicating liquor to any person
by a duly licensed physician. No person shall be denied a license or
renewal of a license issued under this Chapter solely due to a conviction
for unlawful sale or supply to a minor when serving in the capacity as
an employee of a licensed establishment.
B. Any owner, occupant, or other person or legal entity with a lawful right
to the exclusive use and enjoyment of any property who knowingly
allows a person under the age of twenty-one (21) to drink or possess
intoxicating liquor or knowingly fails to stop a person under the age of
twenty-one (21) from drinking or possessing intoxicating liquor on such
property, unless such person allowing the person under the age of
twenty-one (21) to drink or possess intoxicating liquor is his or her
parent or guardian, is guilty of an ordinance violation.
C. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this Section if:
1. The defendant is a licensed retailer, club, drinking establishment,
or caterer or holds a temporary permit, or an employee thereof;
2. The defendant sold the intoxicating liquor to the minor with
reasonable cause to believe that the minor was twenty-one (21) or
more years of age; and
3. To purchase the intoxicating liquor, the person exhibited to the
defendant a driver's license, Missouri non-driver's identification
card, or other official or apparently official document, containing a
photograph of the minor and purporting to establish that such
minor was twenty- one (21) years of age and of the legal age for
consumption of intoxicating liquor.
A. Except as provided in Subsections (B), (C) and (D) of this Section, no
person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall sell or assist in the
sale or dispensing of intoxicating liquor.
B. In any place of business licensed in accordance with this Chapter,
persons at least eighteen (18) years of age may stock, arrange displays,
operate the cash register or scanner connected to a cash register and
accept payment for, and sack for carryout, intoxicating liquor. Delivery
of intoxicating liquor away from the licensed business premises cannot
Section
600.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.250
AO:915
Section 600.260. Time Fixed for Opening and Closing Premises —
Closed Place Defined.137
No person having a license issued pursuant to this Chapter, nor any
employee of such person, shall sell, give away, or permit the consumption
of any intoxicating liquor in any quantity between the hours of 1:30 A.M.
and 6:00 A.M. on weekdays and between the hours of 1:30 A.M. Sunday
and 6:00 A.M. Monday, upon or about his or her premises. If the person
has a license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink, his/her premises
shall be and remain a closed place as defined in this Section between the
hours of 1:30 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on weekdays and between the hours of
1:30 A.M. Sunday and 6:00 A.M. Monday. Where such licenses authorizing
the sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink are held by clubs or hotels,
this Section shall apply only to the room or rooms in which intoxicating
liquor is dispensed; and where such licenses are held by restaurants whose
business is conducted in one (1) room only and substantial quantities of
food and merchandise other than intoxicating liquors are dispensed, then
the licensee shall keep securely locked during the hours and on the days
specified in this Section all refrigerators, cabinets, cases, boxes, and taps
from which intoxicating liquor is dispensed. A "closed place" is defined to
mean a place where all doors are locked and where no patrons are in the
place or about the premises. Any person violating any provision of this
Section shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance violation. Nothing in this
be performed by anyone under the age of twenty-one (21) years. Any
licensee who employs any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years, as authorized by this Subsection, shall, when at least fifty
percent (50%) of the licensee's gross sales does not consist of nonalcoholic
sales, have an employee twenty-one (21) years of age or older
on the licensed premises during all hours of operation.
C. In any distillery, warehouse, wholesale distributorship, or similar place
of business which stores or distributes intoxicating liquor but which
does not sell intoxicating liquor at retail, persons at least eighteen (18)
years of age may be employed and their duties may include the
handling of intoxicating liquor for all purposes except consumption,
sale at retail, or dispensing for consumption or sale at retail. Any
wholesaler licensed pursuant to this Chapter may employ persons of at
least eighteen (18) years of age to rotate, stock and arrange displays at
retail establishments licensed to sell intoxicating liquor.
D. Persons eighteen (18) years of age or older may, when acting in the
capacity of a waiter or waitress, accept payment for or serve
intoxicating liquor in places of business which sell food for consumption
on the premises if at least fifty percent (50%) of all sales in those places
consists of food; provided that nothing in this Section shall authorize
persons under twenty-one (21) years of age to mix or serve across the
bar, intoxicating beverages.
137. Cross References — As to licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays,
§§600.100 et seq.
Section
600.250
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
600.260
AO:916
Section shall be construed to prohibit the sale or delivery of any intoxicating
liquor during any of the hours or on any of the days specified in this Section
by a wholesaler licensed under the provisions of Section 311.180, RSMo., to
a person licensed to sell the intoxicating liquor at retail.
Section 600.270. Controlled Access Liquor Cabinet Systems. [R.O.
2009 §3-18.1; Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000]
A. As used in this Section, the following terms mean:
CONTROLLED ACCESS LIQUOR CABINET — A closed container, either
refrigerated in whole or in part or non-refrigerated, access to the
interior of which is restricted by means of a locking device which
requires the use of a key as herein described.
CONTROLLED ACCESS LIQUOR CABINET SYSTEMS — A system for
the sale of intoxicating liquor in qualified packages or containers in the
rooms provided for the overnight accommodation of transient guests
in a qualified establishment by means of a controlled access liquor
cabinet and such system shall permit the licensee to maintain in the
rooms provided for the overnight accommodation of transient guests a
controlled access liquor cabinet in which such licensee may maintain
for sale intoxicating liquor in qualified packages or containers, together
with, if desired, other beverages or food and such system shall permit
the adult registered guests of the room in which such controlled access
liquor cabinet is located to use the key, magnetic card or other similar
device to gain access to such controlled access liquor cabinet to obtain
the intoxicating liquor or other beverages or food for consumption.
QUALIFIED ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having at least
forty (40) rooms for the overnight accommodation of transient guests
and having a restaurant or similar facility on the premises at least sixty
percent (60%) of the gross income of which is derived from the sale
of prepared meals or food, which restaurant's annual gross food sales
for the past two (2) years immediately preceding its application for a
license shall not have been less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per year, or if such restaurant has been in operation
for less than two (2) years, such restaurant has been in operation for
at least ninety (90) days preceding the application for license for sale
of intoxicating liquor by means of controlled access liquor cabinets
and has a projected experience based upon its sale of food during the
preceding ninety (90) days which would exceed one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) per year.
QUALIFIED PACKAGES OR CONTAINERS — Packages or containers
for intoxicating liquor which holds not less than fifty (50) millimeters
and not more than two hundred (200) milliliters, and any packages or
containers for beer or other malt liquor.
REGISTERED GUEST — Each person who signs his/her name to the
guest register of the qualified establishment or takes some other
Section
600.260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.270
AO:917
equivalent action for the purpose of registering as a guest of such
qualified establishment.
ROOM — A room in a qualified establishment which is intended to
be used as and which is provided for the overnight accommodation of
transient guests.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter to the contrary,
any person who possesses the qualifications required by this Chapter
and who now or hereafter meets the requirements of and complies with
the provisions of this Chapter and who operates a qualified
establishment and who is licensed to sell liquor by the drink at retail
with respect to such qualified establishment may apply for and the
Excise Commissioner shall issue a license to sell intoxicating liquor in
the rooms of such qualified establishment by means of a controlled
access liquor cabinet system on and subject to the following terms and
conditions:
1. The key, magnetic card or other similar device required to attain
access to the controlled access liquor cabinet in a particular room
may be provided only to each adult registered guest who is
registered to stay in such room.
2. Prior to providing a key, magnetic card or other similar device
required to attain access to the controlled access liquor cabinet in a
particular room to the registered guest, the licensee shall verify
that each such registered guest to whom such key, magnetic card
or similar device is to be provided is at least twenty-one (21) years
of age.
3. All employees handling the intoxicating liquor to be placed in the
controlled access liquor cabinet, including without limitation any
employee who inventories and/or restocks and replenishes the
intoxicating liquor in the controlled access liquor cabinet, shall be
at least eighteen (18) years of age and shall obtain such employee
permits as the City, County or other local governmental entity in
which the qualified establishment is located requires to be obtained
by employees of the restaurant operated at such qualified
establishment; provided however, that no such employee permits
shall be required of any employee who handles the intoxicating
liquor in the original case and who does not open such original
case.
4. Registered guests may use the key, magnetic card or other similar
device required to attain access to the controlled access liquor
cabinet in such registered guest's room at any time; provided
however, that no controlled access liquor cabinet may be restocked
or replenished with intoxicating liquor, nor shall any intoxicating
liquor be delivered to a room in order to restock or replenish the
supply of intoxicating liquor in the controlled access liquor cabinet
at any time when the restaurant operated at the qualified
Section
600.270
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
600.270
AO:918
Section 600.280. Sales of Liquor Prohibited Near Schools and
Churches.
establishment is not permitted to sell liquor by the drink at retail
pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
5. Upon request from the registered guest at any time, the qualified
establishment shall cause all intoxicating liquor to be removed
from the controlled access liquor cabinet in the room of such
registered guest as soon as reasonably practicable.
6. The qualified establishment shall have the right to collect payment
for the intoxicating liquor or other beverages or food taken from
the controlled access liquor cabinet in the room of a registered
guest in such manner as it shall determine to be appropriate
including, without limitation, the inclusion of such charges
together with the charges made to such registered guest for the
use of the room or for the purchase of meals at the restaurant
operated at such qualified establishment.
C. Any new qualified establishment having been in operation for less than
ninety (90) days may be issued a temporary license to sell intoxicating
liquor in the rooms of such qualified establishment by means of a
controlled access license cabinet system for a period not to exceed
ninety (90) days if such establishment can show a projection of an
annual business from prepared meals or food which would exceed not
less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per year.
D. In addition to any right to sell granted pursuant to any other provision
of this Chapter, a duly licensed wholesaler shall be permitted to sell
intoxicating liquor to a qualified establishment in any size of qualified
packages or containers for use in a controlled access liquor cabinet
system, provided however, that as to any size of qualified packages or
containers which could not be legally sold to the qualified
establishment except for the provisions of this Section, any such size of
qualified packages or containers shall be sold by the qualified
establishment only by means of the controlled access liquor cabinet
system.
A. No license shall be granted for the sale of intoxicating liquor, as defined
in this Chapter, within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any school, church
or other building regularly used as a place of religious worship, unless
the applicant for the license shall first obtain the consent in writing of
the Board of Aldermen, except that when a school, church or place of
worship shall hereafter be established within one hundred fifty (150)
feet of any place of business licensed to sell intoxicating liquor, the
license shall not be denied for this reason. Such consent shall not be
granted pursuant to this Section until at least ten (10) days' written
notice has been provided to all owners of property within one hundred
fifty (150) feet of the proposed licensed premises.
Section
600.270
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.280
AO:919
Section 600.290. Licenses Non-Transferable — Exceptions.
Section 600.300. Change of Business Location. [R.O. 2009 §3-21;
Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000]
Any person licensed to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink or to sell beer
and light wine by the drink and in the original package under the provisions
of this Code may, upon application to the Board of Aldermen, be authorized
to change the location of his/her place of business during the term of
such license, provided that the proposed new location complies with all
the conditions prescribed in this Code relating to the location where
intoxicating liquor by the drink or beer and light wine by the drink and in
the original package may be sold.
Section 600.310. Unauthorized Liquor on Premises — Secreting.
[R.O. 2009 §3-22; Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000]
It shall be unlawful for the holder of the license authorized by this Code for
the sale of any intoxicating liquor by the drink or the sale of beer and light
wine by the drink and in the original package to keep or secrete, or to allow
any person to keep or secrete in or upon the premises described in such
license, any intoxicating liquor except for the character and kind expressly
authorized to be sold by such particular license.
B. Subsection (A) of this Section shall not apply to a license issued by the
Excise Commissioner for the sale of intoxicating liquor pursuant to
Section 311.218, RSMo., or to a license issued to any church, school,
civic, service, fraternal, veteran, political, or charitable club or
organization which has obtained an exemption from the payment of
Federal taxes.
C. Subsection (A) of this Section shall not apply to any premises holding a
license issued before January 1, 2004, by the Excise Commissioner for
the sale of intoxicating liquor. To retain a license under this Subsection,
the licensed premises shall not change license type, amend the legal
description, or be without a liquor license for more than ninety (90)
days.
A. No license issued under this Chapter shall be transferable or assignable
except as herein provided. In the event of the death of the licensee, the
widow or widower or the next of kin of such deceased licensee, who
shall meet the other requirements of this law may make application and
the Excise Commissioner may transfer such license to permit the
operation of the business of the deceased for the remainder of the
period for which a license fee has been paid by the deceased.
B. Whenever one (1) or more members of a partnership withdraws from
the partnership the Excise Commissioner, upon being requested, shall
permit the remaining partner, or partners, originally licensed, to
continue to operate for the remainder of the period for which the
license fee has been paid, without obtaining a new license.
Section
600.280
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
600.320
AO:920
Section 600.320. (Reserved)138
Section 600.330. Employment of Individuals Convicted of a Felony.
[R.O. 2009 §3-24.1; Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000]
No person holding a license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail
or to sell beer and light wine by the drink and in the original package
shall cause or permit any individual who has been convicted of a felony
or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude to be employed on the licensed
premises.
Section 600.340. Manufacturers, Wholesalers, Etc. — Sale, Etc., to
Unlicensed Persons. [R.O. 2009 §3-25; Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh. A),
2-7-2000]
It shall be unlawful for any manufacturer, brewer or distiller of intoxicating
liquor or any wholesaler dealer therein, either directly or indirectly, to
sell or deliver intoxicating liquor of any kind to any person not licensed
under the provisions of this Code to sell such intoxicating liquor by the
drink at retail, except, however, that this provision shall not apply to any
manufacturer, brewer or distiller of intoxicating liquor or any wholesaler
dealer with both a microbrewer's license under Section 600.380 of this
Code, as amended, and a license to sell either intoxicating liquor by the
drink or beer and light beer by the drink and in the original package or to a
winery licensed under Section 600.380 of this Code, as amended.
Section 600.350. Manufacturers, Wholesalers, Etc., Having
Financial Interest, Etc., in Retail Sale.
A. Distillers, wholesalers, winemakers, brewers or their employees,
officers or agents shall not, except as provided in this Section, directly
or indirectly, have any financial interest in the retail business for sale of
intoxicating liquors, and shall not, except as provided in this Section,
directly or indirectly, loan, give away or furnish equipment, money,
credit or property of any kind, except ordinary commercial credit for
liquors sold to such retail dealers. However, notwithstanding any other
provision of this Chapter to the contrary, for the purpose of the
promotion of tourism, a distiller whose manufacturing establishment is
located within this City may apply for and the Excise Commissioner may
issue a license to sell intoxicating liquor, as in this Chapter defined, by
the drink at retail for consumption on the premises where sold; and
provided further that the premises so licensed shall be in close
proximity to the distillery and may remain open between the hours of
6:00 A.M. and Midnight, Monday through Saturday and between the
hours of 11:00 A.M. and 9:00 P.M., Sunday. The authority for the
collection of fees by Cities and Counties as provided in Section 311.220,
138. Editor's Note — Section 600.320 "Applicability of code to druggist" was removed since the
similar statutory provisions of section 311.470, RSMo. were repealed by HB 1965 in 2010.
Section 600.320 formerly derived from previous code §3-23 and ord. no. 3679 §1(Exh. A),
2-7-2000.
Section
600.320
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.350
AO:921
Section 600.360. Mixing Liquor With Drugs Prohibited. [R.O. 2009
§3-27; Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000]
No holder of a license under this Code or any person shall hold for any
purpose whatsoever, or mix or permit, or cause to be mixed with any
intoxicating liquor except for sale, sold or supplied by him/her as a
beverage, a drug or form of methyl alcohol or impure form of alcohol.
Section 600.370. Misrepresentation of Brand of Liquor Unlawful.
RSMo., and all other laws and regulations relating to the sale of liquor
by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold, shall apply to
the holder of a license issued under the provisions of this Section in the
same manner as they apply to establishments licensed.
B. Distillers, wholesalers, brewers and winemakers, or their officers or
directors shall not require, by agreement or otherwise, that any retailer
purchase any intoxicating liquor from such distillers, wholesalers,
brewers or winemakers to the exclusion in whole or in part of
intoxicating liquor sold or offered for sale by other distillers,
wholesalers, brewers, or winemakers.
C. Distillers, wholesalers, winemakers, brewers or their employees or
officers shall be permitted to make contributions of money or
merchandise to a licensed retail liquor dealer that is a charitable,
fraternal, civic, service, veterans', or religious organization as defined
in Section 313.005, RSMo., or an educational institution if such
contributions are unrelated to such organization's retail operations.
D. A brewer or manufacturer, its employees, officers or agents may have a
financial interest in the retail business for sale of intoxicating liquors at
entertainment facilities owned, in whole or in part, by the brewer or
manufacturer, its subsidiaries or affiliates including, but not limited to,
arenas and stadiums used primarily for concerts, shows and sporting
events of all kinds.
E. For the purpose of the promotion of tourism, a wine manufacturer, its
employees, officers or agents located within this State may apply for
and the Excise Commissioner may issue a license to sell intoxicating
liquor, as defined in this Chapter, by the drink at retail for consumption
on the premises where sold, if the premises so licensed is in close
proximity to the winery. Such premises shall be closed during the hours
specified under Section 311.290, RSMo., and may remain open between
the hours of 9:00 A.M. and Midnight on Sunday.
A. No person holding a license or permit shall sell malt liquor, or any other
intoxicating liquor in this State, or shall offer for sale any such malt
liquor, or other intoxicating liquor whatsoever, brewed, manufactured
or distilled by one manufacturer, in substitution for, or with the
representation that any such malt liquor or other intoxicating liquor, is
the product of any other brewer, manufacturer or distiller. Whosoever
Section
600.350
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
600.370
AO:922
Section 600.380. Fees, Number, Location Restrictions. [R.O. 2009
§3-29; Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 3693 §4,
4-17-2000; Ord. No. 3788 §1, 8-20-2001; Ord. No. 3996 §1,
11-21-2005]
shall violate the provisions of this Section shall be deemed guilty of an
ordinance violation.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection (A) of this Section, no
person holding a license or permit shall be deemed guilty of an
ordinance violation for offering for sale, or for the sale of, wine or
brandy so long as the manufacturer of the brandy or the wine
manufacturer has provided the Excise Commissioner with a copy of the
certificate of label approval issued by the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and
Trade Bureau and, if necessary, has properly registered such label or
name with the appropriate State agency.
A. No license shall be issued for the sale of intoxicating liquor in the
original package, not to be consumed upon the premises where sold,
except to a person engaged in, and to be used in connection with, the
operation of one or more of the following businesses: a drug store, a
cigar and tobacco store, a grocery store, a general merchandise store, a
confectionery or delicatessen store, nor to any such person who does
not have and keep in his/her store a stock of goods having a value
according to invoices of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00),
exclusive of fixtures and intoxicating liquors. Under such license, no
intoxicating liquor shall be consumed on the premises where sold nor
shall any original package be opened on the premises of the vendor
except as otherwise provided in this law. For every license for sale at
retail in the original package, the licensee shall pay to the City Collector
the sum of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per year.
B. For every license issued for the sale of malt liquor and light wine at
retail by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold, the
licensee shall pay to the City Collector the sum of fifty-two dollars fifty
cents ($52.50) per year.
C. For every license to sell malt liquor and light wine at retail by the drink
for consumption on the premises where sold is a club, the license fee
which shall be paid to the City shall be the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00)
per year.
D. If the applicant for a license to sell intoxicating liquor of alcoholic
content in excess of five percent (5%) by weight at retail by the drink for
consumption on the premises of the licensee is a club, the license fee
which shall be paid to the City shall be in the sum of one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) per year, which license shall be limited to the retail
sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink. This Subsection shall have no
application to the sale of beer on special occasions when the Board of
Aldermen prior to such special occasion has duly passed a resolution
Section
600.370
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.380
AO:923
wherein the date, occasion and location are explicitly set forth in such
resolution.
E. For every license issued for the sale of intoxicating liquor in the form of
five percent (5%) beer and light wine and in that form only sold at retail
in the original package not to be consumed on the premises where sold,
the licensee shall pay to the City the sum of twenty-two dollars fifty
cents ($22.50) per year. No such license shall be issued except to a
person engaged in and to be used in connection with one (1) or more of
the following businesses: An establishment operated primarily as a
retail package liquor store, a drugstore, a cigar and tobacco store, a
grocery store, a confectionery or a delicatessen store and a service
station.
F. For every license issued for the sale of all types of intoxicating liquor
and malt beverages at retail by the drink for consumption on the
premises of the licensee, the licensee shall pay to the City Collector the
sum of three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00) per year, which
shall include the sale of intoxicating liquor in the original package not
for consumption on the premises where sold.
G. (Reserved)
H. An additional license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year shall
be charged for licenses permitting sales of intoxicating liquors by the
drink on Sundays payable to the City Collector.
I. An additional license fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per year
shall be charged for licenses permitting sales of intoxicating liquors in
the original package at retail on Sundays payable to the City Collector.
J. For every license issued for the manufacture, brewing, distilling or
fermenting of intoxicating liquors of all kinds, which shall include the
sale of such liquor at wholesale to wholesalers only, the licensee shall
pay to the City Collector the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per
year.
K. For every license issued for the manufacture, brewing, distilling or
fermenting of intoxicating liquors containing not in excess of twentytwo
percent (22%) alcohol by weight, which shall include the sale of
such liquor at wholesale to wholesalers only, the licensee shall pay to
the City Collector the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per
year.
L. For every license issued for the manufacture, brewing, distilling or
fermenting of malt liquor containing not in excess of five percent (5%)
alcohol by weight, which shall include the sale of such malt liquor at
wholesale to wholesalers only, the licensee shall pay to the City
Collector the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year.
M. For every license issued for the sale of intoxicating liquors of all kinds at
wholesale, which shall include bottling and packaging of intoxicating
Section
600.380
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
600.380
AO:924
Section 600.390. Licenses for Charitable and Other Organizations.
[R.O. 2009 §3-30; Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000]
A license authorizing the sale of intoxicating liquor for consumption on the
premises where sold may be issued to any church, school, civic, service,
fraternal, veteran, political or charitable club or organization for the sale
of such intoxicating liquor at a picnic, bazaar, fair or similar gathering. The
license shall be issued only for the day or days designated therein, but in no
case shall such a license be issued to any one (1) club or organization for
more than seven (7) days during any calendar year. For each such license
issued, the licensee shall pay the sum of one dollar ($1.00).
Section 600.400. Temporary Location for Liquor by the Drink,
Caterers — Permit and Fee Required.
The Excise Commissioner may issue a temporary permit to caterers and
other persons holding licenses to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at
retail for consumption on the premises pursuant to the provisions of this
Chapter who furnish provisions and service for use at a particular function,
occasion or event at a particular location other than the licensed premises,
but not including a festival as defined in Chapter 316, RSMo. The temporary
permit shall be effective for a period not to exceed one hundred sixtyeight
(168) consecutive hours, and shall authorize the service of alcoholic
beverages at such function, occasion or event during the hours at which
alcoholic beverages may lawfully be sold or served upon premises licensed
to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. For every permit
issued pursuant to the provisions of this Section, the permittee shall pay to
the Excise Commissioner the sum of one dollar ($1.00) for each calendar
day, or fraction thereof, for which the permit is issued.
Section 600.410. Department of Revenue, Division of Licenses to
Issue License — Fee. [R.O. 2009 §3-31; Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh. A),
2-7-2000]
Except as provided for in this Code, the Excise Commissioner is directed
to issue a proper liquor license upon application to him/her presented by
the holder of a State liquor license or permit for the same type license and
liquor, the licensee shall pay to the City Collector the sum of three
hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00) per year.
N. For every license issued for the sale of intoxicating liquor containing
not in excess of twenty-two percent (22%) alcohol by weight at
wholesale, which shall include bottling and packaging of such liquors,
the licensee shall pay to the City Collector the sum of one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) per year.
O. For every license issued for the sale of malt liquors containing not in
excess of five percent (5%) alcohol by weight at wholesale, which shall
include bottling and packaging of such liquors, the licensee shall pay to
the City Collector the sum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
Section
600.380
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.410
AO:925
same location as stated on said permit and upon payment to the City of the
license fee herein proposed and upon payment to the Excise Commissioner
a one dollar ($1.00) fee. All fees stated herein shall be paid into the General
Revenue Fund.
Section 600.420. Penalties. [R.O. 2009 §3-33; Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh.
A), 2-7-2000]
Every person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
guilty of an ordinance violation and shall upon conviction be punished as set
out in Section 100.080 of this Code.
Section 600.430. Payment With United States Currency by Retail
License Prohibited. [R.O. 2009 §3-34; Ord. No. 3679 §1(Exh. A),
2-7-2000]
Section 600.440. Fire Safety Requirements. [R.O. 2009 §3-35; Ord.
No. 3679 §1(Exh. A), 2-7-2000]
It shall be unlawful for the holder of the license authorized by this Code
for the sale of any intoxicating liquor by the drink or the sale of beer and
light wine by the drink and in the original package or his/her agent or
employee to permit the overcrowding or admittance of any person beyond
the maximum occupant load as posted on the premises by the office of fire
and accident prevention in accordance with the provisions of the current
City Building Codes or to allow any condition to exist which may cause
obstruction of any exit path, exit component or exit door.
Chapter 605
A. No person holding a license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at
retail or beer and light wine by the drink and in the original package,
who accepts delivery of such beer or liquor at premises located in that
portion of St. Louis County outside of the incorporated Cities, Towns
and Villages, shall make payment for such beer or liquor with United
States currency or double endorsement checks at said location,
provided however, that payment with United States currency shall be
lawful and proper at the wholesale vendor's place of business.
B. Retail intoxicating liquor or beer and light wine licenses or having been
notified in writing by a wholesaler that a check, draft, money order or
script given in payment to such wholesaler for such delivered beer or
liquor has been dishonored, shall, within three (3) days after receipt of
such notice, make good such dishonored check, draft, money order or
script. Upon the failure of such retailer to satisfy such indebtedness
within said time, the Excise Commissioner shall suspend the license of
such retailer for a period of three (3) days for a first (1st) violation, one
(1) week for a second (2nd) violation within six (6) months of the first
(1st) violation and shall revoke such license for a third (3rd) violation
occurring within one (1) year.
Section
600.410
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
600.440
AO:926
LICENSES, TAXATION AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS
REGULATIONS
Cross References — As to alcoholic beverages, ch. 600; as to amusements,
ch. 610; as to licensing of electricians, §§500.550 et seq.; as to home
occupations, §§400.1980 et seq.
Section
600.440
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.440
AO:927

ARTICLE I
In General
Section 605.010. Applicability. [R.O. 2009 §12-1; Code 1969 §20-22]
The provisions of this Chapter shall not be applicable to any non-profit
organization, association or establishment nor to any business, occupation,
pursuit, profession or trade which the City may be prohibited by law from
licensing or regulating.
Section 605.020. Persons Not to Be Charged for Business License.
Section 605.030. Responsibilities of Deputies and Agents. [R.O.
2009 §12-3; Code 1969 §20-21]
Any act or duty required or authorized to be performed under the provisions
of this Chapter by any officer or agency of the City may be performed by
any duly authorized agent or deputy of such officer or agency. Any act or
duty required to be performed under the provisions of this Chapter by any
corporation shall, in addition, be the responsibility of the president of such
corporation and of any other person duly authorized by such corporation
to perform such act or duty and such president or other authorized person
shall be personally subject to all penalties provided for violation of such
applicable provisions of this Chapter as may relate to such acts or duties.
A. No person following for a livelihood the profession or calling of minister
of the gospel, duly accredited Christian Science practitioner, teacher,
professor in a college, priest, lawyer, certified public accountant,
dentist, chiropractor, optometrist, chiropodist, or physician or surgeon
in this City shall be taxed or made liable to pay any municipal or other
corporation tax or license fee of any description whatever for the
privilege of following or carrying on such profession or calling, and
after December 31, 2003, no investment funds service corporation as
defined in Section 143.451, RSMo., may be required to pay any such
license fee in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00)
annually, any law, ordinance or Charter to the contrary
notwithstanding.
B. No person following for a livelihood the profession of insurance agent
or broker, veterinarian, architect, professional engineer, land surveyor,
auctioneer, or real estate broker or salesman in this City shall be taxed
or made liable to pay any municipal or other corporation tax or license
fee for the privilege of following or carrying on his/her profession
unless that person maintains a business office within the City of
Brentwood.
Section
605.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.040
AO:929
Section 605.040. False Solicitation. [R.O. 2009 §12-4; Code 1969
§20-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to directly or indirectly solicit
contributions for any purpose by misrepresentation of his/her name,
occupation, business, financial condition, social condition or residence and
no person shall make or perpetrate any other misstatement, deception or
fraud in connection with any solicitation of any contribution for any purpose
or in the conduct of his/her business, occupation, pursuit, profession, trade
or activity to be conducted for the purpose of perpetrating any fraud or
deception upon any person or which shall be detrimental to the general
physical or mental health or general welfare of any person and no license
may be issued under this Chapter to any such business, occupation, pursuit,
profession, trade or activity.
Section 605.050. through Section 605.100. (Reserved)
Section
605.040
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.050
AO:930
ARTICLE II
Licenses Generally
Section 605.110. Scope. [R.O. 2009 §12-16]
This Article applies to all business licenses and permits issued by the City
in the absence of specific provisions to the contrary.
Section 605.120. Making False Statements in Application. [R.O.
2009 §12-17; Code 1969 §20-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make a false statement in
his/her application for any occupational license as to his/her gross annual
business or annual gross receipts or as to any other conditions or factors
upon which the license fee is or shall be based.
Section 605.130. Required for Businesses, Occupations, Etc. [R.O.
2009 §12-18; Code 1969 §§20-1, 20-23]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business, occupation,
pursuit, profession or trade or, in keeping or maintaining any institution,
establishment, article, utility or commodity without first procuring and
paying for a license to do so.
Section 605.140. Form. [R.O. 2009 §12-19; Code 1969 §20-3]
The Ways and Means Committee of the Board of Aldermen shall prescribe
the form of all licenses and applications therefor.
Section 605.150. Payment of Taxes and Other Obligations Required
Prior to Issuance. [R.O. 2009 §12-20; Code 1969 §20-4; Ord. No.
3890 §§1 — 2, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 4321 §1, 1-17-2012]
A. No license or permit shall be issued to any person until all personal
taxes, merchants' and manufacturers' taxes and other applicable
license fees, permit fees, inspection fees and any other financial
obligations which are delinquent and owing to the City by any applicant
have been paid.
B. It shall be the duty of the Ways and Means Committee to establish and
promulgate rules and regulations relative to an orderly method of
checking unpaid personal taxes or other obligations in order to
determine the amounts thereof due and owing to the City by any such
applicant.
C. Prior to issuing a license or permit, the Department of Planning and
Development shall inspect any premises proposed for a business and
shall certify that said premises are in conformance with all applicable
requirements and are suitable for conducting the business for which a
license or permit is sought. Upon such certification and satisfaction of
Section
605.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.150
AO:931
Section 605.160. Occupational or Business License for
Construction Contractors — Duty to Require Proof of Workers'
Compensation Coverage, When, Effect.
Section 605.170. Issuance — Transferability — Signed and Sealed.
[R.O. 2009 §12-21; Code 1969 §20-2; Ord. No. 2868 §1, 4-20-1987;
Ord. No. 3594 §1, 3-16-1998]
All licenses shall be regulated and fixed by ordinance and no license shall
be issued until the amount prescribed therefor shall be paid to the City
Clerk/Administrator. No license shall in any case be assigned or transferred.
Licenses shall be signed by the Mayor and by the City Clerk/Administrator
who shall affix the corporate Seal of the City thereto.
Section 605.180. Issuance to Two or More Persons or to
Corporations, Etc. [R.O. 2009 §12-22; Code 1969 §20-5]
A license may be issued to any corporation, association or partnership or,
to two (2) or more persons engaged in any joint enterprise, the same as
to a single person and for the same fee, except where otherwise specially
provided.
Section 605.190. Separate License Required for Each Place of
Business. [R.O. 2009 §12-23; Code 1969 §20-6]
A separate license shall be obtained for each place of business conducted,
operated, maintained or carried on by every person engaged in any
occupation, calling, trade or enterprise for which a license is required.
all requirements specific to the license or permit applied for, such
license or permit shall be issued.
A. When the City issues an occupational or business license for a
contractor in the construction industry, the City shall require a
certificate of insurance for workers' compensation coverage or an
affidavit, the form of which shall be developed by the division, signed by
the applicant attesting that the contractor is exempt. The City shall
have the duty to investigate any certificate of insurance or affidavit filed
pursuant to this Section.
B. Any contractor who fails to comply with the provisions of Subsection (A)
of this Section shall be denied such a license until he or she furnishes a
certificate of insurance.
C. It is unlawful, pursuant to Section 287.128, RSMo., for any contractor
to provide fraudulent information pursuant to this Section.
D. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to create or constitute a
liability to or a cause of action against the City in regard to the issuance
of any license pursuant to this Section.
Section
605.150
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.200
AO:932
Section 605.200. Fees — Amounts. [R.O. 2009 §12-24; Code 1969
§20-24; Ord. No. 2884 §1, 9-21-1987; Ord. No. 3379 §1, 2-6-1995;
Ord. No. 3579 §1, 12-1-1997; Ord. No. 3580 §1, 12-1-1997; Ord. No.
3957 §1, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 4141 §§1 — 2, 9-15-2008]
A. The license fees for certain businesses, occupations, etc., per year,
unless otherwise specified, are as follows:
Amusement parks, miniature golf courses, trampoline
parks and similar amusement parks or devices, per
year or any part thereof
$150.00
Amusement machines and devices, each $10.00
Barbershops, per chair $25.00
Two (2) or more $50.00
Beauty parlors, per chair $25.00
Two (2) or more $50.00
Billboard posters $5,000.00
Billiard and pool tables, per 1 or more tables $75.00
Bowling and tenpin alleys, per alley $25.00
Canvassers, solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, hucksters,
itinerant merchants: (See Sections 605.410 et seq.)
Per day, per individual $5.00
Each individual must register with the Police
Department each day before soliciting.
Caterers — Food $25.00
Cleaning plants and agencies, laundries and agencies
or combined
$75.00
Dairy trucks, each $25.00
Ice cream truck, one-half (½) year $15.00
Per year $25.00
Juke boxes, per box $15.00
Launderette, per machine $10.00
Maximum $50.00
Newspaper vending machines, each $1.00
Parcel delivery service $75.00
Photographers $50.00
Reporting services $50.00
Telecommunication towers and antenna $5,000.00
Vending machines, per machine $15.00
One cent ($.01) vending machines (candy), per
machine
$10.00
Section
605.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.200
AO:933
B. For the following businesses, the annual license fee shall be the flat fee
listed below:
1. Financial businesses in excess of seven hundred (700) square feet:
Bank, trust company or loan agency $3,000.00
Credit union or savings and loan $2,500.00
2. Financial businesses less than seven hundred (700) square feet:
Bank, trust company or loan agency $500.00
Credit union or savings and loan $500.00
3. License fee for automated teller machines:
Automated teller machine $100.00
C. For the following businesses, the license fee shall be ten cents ($0.10)
per square foot with a minimum fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) annually.
Abstract agency
Actuarial firm
Adjustment agency or company
Architect
Auctioneer (per day)
Business or correspondence school
Collection agency
Contractor
Employment agency
Engineer, professional
Food storage locker
Funeral home
Health club
Home for the aged
Insurance agency/brokerage/sale
Insurance companies, all types
Insurance inspection/rating/claim
Land surveyor
Section
605.200
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.200
AO:934
Section 605.210. Fees — When No Fee Specified. [R.O. 2009 §12-25;
Code 1969 §20-11]
Every person conducting any business, industry or enterprise for which no
license fee is specified in this Chapter or in any other Section of this Code
shall procure a license therefor from the City and pay a license fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per year for the same.
Section 605.220. Fees — When Due, Payable, Delinquent —
Proration. [R.O. 2009 §12-26; Code 1969 §20-8; Ord. No. 4166 §1,
2-2-2009]
Licenses shall be due and payable on or before February fifteenth (15th)
of each year. Effective as of January 1, 1977, a delinquent charge of ten
percent (10%) is to be entered on all known unpaid occupational tax bills.
In addition to the late charge, any person who fails to pay the full amount of
the license tax on or before the due date therefor shall pay interest on such
delinquency at a rate of one percent (1%) per month for each month which
payment is delinquent (up to and not to exceed ten percent (10%)). For any
business or occupation licensed for the first (1st) time prior to July first (1st)
of any year, the full yearly amount shall be charged. For any such business
Office not otherwise classified
Manufacturing representative
Mortgage broker
Moving and storage
Nursery school
Pawnbroker
Parcel delivery
Pay parking lots
Publisher
Public hall
Real estate agency/brokerage
Storage (public warehouse)
Swimming pools
Ticket or travel agency
Title insurance company
Veterinarian
Warehouse (public)
Section
605.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.220
AO:935
or occupation licensed for the first (1st) time on July first (1st) or thereafter
and prior to October first (1st), one-half (½) of the full yearly amount shall
be charged. For any such business or occupation licensed for the first (1st)
time on or after October first (1st) of any year, one-fourth (¼) of the yearly
amount shall be charged.
Section 605.230. Extension of Time for Payment. [R.O. 2009 §12-28;
Code 1969 §20-10]
The Board of Aldermen may, before any delinquency and for good cause
shown, extend the time for payment for a period not to exceed sixty (60)
days.
Section 605.240. Statements of Gross Receipts or Commission —
Inspection of Books of Accounts. [R.O. 2009 §12-29; Code 1969
§20-17]
Every person for whom a license is provided in this Chapter, the amount of
which license is to be computed upon the amount of gross annual receipts
or gross annual commissions of such person, shall furnish the City with
a correct statement in writing, showing the amount of such gross annual
receipts or gross annual commissions, received, which statement shall not
be made public or used by the City except for the purpose of establishing
a correct basis for fixing and collecting the amount of the license provided
in this Chapter. All books of account showing the amount of such annual
business or gross annual commissions shall be open to the inspection of the
City Officials charged with the duty of issuing the license provided in this
Chapter and collecting for the same and the issuance of any such license
may be withheld until all the requirements have been fulfilled.
Section 605.250. License Year. [R.O. 2009 §12-30; Code 1969 §20-7]
Except as otherwise specifically provided, the license year for all
occupational or other licenses which are issued for an annual specified fee
shall coincide with the calendar year, that is to say, the license year shall
begin January first (1st) and end December thirty-first (31st).
Section 605.260. Disclosure of State Sales Tax Returns. [R.O. 2009
§12-31; Code 1969 §20-18]
Every licensee or applicant for license shall, upon demand by the Ways
and Means Committee or its duly authorized deputy or agent, file with the
Committee, deputy or agent a certified copy of any State sales tax return
made by such applicant or licensee during a period of three (3) years prior
to such demand. Refusal to comply with the provisions of this Section shall
be deemed cause for revocation of license or refusal to grant any license
applied for.
Section
605.220
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.270
AO:936
Section 605.270. Right to Audit or Examine Applicant's Books.
[R.O. 2009 §12-32; Code 1969 §20-16]
The Ways and Means Committee, or any deputy or agent acting for it, shall
have the right at all reasonable times during regular business hours to
audit or examine the books and records of any licensee or applicant for
any license for the purpose of determining the proper basis for his/her
license tax or the truthfulness and accuracy of any statement made by such
applicant or licensee in his/her application for an occupational license.
Section 605.280. Penalty for Making False Statements Which Cause
Reduction in Fees. [R.O. 2009 §12-33; Code 1969 §20-15]
Any person found making a statement in his/her application for an
occupational license showing the gross annual business or annual gross
receipts in an amount less than the true amount thereof or knowingly
making a false statement as to any other condition or factor upon which the
license fee is or shall be based, the effect of which would be to reduce the
amount of such fee, shall, in addition to all other penalties now provided
by law or ordinance, pay to the City Clerk/Administrator, upon demand
therefor, the additional amount of license fee found to be due, plus a penalty
of twenty-five percent (25%) of such additional amount, with interest on the
additional license fee of one percent (1%) per month for each month or part
thereof from the date when the original license fee became due and payable
and any license theretofore issued to any such person shall be subject to
revocation.
Section 605.290. Display. [R.O. 2009 §12-34; Code 1969 §20-12]
Each license granted by the City shall be carefully preserved and displayed
in a conspicuous place in the place of business authorized to be conducted
by such license.
Section 605.300. Records to Be Kept by City Clerk/Administrator.
[R.O. 2009 §12-35; Code 1969 §20-13]
The City Clerk/Administrator shall keep a complete and perfect record of all
licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter showing the nature of the license,
its date, expiration and to whom issued.
Section 605.310. Duplicates. [R.O. 2009 §12-36; Code 1969 §20-14]
Any licensee desiring for any purpose to obtain a copy of the license
theretofore issued to such licensee may obtain the same from the City Clerk/
Administrator upon payment of the sum of five dollars ($5.00).
Section 605.320. Grounds for Revocation Generally. [R.O. 2009
§12-37; Code 1969 §20-19]
Section
605.270
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.320
AO:937
Section 605.330. Procedure for Revocation. [R.O. 2009 §12-38;
Code 1969 §20-20]
A. Any of the following shall be considered sufficient cause for the
revocation of any license issued by the City, provided that these
grounds shall not be deemed the exclusive grounds for such revocation:
1. Violation of the terms or conditions upon which the license was
issued;
2. Violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the
City regulating the business, activity or thing licensed, including
the violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter;
3. Failure of licensee to pay any tax or obligation referred to in
Section 605.150;
4. Illegal or improper issuance of the license;
5. Causing, maintaining or assisting in the cause or maintenance of
nuisance, whether public or private. For the purposes of this
Chapter, such a nuisance is defined as anything done to the hurt or
annoyance of the lands, tenements or hereditaments of another. By
hurt or annoyance here is meant not a physical injury necessarily,
but any injury to the health, comfort or welfare of the owner or
possessor of property as respects his/her possession or enjoyment
of his/her property;
6. Any misrepresentation or false statement in the application for
such license.
A. In any case in which complaint shall be made to the Ways and Means
Committee that cause exists for the revocation of a license issued under
this Chapter or issued under any other Chapter of this Code which has
no specific provision pertaining to revocation, the following procedure
shall govern:
1. The Ways and Means Committee or its authorized representative
shall set a hearing to consider the question of revocation.
2. Written notice of the time and place of this hearing shall be mailed
to the licensee at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
3. During the pendency of this hearing before the Ways and Means
Committee or its authorized representative, the licensee shall be
permitted to continue the operation of his/her business.
4. At this hearing the Ways and Means Committee or its authorized
representative shall hear all relevant evidence justifying the
revocation of the license and all relevant evidence justifying the
retention of the license. If such hearing is before a representative
of the Ways and Means Committee, the decision of such
Section
605.320
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.330
AO:938
Section 605.340. Additional Requirements for Adult Businesses.
[R.O. 2009 §12-39; Ord. No. 3555 §1, 7-21-1997]
representative shall become for all purposes that of the Ways and
Means Committee.
5. Written notice of the decision of the Ways and Means Committee
shall be mailed to the licensee and he/she shall have fourteen (14)
days from the date this notice is deposited in the United States mail
in which to appeal, in writing, to the Board of Aldermen to amend
or overrule the decision of the Ways and Means Committee.
6. The Board of Aldermen shall hear any appeal at its first (1st)
regular meeting after filing of appeal. During the pendency of this
appeal before the Board of Aldermen the licensee shall be
permitted to continue the operation of his/her business. The Board
of Aldermen shall render its decision upon the appeal not later than
the second (2nd) regular meeting following the filing of appeal.
7. If the Ways and Means Committee decides that insufficient cause
exists for the revocation of the license, then the City Official
concerned or any complaining party may appeal this decision to the
Board of Aldermen in the same manner as provided in this Chapter
for appeal by a licensee.
A. The following words and phrases are defined:
ADULT-ORIENTED ITEMS — Shall consist of:
Sexual devices. Any three-dimensional object designed or
marketed as useful primarily in the performance of a sexual act
or to enhance or entice sexual stimulation or gratification. Such
devices include any item which has no substantial non-sex related
utility, such as erotic undergarments and artificial sexual organs,
as well as devices with other utility when they are marked for
sexual purposes, such as chains, handcuffs or the like, but does
not include devices primarily intended for protection of health or
prevention of pregnancy; or
1.
Sexually explicit materials. Any book, magazine, pamphlet,
newspaper or other printed or written matter, picture, drawing,
photograph, motion picture film, pictorial representation, statue,
figure or other three-dimensional object, recording, transcription
or anything which is or may be used as a means of communication
that depicts, describes or portrays human sexual intercourse,
sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, masturbation, urinary and
defecatory functions, sadism, masochism, sado-masochistic abuse,
exhibition of the genitals or any touching of the genitals, pubic
areas or buttocks of the human male or female or the breasts of
the female, whether alone or between members of the same or
opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent
sexual stimulation or gratification.
2.
Section
605.330
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.340
AO:939
Section 605.350. through Section 605.400. (Reserved)
B. A sexually oriented business is an adult cabaret or any business which
offers its patrons goods of which a substantial or significant portion are
sexually oriented material. It shall be presumed that a business that
derives thirty percent (30%) or less of its revenue from sexually
oriented materials is presumed not to be a sexually oriented business.
No building, premises, structure, or other facility that contains any
sexually oriented business shall contain any other kind of sexually
oriented business.
Section
605.340
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.350
AO:940
ARTICLE III
Canvassers, Peddlers And Solicitors
Section 605.410. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following words have the meaning indicated:
CANVASSER — A person who attempts to make personal contact with
a resident at his/her residence without prior specific invitation or
appointment from the resident for the primary purpose of,
PEDDLER — A person who attempts to make personal contact with a
resident at his/her residence without prior specific invitation or
appointment from the resident for the primary purpose of attempting to sell
a good or service. A "peddler" does not include a person who distributes
handbills or flyers for a commercial purpose, advertising an event, activity,
good or service that is offered to the resident for purchase at a location
away from the residence or at a time different from the time of visit. Such a
person is a "solicitor".
SOLICITOR — A person who attempts to make personal contact with a
resident at his/her residence without prior specific invitation or
appointment from the resident for the primary purpose of,
Section 605.420. Exception.
This Article shall not apply to a Federal, State or local government employee
or a public utility employee in the performance of his/her duty for his/her
employer.
Section 605.430. Permit Required for Peddlers and Solicitors,
Available for Canvassers.
No person shall act as a peddler or as a solicitor within the City without
first obtaining a permit in accordance with this Article. A canvasser is
not required to have a permit but any canvasser wanting a permit for the
Attempting to enlist support for or against a particular religion,
philosophy, ideology, political party, issue or candidate, even if
incidental to such purpose the canvasser accepts the donation of money
for or against such cause, or
1.
Distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a non-commercial event or
service.
2.
Attempting to obtain a donation to a particular patriotic, philanthropic,
social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, fraternal,
charitable, political or religious purpose, even if incidental to such
purpose there is the sale of some good or service, or
1.
Distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a commercial event or
service.
2.
Section
605.410
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.430
AO:941
purpose of reassuring City residents of the canvasser's good faith shall be
issued one upon request.
Section 605.440. Fee.
Section 605.450. Application for Permit.
Any person or organization, formal or informal, may apply for one (1) or
more permits by completing an application form at the Department of
Planning and Development.
Section 605.460. Contents of Application.
A. The fee for the issuance of each permit shall be:
1. For a peddler acting on behalf of a merchant otherwise licensed to
do business within the City: No fee.
2. For a peddler acting on behalf of a merchant not otherwise licensed
to do business within the City: A fee of five dollars ($5.00) per day.
3. For a solicitor, including a commercial solicitor advertising an
event, activity, good or service for purchase at a location away from
the residence: No fee.
4. For a canvasser requesting a permit: No fee.
A. The applicant, person or organization shall provide the following
information:
1. Name of applicant.
2. Number of permits required.
3. The name, physical description and photograph of each person for
which a permit is requested. In lieu of this information, a driver's
license, State identification card, passport or other governmentissued
identification card issued by a government within the United
States containing this information may be provided and a
photocopy taken.
4. The permanent and, if any, local address of the applicant.
5. The permanent and, if any, local address of each person for whom a
permit is requested.
6. A brief description of the proposed activity related to this permit.
Copies of literature to be distributed may be substituted for this
description at the option of the applicant.
7. A completed background check provided by either Missouri
Highway Patrol or St. Louis County Police Department.
Section
605.430
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.460
AO:942
Section 605.470. Issuance of Permit.
8. The motor vehicle make, model, year, color and State license plate
number of any vehicle which will be used by each person for whom
a permit is requested.
9. If a permit is requested for a peddler:
a. The name and permanent address of the business offering the
event, activity, good or service, i.e., the peddler's principal.
b. A copy of the principal's sales tax license as issued by the State
of Missouri, provided that no copy of a license shall be required
of any business which appears on the City's annual report of
sales tax payees as provided by the Missouri Department of
Revenue.
c. The location where books and records are kept of sales which
occur within the City and which are available for City
inspection to determine that all City sales taxes have been
paid.
10. If a permit is requested for a solicitor:
a. The name and permanent address of the organization, person
or group for whom donations or proceeds are accepted.
b. The web address for this organization, person or group or
other address where residents having subsequent questions
can go for more information.
11. Any other information the applicant wishes to provide, perhaps
including copies of literature to be distributed, references to other
municipalities where similar activities have occurred, etc.
A. The permit(s) shall be issued promptly after application but in all cases
within eight (8) business hours of completion of an application, unless it
is determined within that time that:
1. The applicant has been convicted of a felony, a misdemeanor or an
ordinance violation involving moral turpitude within the past seven
(7) years,
2. With respect to a particular permit, the individual for whom a
permit is requested has been convicted of any felony, a
misdemeanor or an ordinance violation involving moral turpitude
within the past seven (7) years, or
3. Any statement upon the application is false, unless the applicant
can demonstrate that the falsehood was the result of excusable
neglect.
Section
605.460
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.480
AO:943
Section 605.480. Investigation.
During the period of time following the application for one (1) or more
permits and its issuance, the City shall investigate as to the truth and
accuracy of the information contained in the application. If the City has not
completed this investigation within the eight (8) business hours provided
in Section 605.470, the permit will nonetheless be issued subject, however,
to administrative revocation upon completion of the investigation. If a
canvasser requests a permit, the investigation will proceed as described
above, but if the City refuses to issue the permit (or revokes it after
issuance), the canvasser will be advised that the failure to procure a permit
does not prevent him/her from canvassing the residents of the City.
Section 605.490. Denial — Administrative Revocation.
If the issuing officer denies, or upon completion of an investigation revokes,
the permit to one (1) or more persons, he/she shall immediately convey
the decision to the applicant orally and shall within sixteen (16) working
hours after the denial prepare a written report of the reason for the denial
which shall be immediately made available to the applicant. Upon receipt of
the oral notification and even before the preparation of the written report,
the applicant shall have at his/her option an appeal of the denial of his/her
application before the City Administrator.
Section 605.500. Hearing on Appeal.
If the applicant requests a hearing under Section 605.490, the hearing shall
be held before the City Administrator. The applicant may seek review from
the decision in the Circuit Court of the County in which the City is located.
Section 605.510. Display of Permit.
Each permit shall be, when the individual for whom it was issued is acting
as a peddler or solicitor, worn on the outer clothing of the individual as so
to be reasonably visible to any person who might be approached by said
person.
Section 605.520. Validity of Permit.
A permit shall be valid within the meaning of this Article for a period of
seven (7) days from its date of issuance. No more than five (5) 7-day permits
shall be issued to an applicant within a calendar year.
Section 605.530. Revocation of Permit.
A. In addition to the administrative revocation of a permit, a permit may
be revoked for any of the following reasons:
1. Any violation of this Article by the applicant or by the person for
whom the particular permit was issued.
Section
605.480
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.530
AO:944
Section 605.540. Distribution of Handbills and Commercial Flyers.
Section 605.550. General Prohibitions.
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement made in the
course of carrying on the activity.
3. Conviction of any felony, a misdemeanor or an ordinance violation
involving moral turpitude within the last seven (7) years.
4. Conducting the activity in such a manner as to constitute a breach
of the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public.
The revocation procedure shall be initiated upon appropriate
notice to the permittee and a hearing before the City
Administrator in accordance with Section 605.490 above.
A. In addition to the other regulations contained herein, a solicitor or
canvasser leaving handbills or commercial flyers about the community
shall observe the following regulations:
1. No handbill or flyer shall be left at or attached to any sign, utility
pole, transit shelter or other structure within the public right-ofway.
The Police are authorized to remove any handbill or flyer
found within the right-of-way.
2. No handbill or flyer shall be left at or attached to any privately
owned property in a manner that causes damage to such privately
owned property.
3. No handbill or flyer shall be left at or attached to any of the
property having a "no solicitor" sign of the type described in
Section 605.550(1) and (2).
4. Any person observed distributing handbills or flyers shall be
required to identify himself/herself to the Police (either by
producing a permit or other form of identification). This is for the
purpose of knowing the likely identity of the perpetrator if the City
receives a complaint of damage caused to private property during
the distribution of handbills or flyers.
A. No peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall:
1. Enter upon any private property where the property has clearly
posted in the front yard a sign visible from the right-of-way (public
or private) indicating a prohibition against peddling, soliciting and/
or canvassing. Such sign need not exceed one (1) square foot in size
and may contain words such as "no soliciting" or "no solicitors" in
letters of at least two (2) inches in height. The phrase "no
soliciting" or "no solicitors" shall also prohibit peddlers and
canvassers.
Section
605.530
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.550
AO:945
Section 605.560. Violation to Be Prosecuted as Trespass.
Any person violating any part of this Article shall have committed a trespass
on such property and shall be prosecuted under the general trespass
ordinance of the City. The penalty for such violation shall be the same as for
any other trespass.
Section 605.570. through Section 605.600. (Reserved)
2. Remain upon any private property where a notice in the form of a
sign or sticker is placed upon any door or entrance way leading into
the residence or dwelling at which guests would normally enter,
which sign contains the words "no soliciting" or "no solicitors" and
which is clearly visible to the peddler, solicitor or canvasser.
3. Use or attempt to use any entrance other than the front or main
entrance to the dwelling, or step from the sidewalk or indicated
walkway (where one exists) leading from the right-of-way to the
front or main entrance, except by express invitation of the resident
or occupant of the property.
4. Remove any yard sign, door or entrance sign that gives notice to
such person that the resident or occupant does not invite visitors.
5. Enter upon the property of another except between the hours of
9:00 A.M. and 7:00 P.M. in the hours of Central Standard Time and
9:00 A.M. and 8:00 P.M. in the hours of Central Daylight Time.
Except that the above prohibitions shall not apply when the
peddler, solicitor or canvassers has an express invitation from
the resident or occupant of a dwelling allowing him/her to
enter upon any posted property.
Section
605.550
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.570
AO:946
ARTICLE IV
Dance Halls And Dancing Schools
DIVISION 1
Generally
Section 605.610. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §12-81; Code 1969 §20-25]
The following words, terms, phrases, when used in this Article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
PRIVATE DANCING SCHOOL OR ACADEMY OR DANCING CLASS — A
place conducted as a school of instruction where courses in various forms of
dancing are given upon the payment of fees therefor, but where the public
generally is not invited or permitted to enter and engage in dancing.
PUBLIC DANCE HALLS, BALLROOMS or PUBLIC DANCES — A place
or room where the public generally is invited or permitted to engage in
dancing for the payment of a fee or other consideration and is held out to
the public as a place where dances will be given.
Section 605.620. Building, Maintenance, Operation Requirements.
[R.O. 2009 §12-82; Code 1969 §5-3]
No public dance hall, ballroom, academy or other place for dancing shall be
licensed or operated until each and all of the ordinances and requirements
pertaining to health, building, fire regulations and public morals shall have
been complied with and unless the place is properly ventilated and supplied
with sufficient free drinking fountains, toilet conveniences and separate
dressing rooms for men and women and is a safe and proper place for
the purpose for which it is to be used. All public dance halls, ballrooms,
academies or other places where public dances are held or permitted shall
at all times be kept in a clean, healthful and sanitary condition and operated
in such manner as to be conducive to good morals and right living, and
all stairways, passageways and all rooms connected with the dance hall,
ballroom, academy or other place where dances are held, except the toilet
rooms, shall be kept open and well lighted. The dance hall and all other
rooms or places in or about or connected therewith shall be sufficiently
lighted at all times so that it may be possible to see distinctly to any part
thereof.
Section 605.630. Hours of Operation. [R.O. 2009 §12-83; Code 1969
§5-4]
All dance halls, ballrooms, academies or other places where public dances
are held shall close not later than 1:30 A.M. and remain closed between
such hour and the hour of 8:00 A.M.
Section 605.640. through Section 605.650. (Reserved)
Section
605.610
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.640
AO:947

DIVISION 2
License
Section 605.660. Required. [R.O. 2009 §12-91; Code 1969 §20-26]
It shall be unlawful to conduct any public dance hall or ballroom or other
place for holding any public dance or ball or, to convene, hold, teach or
conduct any class or person in dancing or, to give any instructions in
dancing for hire or compensation of any kind in any hall or academy or other
place within the City, without a license therefor.
Section 605.670. Application — Investigations — Issuance. [R.O.
2009 §12-92; Code 1969 §20-27]
All applications for a license to operate a public dance hall or conduct a
public dance or, to conduct a dancing school, academy or dancing classes,
shall be made to the City Collector, giving such information as may be
required. All such applications shall be referred to the Public Safety
Committee or the Board of Aldermen for investigation. It shall investigate
the hall or premises where it is proposed to conduct such public dance or
public dance hall, having particular regard to its provisions for safeguarding
the patrons and the public and shall also investigate the character and
fitness of the person, club, association, organization or society and a report
of such investigation shall be made to the City Collector. The application and
report shall thereupon be referred to the Board of Aldermen, which shall
direct the issuance of such license or deny the same, as the public interest
may require.
Section 605.680. Fees. [R.O. 2009 §12-93; Code 1969 §§20-28,
20-29]
Section 605.690. Revocation — Suspension. [R.O. 2009 §12-94;
Code 1969 §20-30]
Any license issued under this Division may be suspended by the Mayor
at any time for disorderly or immoral conduct or for immoral dancing or
for the use of profane, indecent or ugly language; quarreling, disputing
or fighting; loud and boisterous noise; or for the violation of any of the
rules, regulations, provisions, terms or conditions in this Article or, for the
A. The following fees shall be paid upon the issuance of a license for a
public dance hall or public dance:
Per year $100.00
Per month $50.00
Per day $25.00
B. All persons engaged in conducting a dancing school, a dancing
academy or dancing classes shall make application therefor and pay an
annual license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
Section
605.660
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.690
AO:949
violation of any law or ordinance, in or about such hall, room, academy or
other place, on proof thereof satisfactory to the Mayor. Upon the suspension
of any such license, the Mayor shall report the same to the Board of
Aldermen and the Board of Aldermen may revoke the license or reinstate
the same, as the public interest may require. If any license, as above
provided, shall be revoked for any cause whatever, at least three (3) months
shall lapse before another license shall be issued for dancing in, on or
about the premises or other premises owned, leased, rented, conducted,
managed or superintended by any person owning, conducting, managing,
supervising, controlling or in any manner connected with such place where
the license was revoked and no license shall then be issued until after the
premises shall have been reinspected and reports thereof made as provided
in this Article.
Section 605.700. through Section 605.750. (Reserved)
Section
605.690
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.700
AO:950
ARTICLE V
Drive-In Restaurants
DIVISION 1
Generally
Section 605.760. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §12-106]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CITY LICENSE COLLECTOR — The City Clerk/Administrator.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — Any establishment where food, frozen dessert
or beverage is sold to the consumer and where motor vehicle parking space
is provided and where such food, frozen dessert or beverage is intended to
be consumed in the motor vehicle parked upon the premises or anywhere
on the premises outside the building.
LICENSEE — A person having a City license in full force and effect issued
under this Article for a drive-in restaurant.
WASTE MATERIAL — Paper cups, straws, napkins, garbage, beverages
and all other waste matter intended for disposal which, if not placed in a
proper receptacle, tends to create a public nuisance by rendering property
unclean, unsafe and unsightly.
Section 605.770. Construction of Article. [R.O. 2009 §12-107; Code
1969 §15-4]
This Article shall be deemed and construed to be an exercise of the Police
power of the City for the preservation and protection of the public safety,
health and general welfare and all of its provisions shall be literally
construed with a view to the effectuation of such purpose.
Section 605.780. Sale From Windows and Other Openings. [R.O.
2009 §12-108; Code 1969 §15-16]
The sale of food, frozen desserts, beverages, candy and other products from
a window or other opening of a drive-in restaurant shall be at least thirty
(30) feet from the property line. Such windows or openings shall not be
greater than thirty (30) inches by thirty (30) inches unless enclosed by a
glass or screen vestibule.
Section 605.790. Use of Intoxicating Liquors. [R.O. 2009 §12-109;
Code 1969 §15-17]
No person on the premises of a drive-in restaurant whether in or out of
a motor vehicle shall drink or offer to give to another to drink any beer,
wine or intoxicating liquor, provided that this provision shall not apply to
Section
605.760
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.790
AO:951
any person when served inside the building by a drive-in restaurant duly
licensed to serve such beverages.
Section 605.800. Serving Hours. [R.O. 2009 §12-110; Code 1969
§15-18]
The licensee shall serve no person upon the premises of a drive-in
restaurant any food, frozen dessert or beverage in a motor vehicle between
the hours of 1:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. prevailing time.
Section 605.810. Quiet and Good Order to Be Maintained. [R.O.
2009 §12-111; Code 1969 §§15-12, 15-13]
Section 605.820. Disposal of Refuse — Refuse Containers. [R.O.
2009 §12-113; Code 1969 §15-15]
The licensee shall at least once in twenty-four (24) hours dispose of waste
materials which tend to create a public nuisance on the premises. The
licensee shall provide the premises whereon the drive-in restaurant is
located, together with the parking area and that portion of any street or
alley adjoining the drive-in restaurant, with a sufficient number of adequate
refuse containers.
Section 605.830. through Section 605.850. (Reserved)
A. The licensee shall maintain quiet and good order upon the premises of a
drive-in restaurant and shall not permit disorderly or illegal conduct or
loitering. The licensee shall not cause or create any noise or other
nuisance on the parking area of a drive-in restaurant whereby the quiet
and good order of the premises or of the neighborhood is disturbed.
B. No person on the premises of a drive-in restaurant shall race the motor
of any motor vehicle, needlessly bring to a sudden start or stop any
motor vehicle, blow any horn or make or cause to be made any other
loud or unseemly noise, nuisance or disturbance whereby the quiet and
good order of the premises is disturbed.
Section
605.790
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.830
AO:952
DIVISION 2
License
Section 605.860. Required. [R.O. 2009 §12-121; Code 1969 §15-5]
No person shall construct, operate or maintain a drive-in restaurant within
the City without first obtaining a license as provided in this Division from
the City Clerk/Administrator.
Section 605.870. Application — Fee. [R.O. 2009 §12-122; Code 1969
§§15-6, 15-7]
Section 605.880. Issuance. [R.O. 2009 §12-123; Code 1969 §15-9]
A. Applications for licenses required by this Division shall be made upon
blank forms prepared and made available by the Board of Aldermen and
shall state:
1. The name, home address and proposed business address of the
applicant;
2. The number of motor vehicles which the proposed drive-in
restaurant is designed to accommodate;
3. The hours of operation for the proposed drive-in restaurant;
4. Such other information as the Board of Aldermen shall find
reasonably necessary to effectuate the purpose of this Article and
to arrive at a fair determination of whether the terms of this Article
have been complied with.
B. An application under this Section shall be accompanied by a plat or
drawing of the proposed drive-in restaurant showing: Its location, size
and capacity, the location and size of entrances and exits, the kind of
ground surface, the location, size and construction of all structures and
the location, size and construction of surrounding walls, fences or
barriers.
C. An application under this Section shall be accompanied by an
application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
A. The City Clerk/Administrator shall issue a license under this Division
when the Board of Aldermen determines:
1. There is no apparent danger to the health and safety of the people
of the City;
2. The applicant, its officers or agents, if any, are responsible, having
a good reputation and are capable of operating the proposed drivein
restaurant in a manner consistent with the public health and
safety;
Section
605.860
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.880
AO:953
Section 605.890. Fee. [R.O. 2009 §12-124; Code 1969 §15-8]
A license required under this Division shall be issued by the City Clerk/
Administrator to a successful applicant after payment of a license fee as
prescribed by this Chapter.
Section 605.900. Revocation or Suspension. [R.O. 2009 §12-125;
Code 1969 §15-10]
Section 605.910. through Section 605.950. (Reserved)
3. Conducting a drive-in restaurant at the location designated during
the hours applied for will not result in the violation of any law or
ordinance and will not result in a disturbance of the peace and
quiet of the neighborhood;
4. The requirements of this Article and of all other governing laws and
ordinances have been met.
A. The Board of Aldermen shall have the authority to revoke or suspend a
license issued under this Division when it is determined:
1. The licensee is operating in violation of this Article or of any other
governing law, ordinance or regulation;
2. The licensee is operating so as to constitute a nuisance by reason of
noise, disorderly conduct or unlawful activity on the premises.
Section
605.880
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.910
AO:954
ARTICLE VI
General Contractors And Builders
DIVISION 1
Generally
Section 605.960. Applicability. [R.O. 2009 §12-141; Code 1969 §8-5]
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to any person who is engaged
to perform work on any building, structure or other works by a general
contractor or builder.
Section 605.970. Definition. [R.O. 2009 §12-142; Code 1969 §15-1]
The terms "general contractor" and "builder", as used in this Article, shall
be defined to mean any person acting as or being the employer of all
workmen, mechanics or laborers, whether the same are engaged directly by
them or by some subcontractor in the constructing of buildings, structures
or other works, or as any person who contracts directly with the owner of
the property to construct a part or the whole of any building, structure or
other works thereon.
Section 605.980. through Section 605.1000. (Reserved)
Section
605.960
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.980
AO:955

DIVISION 2
License
Section 605.1010. Required. [R.O. 2009 §12-151; Code 1969 §8-2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as or carry on the business of
a general contractor or builder within the City without first obtaining a
license to do so from the City.
Section 605.1020. Revocation. [R.O. 2009 §12-152; Code 1969 §8-4]
The Board of Aldermen may revoke any license required by this Division
upon proof that such licensee has violated or failed to comply with the
Building Code of the City or any other ordinance of the City relating to or
regulating the construction of buildings or other structures in the City.
Section 605.1030. through Section 605.1050. (Reserved)
Section
605.1010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.1030
AO:957

ARTICLE VII
Gross Receipts Taxes
DIVISION 1
Merchants and Manufacturers139
Section 605.1060. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §12-181; Code 1969
§§20-41, 20-46, 20-51; Ord. No. 3589 §1, 2-17-1998]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
GROSS RECEIPTS — The aggregate amount of all sales of commodities and
charges for services as described in this Article in the City of Brentwood
during any period, less discounts, credits, refunds, sales taxes and
uncollectible accounts actually charged off.
MANUFACTURER — Every person who shall hold or purchase personal
property for the purpose of adding to the value thereof by any process of
manufacturing, refining or by the combination of different materials or, shall
purchase and sell manufactured articles such as he/she manufactures or
uses in manufacturing.
MERCHANT — Every person who shall deal in the selling or leasing of
any goods, wares or merchandise at any store, stand or place occupied
for that purpose within the City, and shall include any person conducting
any business in the City who furnishes goods, wares and merchandise to
customers in connection with contracts for services of any kind.
MOTOR FUEL — Gasoline and all other volatile and inflammable liquid
ordinarily, practically or commercially usable in internal-combustion
engines for the generation of power.
MOTOR FUEL DEALER — Any person who shall store for sale, delivery
or other purposes, or who shall engage in the carrying on, operating or
conducting the business of selling any motor fuel in this City, either in the
capacity of a filling station, gasoline station, public garage, repair shop or
as a wholesale, bulk or other station of any character whatsoever, or who
shall transport or have stored the same for the use of themselves or other
persons in this City.
SERVICE OCCUPATION — All callings, businesses, dealers, trades,
avocations, pursuits, occupations and enterprises, with the exception of
merchants and manufacturers, and shall include the selling of goods, wares
and merchandise other than from a store, stand or place of business in the
City, persons dealing in or rendering services of any and all kinds to persons
or property and persons renting or hiring property or facilities to others
and those who conduct activities for which an admission is charged or
consideration is received for attendance at performances, shows, spectacles
139. State Law Reference — Merchant's gross receipts tax, §94.270, RSMo.
Section
605.1060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.1060
AO:959
or other events or, for participation in contests or games or for use of
facilities or accommodations operated or maintained by such person. The
words "service occupation", as used in this Article, shall, when the context
requires, be construed to mean persons engaged in a business defined in
this Article as a service occupation.
Section 605.1070. Motor Fuel Dealers Deemed Merchants. [R.O.
2009 §12-182; Code 1969 §20-53]
Every person doing business in this City as a motor fuel dealer shall be
subject to all the licensing and taxing provisions of this Article. For the
purpose of computing the license fees and taxes to be paid under such
provisions, such persons shall be deemed merchants and the sales of motor
fuel shall be included in gross sales for such purposes.
Section 605.1080. License — Required. [R.O. 2009 §12-183; Code
1969 §§20-42, 20-52]
Section 605.1090. License — Application. [R.O. 2009 §12-184; Code
1969 §20-43]
Each person desiring to engage in the business of a merchant or
manufacturer or service occupation, as defined in this Article, in this City
shall file with the City Clerk/Administrator on or before the sixteenth (16th)
day of February of each calendar year an application for license as such
for the current year. Such application shall include a statement of the
anticipated gross amount of all receipts during the current year in which
the application is being made which the applicant anticipates receiving from
the sale or lease of any goods, wares or merchandise, from contracts for
services of any kind or, from the business of a manufacturer as defined
in Section 605.1060, basing the statement on the total receipts for the
calendar year immediately preceding the year for which the statement
is made. Such application shall be accompanied by the license fee as
prescribed in this Article.
Section 605.1100. License — Fees for Merchants, Manufacturers,
Service Occupations and Home Occupations. [R.O. 2009 §12-185;
Code 1969 §§20-44 — 20-46; Ord. No. 2883 §1, 9-21-1987; Ord. No.
3957 §2, 12-6-2004]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the conduct of any
business in the City as a merchant or a manufacturer without first
procuring a license therefor and paying a license or occupational tax as
prescribed in this Article.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business as a motor
fuel dealer in the City without first procuring a license therefor and
paying a license or occupational tax as prescribed in this Article.
A. The annual license fee or occupational tax to be paid by merchants shall
be one dollar twenty-five cents ($1.25) on each one thousand dollars
Section
605.1060
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.1100
AO:960
Section 605.1110. License — Fees for New Businesses — Estimates
Based on Former Business Experience. [R.O. 2009 §12-186; Code
1969 §§20-47, 20-48; Ord. No. 2883 §2, 9-21-1987; Ord. No. 3957 §3,
12-6-2004]
($1,000.00) or part thereof of gross receipts as shown by the
application required by Section 605.1090. The license fee for
merchants shall be calculated on the total amount of sales of goods,
wares and merchandise in the State arising out of a business wholly or
partly conducted at any store, stand or place in the City, provided that
the minimum aggregate license fee or occupational tax shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00).
B. The annual license fee or occupational tax to be paid by manufacturers
shall be computed in the same manner as provided in this Section for
merchants. The license fee for manufacturers shall be calculated on the
total amount of sales of goods manufactured by them in the City,
wherever such sale may be made.
C. The annual license fee or occupational tax to be paid by service
occupations shall be computed in the same manner as provided in this
Section for merchants. The license fee for service occupations shall be
calculated on the total amount of gross receipts arising out of
transactions or other activities in the State which are wholly or partly
conducted, arranged or supervised in or from the City.
D. This Section shall also include all businesses, trades, avocations,
pursuits, occupations, enterprises and activity carried on by a family, or
member of a family, residing on the premises in a residential or multifamily
area, to be known as a home occupation. The annual license fee
to be paid by any home occupation shall be a minimum of ten dollars
($10.00). If gross sales or gross receipts of a home occupation amount
to more than fourteen thousand dollars ($14,000.00) annually, the
license fee shall be calculated the same as the license fee for merchants
in Subsection (A) of this Section.
A. When any person commences business as a merchant, manufacturer or
service occupation after January 31, 1964 and until he/she has been
engaged in business within the City during the period from
commencement of business to the first (1st) Monday of the month of
February which occurs more than one (1) year after he/she commences
business, he/she shall take out a merchant's or manufacturer's or
service occupation license, as the case may be, but before any such
license shall be issued, he/she shall deposit with the City Clerk/
Administrator such sum of money as may be agreed upon by him/her
and the City Clerk/Administrator sufficient to cover a tax of one-tenth of
one percent (0.1%) on the estimated gross receipts of the business to
December thirty-first (31st) of the year in which he/she has commenced
business. On or before the last day of February of the year following the
aforementioned December thirty-first (31st), the licensee shall file with
the City Clerk/Administrator a statement showing his/her total gross
Section
605.1100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.1110
AO:961
Section 605.1120. Surety Bonds — Minimum Fee. [R.O. 2009
§12-187; Code 1969 §20-49]
If the City Clerk/Administrator and any person commencing business after
December 31, 1964, as provided for in Section 605.1110, are unable to
agree on the amount of deposit, the City Clerk/Administrator may require a
corporate surety bond from the licensee, conditioned that he/she will, on or
before April first (1st) next following, furnish the City Clerk/Administrator
with a statement, verified as required by this Chapter, as to the gross
receipts and that he/she will pay to the City Clerk/Administrator the taxes
and licenses due according to the provisions of this Chapter, which bond
shall be of not more than double the amount of the estimate of taxes made
by the City Clerk/Administrator or, in such lesser amount as the City Clerk/
Administrator may deem sufficient to protect the City's interest, and his/
her approval shall be endorsed upon such bond before the license shall
issue. In addition to the bond, the licensee shall pay a minimum license fee
of ten dollars ($10.00) which shall be credited to his/her tax and license
when his/her first (1st) return is made and the tax thereon paid. If the
deposit made by such licensee for the period expiring December thirty-first
(31st) after he/she commences business is determined to be in excess of the
receipts for the period from which he/she commenced business to
December thirty-first (31st) and at the same time shall also file with
the City Clerk/Administrator, as required of other merchants,
manufacturers and service occupations, a statement of anticipated
gross receipts for the current year in the manner provided for by
Section 605.1090. He/she shall pay to the City at that time:
1. An amount determined to be due above the amount deposited with
the City Clerk/Administrator for the required one dollar twenty-five
cents ($1.25) per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or fractional
part thereof of gross receipts.
2. On or before the last day of February a license fee on estimated
gross receipts for the current year by dividing the gross receipts
for the previous fractional year by the number of months engaged
in business to December twenty-first (21st) and multiplying it by
twelve (12).
B. Upon payment of such sums, such license shall issue for the ensuing
year thereafter, the tax and license shall be determined as in the case of
other merchants, manufacturers or service occupations.
C. If a merchant, manufacturer or service occupation commencing
business in the City after December 31, 1964, has been engaged in
substantially the same business and proposes to locate such business in
the City, his/her experience in that business and the amount of gross
receipts may be used in estimating the deposit to be made with the City
Clerk/Administrator as provided in this Section, making due allowance
for any increase or decrease in the proposed or expected extent or
magnitude of the business.
Section
605.1110
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.1120
AO:962
amount due, the City Clerk/Administrator shall credit the excess on his/her
next license or, it shall be paid to the licensee if he/she has discontinued
business.
Section 605.1130. Alternate Methods of Calculating Return. [R.O.
2009 §12-188; Code 1969 §20-50]
Merchants, manufacturers and persons engaged in service occupations
may elect, in lieu of furnishing the statements as provided for in Sections
605.1090 and 605.1110, to calculate their gross sales or anticipated gross
sales on a fiscal year basis. If a merchant, manufacturer or service
occupation elects to use this alternative method, he/she shall note on his/
her statement that the returns are for the fiscal year rather than for the
periods specified in Sections 605.1090 or 605.1110 and the tax and license
shall be calculated accordingly.
Section 605.1140. Delinquent Charge Occupational Tax. [R.O. 2009
§12-189; Code 1969 §20-50A; Ord. No. 4022 §2, 5-1-2006]
Section 605.1150. through Section 605.1190. (Reserved)
A. Effective as of January 1, 1977 a delinquent charge of ten percent (10%)
is to be entered on all known unpaid occupational tax bills for
merchants and manufacturer's licenses and service occupation
licenses.
B. In addition to the late charge described in Subsection (A), any person
who fails to pay the full amount of license tax on or before the due date
therefor shall pay interest on such delinquency at a rate of one percent
(1%) per month for each month which payment is delinquent (up to and
not to exceed ten percent (10%).
Section
605.1120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.1150
AO:963

DIVISION 2
Utilities
Section 605.1200. License Tax Levied.140 [R.O. 2009 §12-201; Code
1969 §20-54; Ord. No. 2740 §1, 6-3-1985; Ord. No. 3243 §1,
10-5-1992; Ord. No. 3578 §1, 12-1-1997; Ord. No. 4021 §1, 5-1-2006;
Ord. No. 4307 §1, 9-19-2011]
Section 605.1205. Reaffirming Gross Receipts Tax. [Ord. No. 4402
§1, 2-4-2013]
The gross receipts tax imposed upon electric corporations, including but not
limited to Ameren Missouri, pursuant to Section 605.1200(B) of the Code
of Brentwood, Missouri shall be maintained at its existing rate of seven and
one-half percent (7½%) despite the tariff increase awarded by the PSC to
Ameren Missouri effective on December 27, 2012.
A. Every person engaged in the business of operating systems for
supplying gas, water and telephone services in the City shall pay the
City a monthly license tax of eight percent (8%) for non-domestic usage
and zero percent (0%) for domestic usage of the gross receipts received
from the operation of any such systems being granted with the City and
shall file with the City Clerk/Administrator, commencing on April 1,
1998 and the twentieth (20th) day of each month thereafter, sworn
statements of the amount of the gross receipts received by any such
person from the operation of any such systems within the City during
the preceding month and shall at such time pay the license tax of eight
percent (8%) for non-domestic usage and zero percent (0%) for
domestic usage of the gross receipts to the City Clerk/Administrator. It
shall not be necessary to include in such statements nor calculate the
tax upon any receipts derived from any such service furnished to the
City or any other governmental unit.
B. Every person engaged in the business of operating systems for
supplying electric light and power shall pay the City a monthly license
tax of seven and one-half percent (7½%) for non-domestic usage and
zero percent (0%) for domestic usage of the gross receipts pursuant to
the procedure set out in Subsection (A). The gross receipts tax imposed
upon electric corporations, including, but not limited to Ameren
Missouri, pursuant to this Subsection shall be maintained at its existing
rate of seven and one-half percent (7½%) despite the tariff increase
awarded by the PSC to Ameren Missouri effective July 31, 2011.
140. Note — Ord. No. 4021, adopted May 1, 2006, was enacted pursuant to Sections 92.074 to
92.085, RSMo., adopted in 2005 by the 93rd Missouri General Assembly, regarding the
Municipal Telecommunications Business License Tax Simplification Act. Since said Act has
been declared invalid, the Municipal Code and the tax remain unchanged from the prior
rate.
Section
605.1200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.1210
AO:965
Section 605.1210. Investigation of Statements. [R.O. 2009 §12-202;
Code 1969 §20-56]
The City Clerk/Administrator or his/her deputies are hereby authorized to
investigate the correctness and accuracy of the gross receipts statement
filed under this Article and for that purpose shall have access, at all
reasonable times, to the books, documents, papers and records of any
person engaged in the aforedescribed business, making a return in order to
ascertain the accuracy thereof.
Section 605.1220. Effect of Division on Franchise Contracts. [R.O.
2009 §12-203; Code 1969 §20-57]
If any person engaged in a business covered by this Division is required by
the terms of any franchise contract entered into prior to February 19, 1968,
with the City to make any payment to the City, such persons shall receive
a credit on such payment equal to the amount of tax provided for in this
Division. Should the tax provided for in this Division exceed the payments
provided for in such franchise contract, then the payment required to be
made by such persons shall be as set forth in this Division.
Section 605.1230. Division Not to Affect Real and Personal Property
Taxes. [R.O. 2009 §12-204; Code 1969 §20-58]
Nothing contained in this Division shall be so construed as to exempt any
person to which this Division is applicable from the payment to the City of
the tax which the City levies upon the real and personal property belonging
to any such person.
Section 605.1240. through Section 605.1250. (Reserved)
Section
605.1210
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.1240
AO:966
DIVISION 3
Moving Picture Shows
Section 605.1260. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §12-211; Ord. No. 3379
§2, 2-6-1995]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Division 3, shall
have the meanings given them in this Section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
GROSS RECEIPTS — The total gross receipts from whatever source
derived.
MOVING PICTURE SHOW — Any facility where moving pictures are viewed
by any person for a fee or charge including, without limitation, any theater,
movie house, cinema or similar facility.
Section 605.1270. License Required — Application. [R.O. 2009
§12-212; Ord. No. 3379 §2, 2-6-1995]
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or operate a
moving picture show within the City without making application for and
securing a license to do so. Application for such license shall be filed
with the City Clerk/Administrator during the month of January of each
calendar year, but in no event later than January thirty-first (31st). Such
application shall include the name and address of the person expecting to
operate such moving picture show, the location of the same, the number
of viewing screens, the capacity thereof in number of customers that can
be accommodated and a statement certifying the gross receipts for the
calendar year immediately preceding the year in which the application
is made, provided however, if the preceding calendar year consists of a
period of less than twelve (12) full calendar months, then the applicant
shall annualized the prior short year gross receipts by dividing the same
by the number of full calendar months which the applicant has engaged
in business to December thirty-first (31st) and multiplying the quotient
by twelve (12) and the product resulting therefrom shall be the gross
receipts on which the annual license tax set forth in Section 605.1280
shall be determined and paid by the applicant. Such application shall be
accompanied by payment of the required business license tax as prescribed
in this Article.
Section 605.1280. Annual Business License Tax. [R.O. 2009
§12-213; Ord. No. 3379 §2, 2-6-1995]
A. An annual business license tax is hereby levied on each moving picture
show operating within the City. Said annual business license tax shall
be assessed against the annual gross receipts of the applicant as shown
on the application required by Section 605.1270 in accordance with the
following rate schedule:
Section
605.1260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.1280
AO:967
Section 605.1290. Inspection of Premises, Issuance. [R.O. 2009
§12-214; Ord. No. 3379 §2, 2-6-1995]
Upon receipt of an application for a moving picture show license, the
City Clerk/Administrator shall cause an inspection of the premises to be
made from the standpoints of health, sanitation and safety. The City Clerk/
Administrator shall make a report of his/her inspection which, together with
the application, shall be referred to the Board of Aldermen. If the Board of
Aldermen is satisfied that the establishment contemplated by the applicant
is in compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances, it shall direct the
issuance of the license.
Section 605.1300. Renewal — Inspections. [R.O. 2009 §12-215; Ord.
No. 3379 §2, 2-6-1995]
The operator shall in the month of January of every year make application
for renewal of his/her moving picture show license, at which time
inspections shall be made as upon original application and the annual
license tax paid. The Mayor may at any time require the inspection of
any moving picture show by City employees and may order any alterations
or changes made or the installation of any safety appliance that may be
necessary to render the premises sanitary, safe or suitable for the purposes
for which they are used. In the event of failure to comply with any such
requirements within a period of thirty (30) days, then the license for such
moving picture show may be revoked.
Section 605.1310. Annual Business License Tax for New Moving
Picture Shows. [R.O. 2009 §12-216; Ord. No. 3379 §2, 2-6-1995]
1. One dollar ($1.00) on each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or part
thereof of gross receipts up to five million dollars ($5,000,000.00);
plus
2. Ninety-five cents ($.95) on each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
or part thereof of gross receipts in excess of five million dollars
($5,000,000.00) and up to ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00);
plus
3. Ninety cents ($.90) on each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
part thereof of gross receipts in excess of ten million dollars
($10,000,000.00); provided however, the minimum annual business
license tax shall in no event be less than five hundred dollars
($500.00). The annual business license tax shall be due and payable
to the City on January thirty-first (31st) of each calendar year.
A. When any person desires to establish and operate a moving picture
show in the City, he/she shall apply for a license for same, but before
any such license shall be issued, said person shall deposit with the City
Clerk/Administrator such sum of money as may be agreed upon by him/
her and the City Clerk/Administrator sufficient to cover the annual
business license tax for the year in which application is made. The
Section
605.1280
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.1310
AO:968
Section 605.1320. Surety Bonds — Minimum Business License Tax.
[R.O. 2009 §12-217; Ord. No. 3379 §2, 2-6-1995]
If the City Clerk/Administrator and any person commencing business as
provided in Section 605.1310 are unable to agree on the amount of deposit,
the City Clerk/Administrator may require a corporate surety bond from
the licensee conditioned that he/she will, on or before January thirty-first
(31st) next following, furnish the City Clerk/Administrator with a statement,
verified as required by this Chapter, as to the gross receipts and that
he/she will pay to the City Clerk/Administrator the business license taxes
due according to the provisions of this Chapter, which bond shall be of
not more than double the amount of the estimate of such taxes made by
the City Clerk/Administrator or, in such lesser amount as the City Clerk/
Administrator may deem sufficient to protect the City's interest, and his/
her approval shall be endorsed upon such bond before the license shall
issue. In addition to the bond, the licensee shall pay a minimum business
license tax of five hundred dollars ($500.00) which shall be credited to
his/her tax and license when his/her first (1st) return is made and the tax
thereon paid. If the deposit made by such licensee for the period expiring
December thirty-first (31st) after he/she commences business is determined
to be in excess of the amount due, the City Clerk/Administrator shall credit
the excess on his/her next license or, it shall be paid to the licensee if he/she
has discontinued business.
annual business license tax for said year shall be based upon the
applicant's estimated gross receipts of the moving picture show to
December thirty-first (31st) of the year in which he/she commences
business. During the month of January of the year following the
aforementioned December thirty-first (31st), the licensee shall file with
the City Clerk/Administrator a statement showing his/her actual gross
receipts for the period from which he/she commenced business to
December thirty-first (31st), and at the same time shall also file with the
City Clerk/Administrator a statement of gross receipts for the current
year in the manner provided for by Section 605.1270. He/she shall pay
to the City at that time:
1. An amount determined to be due above the amount deposited with
the City Clerk/Administrator for the preceding year; and
2. A business license tax for the current year.
B. Upon payment of such sums, such license shall be issued for the current
year.
C. If a person who desires to establish a moving picture show in the City
has been engaged in substantially the same business in other areas
within the State of Missouri, his/her experience in that business and the
amount of gross receipts may be used in estimating the deposit to be
made with the City Clerk/Administrator as provided in this Section,
making due allowance for any increase or decrease in the proposed or
expected extent or magnitude of the business.
Section
605.1310
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.1330
AO:969
Section 605.1330. Alternate Method of Calculating Gross Receipts.
[R.O. 2009 §12-218; Ord. No. 3379 §2, 2-6-1995]
Any person operating a moving picture show within the City may, with
the prior written consent of the City Clerk/Administrator, elect, in lieu
of furnishing the statements as provided for in Sections 605.1270 and
605.1310, to calculate their gross receipts on a fiscal year basis. If a
person operating a moving picture show is permitted to and elects to use
this alternative method, he/she shall note on his/her application that the
determination of gross receipts is being made for the fiscal year rather
than for the calendar year as specified in Sections 605.1270 or 605.1310
and he/she shall provide a copy of the City Clerk/Administrator's written
consent thereto and thereafter the annual business tax and license shall be
calculated accordingly.
Section 605.1340. Delinquent Charges. [R.O. 2009 §12-219; Ord.
No. 3379 §2, 2-6-1995; Ord. No. 4022 §3, 5-1-2006]
Section 605.1350. through Section 605.1370. (Reserved)
A. A delinquent charge of ten percent (10%) of the amount of license tax
due and payable to the City shall be assessed against any person who
fails to pay the full amount of the license tax on or before the due date
therefor.
B. In addition to the late charge described in Subsection (A), any person
who fails to pay the full amount of license tax on or before the due date
therefor shall pay interest on such delinquency at a rate of one percent
(1%) per month for each month which payment is delinquent (up to and
not to exceed ten percent (10%).
Section
605.1330
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.1350
AO:970
ARTICLE VIII
Hotels
DIVISION 1
Generally
Section 605.1380. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §12-221; Code 1969
§20-31; Ord. No. 3378 §1, 2-6-1995]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall
have the meanings given them in this Section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
GROSS RECEIPTS — The total gross receipts from whatever source
derived.
HOTEL — Any facility where lodging is furnished to any person for a fee
or charge including, without limitation, any lodge, inn, bed and breakfast,
hotel, motel or similar facility.
Section 605.1390. through Section 605.1400. (Reserved)
Section
605.1380
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.1390
AO:971

DIVISION 2
License
Section 605.1400. Required — Application. [R.O. 2009 §12-231;
Code 1969 §20-32; Ord. No. 3378 §2, 2-6-1995]
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or operate a
hotel within the City without making application for and securing a license
to do so. Application for such license shall be filed with the City Clerk/
Administrator during the month of January of each calendar year, but
in no event later than January thirty-first (31st). Such application shall
include the name and address of the person expecting to operate such
hotel, the location of the same, the number of rooms available for guests,
the capacity thereof in number of guests that can be accommodated and a
statement certifying the gross receipts for the calendar year immediately
preceding the year for which the statement is made, provided however, if
the preceding calendar year consists of a period of less than twelve (12) full
calendar months, then the applicant shall annualized the prior short year
gross receipts by dividing the same by the number of full calendar months
which the applicant has engaged in business to December thirty-first (31st)
and multiplying the quotient by twelve (12) and the product resulting
therefrom shall be the gross receipts on which the annual license tax set
forth in Section 605.1420 shall be determined and paid by the applicant.
Such application shall be accompanied by payment of the required business
license tax as prescribed in this Article.
Section 605.1420. Annual Business License Tax. [R.O. 2009
§12-232; Code 1969 §20-33; Ord. No. 3378 §3, 2-6-1995]
A. An annual business license tax is hereby levied on each hotel operating
within the City. Said annual business license tax shall be assessed
against the annual gross receipts of the applicant as shown on the
application required by Section 605.1410 in accordance with the
following rate schedule:
1. One dollar ($1.00) on each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or part
thereof of gross receipts up to five million dollars ($5,000,000.00);
plus
2. Ninety-five cents ($0.95) on each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
or part thereof of gross receipts in excess of five million dollars
($5,000,000.00) and up to ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00);
plus
3. Ninety cents ($.90) on each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
part thereof of gross receipts in excess of ten million dollars
($10,000,000.00), provided however, the minimum annual business
license tax shall in no event be less than five hundred dollars
($500.00). The annual business license tax shall be due and payable
to the City on January thirty-first (31st) of each calendar year.
Section
605.1400
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.1430
AO:973
Section 605.1430. Inspection of Premises — Issuance. [R.O. 2009
§12-233; Code 1969 §20-34]
Upon receipt of an application for a hotel license, the City Clerk/
Administrator shall cause an inspection of the premises to be made from the
standpoints of health, sanitation and safety. The City Clerk/Administrator
shall make a report of his/her inspection which, together with the
application, shall be referred to the Board of Aldermen. If the Board of
Aldermen is satisfied that the establishment contemplated by the applicant
is in compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances, it shall direct the
issuance of the license.
Section 605.1440. Renewal — Inspections. [R.O. 2009 §12-234;
Code 1969 §20-35]
The operator shall in the month of January of every year make application
for renewal of his/her hotel license, at which time inspections shall be made
as upon original application and the annual license fee paid. The Mayor
may at any time require the inspection of any hotel by City employees and
may order any alterations or changes made or the installation of any safety
appliance that may be necessary to render the premises sanitary, safe or
suitable for the purposes for which they are used. In the event of failure to
comply with any such requirements within a period of thirty (30) days, then
the license for such hotel may be revoked.
Section 605.1450. Annual Business License Tax for New Hotels.
[R.O. 2009 §12-235; Ord. No. 3378 §4, 2-6-1995]
A. When any person desires to establish and operate a hotel in the City, he/
she shall apply for a license for same, but before any such license shall
be issued, said person shall deposit with the City Clerk/Administrator
such sum of money as may be agreed upon by him/her and the City
Clerk/Administrator sufficient to cover the annual business license tax
for the current year ending December thirty-first (31st). The annual
business license tax for said year shall be based upon the applicant's
estimated gross receipts of the hotel to December thirty-first (31st) of
the year in which he/she commences business. During the month of
January of the year following the aforementioned December thirty-first
(31st), the licensee shall file with the City Clerk/Administrator a
statement showing his/her actual gross receipts for the period from
which he/she commenced business to December thirty-first (31st) and
at the same time shall also file with the City Clerk/Administrator a
statement of gross receipts for the current year in the manner provided
for by Section 605.1410. He/she shall pay to the City at that time:
1. An amount determined to be due above the amount deposited with
the City Clerk/Administrator for the preceding year; and
2. The business license tax for the current year based upon the
formula for annualizing the gross receipts for the short year as set
forth in Section 605.1410.
Section
605.1430
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.1450
AO:974
Section 605.1460. Surety Bonds — Minimum Business License Tax.
[R.O. 2009 §12-236; Ord. No. 3378 §4, 2-6-1995]
If the City Clerk/Administrator and any person commencing business as
provided in Section 605.1450 are unable to agree on the amount of deposit,
the City Clerk/Administrator may require a corporate surety bond from
the licensee, conditioned that he/she will on or before January thirty-first
(31st) next following, furnish the City Clerk/Administrator with a statement,
verified as required by this Chapter, as to the gross receipts and that
he/she will pay to the City Clerk/Administrator the business license taxes
due according to the provisions of this Article, which bond shall be of
not more than double the amount of the estimate of such taxes made by
the City Clerk/Administrator or, in such lesser amount as the City Clerk/
Administrator may deem sufficient to protect the City's interest, and his/her
approval shall be endorsed upon such bond before the license shall issue.
In addition to the bond, the licensee shall pay a minimum business license
tax of five hundred dollars ($500.00) which shall be credited to the annual
business license tax when his/her first (1st) application is made and the tax
thereon paid. If the deposit made by such licensee for the period expiring
December thirty-first (31st) after he/she commences business is determined
to be in excess of the amount due, the City Clerk/Administrator shall credit
the excess on his/her next license or, it shall be paid to the licensee if he/she
has discontinued business.
Section 605.1470. Alternate Method of Calculating Gross Receipts.
[R.O. 2009 §12-237; Ord. No. 3378 §4, 2-6-1995]
Any person operating a hotel within the City may, with the prior written
consent of the City Clerk/Administrator, elect, in lieu of furnishing the
statements as provided for in Sections 605.1410 and 605.1450, to calculate
his/her gross receipts on a fiscal year basis. If a person operating a hotel is
permitted to and elects to use this alternative method, he/she shall note on
his/her application that the determination of gross receipts is being made
for the fiscal year rather than for the calendar year as specified in Sections
605.1410 or 605.1450 and he/she shall provide a copy of the City Clerk/
Administrator's written consent thereto and thereafter the business tax and
license shall be calculated accordingly.
B. Upon payment of such sums, such license shall issued for the current
year.
C. If a person who desires to establish a hotel in the City has been engaged
in substantially the same business in other areas within the State of
Missouri, his/her experience in that business and the amount of gross
receipts may be used in estimating the deposit to be made with the City
Clerk/Administrator as provided in this Section, making due allowance
for any increase or decrease in the proposed or expected extent or
magnitude of the business.
Section
605.1450
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.1480
AO:975
Section 605.1480. Delinquent Charges. [R.O. 2009 §12-238; Ord.
No. 3378 §4, 2-6-1995]
Section 605.1490. through Section 605.1500. (Reserved)
A. A delinquent charge of ten percent (10%) of the amount of license tax
due and payable to the City shall be assessed against any person who
fails to pay the full amount of the license tax on or before the due date
therefor.
B. In addition to the late charge described in Subsection (A), any person
who fails to pay the full amount of license tax on or before the due date
therefor shall pay interest on such delinquency at a rate of one percent
(1%) per month for each month which payment is delinquent (up to and
not to exceed eight percent (8%)).
Section
605.1480
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.1490
AO:976
ARTICLE IX
Motor Vehicle License Fees141
Section 605.1510. Schedule. [R.O. 2009 §12-241; Ord. No. 3036 §1,
11-6-1989]
All motor-driven vehicles owned by residents of the City shall be assessed
an annual license fee by the St. Louis County Department of Revenue in
accordance with the following schedule:
Private passenger vehicles: $5.00.
Motorcycles and motortricycles: $5.00.
Commercial vehicles:
Pickup trucks: $6.00.
Two (2) ton truck capacity: $8.00.
Over two (2) ton truck capacity: $11.00.
Section 605.1520. Collection. [R.O. 2009 §12-242; Ord. No. 3036 §1,
11-6-1989]
Annual license fees shall be collected by the St. Louis County Department
of Revenue.
Section 605.1530. through Section 605.1550. (Reserved)
141. State Law Reference — Motor Vehicle License Tax, §301.340, RSMo.
Section
605.1510
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.1530
AO:977

ARTICLE X
Parking Lots
Section 605.1560. Parking Lot Defined. [R.O. 2009 §12-261; Code
1969 §7-3]
A "parking lot" is any area which is designed for the use of parking
automobiles or other motor vehicles, but specifically excludes parking areas
for single-family dwelling units.
Section 605.1570. Permit Required. [R.O. 2009 §12-262; Code 1969
§7-14]
No person shall construct or maintain a parking lot within the City, nor shall
any such person allow any property to be used for a parking lot without first
having obtained a permit for such construction, maintenance or use from
the Building Official in full compliance with the terms of this Article.
Section 605.1580. License Required. [R.O. 2009 §12-263; Code
1969 §7-9]
Each owner of a parking lot making a charge for the use of the lot shall be
required to obtain from the City Clerk/Administrator a license for the use of
the lot.
Section 605.1590. Bond. [R.O. 2009 §12-264; Code 1969 §7-10]
Each operator of a parking lot, prior to being issued a license under this
Article shall file a bond or certificate of insurance in the sum of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with the City Clerk/Administrator. Such bond
or certificate of insurance shall be subject to the approval of the City
Attorney and shall run to the City for the benefit of any person who may
receive injury or damage resulting from the negligent maintenance or
operation of such lot.
Section 605.1600. Temporary Parking Lots. [R.O. 2009 §12-265;
Code 1969 §7-12]
Upon application in writing to it, the Board of Aldermen may issue to a
person a permit to operate a temporary parking lot for a period not to
exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. Such application shall set forth
the reasons for which a temporary permit is sought and before any such
permit shall be issued and the operation of such temporary lot shall be
commenced, the owner or operator of such temporary lot shall agree and
shall conform to all conditions prescribed by the Board of Aldermen relating
to the construction and use of the temporary parking lot.
Section 605.1610. through Section 605.1700. (Reserved)
Section
605.1560
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.1610
AO:979

ARTICLE XI
Private Hospitals, Nursing And Convalescent Homes
DIVISION 1
License
Section 605.1620. Required — Application. [R.O. 2009 §12-301;
Code 1969 §20-36]
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or conduct any
private hospital, nursing home or convalescent home within the City
without making application for and securing a license to do so. Application
for such license shall be made to the City Clerk/Administrator and shall
contain the name and address of the applicant, the location of the proposed
establishment, the number and character of rooms therein and the
maximum number of persons expected to be accommodated therein at any
one (1) time.
Section 605.1630. Inspections — Issuance — Posting. [R.O. 2009
§12-302; Code 1969 §20-38]
Upon receipt of an application for a private hospital, etc., license, the City
Clerk/Administrator shall refer the same to the Public Safety Committee
who shall cause an inspection of the premises to be made from the
standpoints of health, sanitation and safety. The Public Safety Committee
shall make a report of its inspection which, together with the application,
shall be referred to the Board of Aldermen. Such report shall contain
a recommendation as to the maximum number of persons which the
applicant, as licensee, may be permitted to accommodate upon the premises
at any one time. If the Board of Aldermen is satisfied that the establishment
contemplated by the applicant is in compliance with the applicable laws and
ordinances, it shall direct the issuance of the license. Such direction shall
state the maximum number of persons which the licensee may be permitted
to accommodate upon the premises at any one time, such maximum to be
clearly stated upon such license. Such license, or a copy thereof, shall be
promptly displayed by the licensee at or near each entrance to the premises.
Section 605.1730. Fee. [R.O. 2009 §12-303; Code 1969 §20-37]
The annual fee for a private hospital, etc., license shall be the sum of three
dollars ($3.00) multiplied by the maximum number of persons permitted to
be accommodated upon the premises at any one time, but not, however, less
than the sum of sixty dollars ($60.00).
Section 605.1740. Renewal — Annual Inspection. [R.O. 2009
§12-304; Code 1969 §20-39]
Every licensee under this Division shall in the month of January of each
year make application for renewal of such license, at which time inspections
shall be made as upon original application and the annual license fee paid.
Section
605.1620
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.1740
AO:981
The Mayor may at any time require the inspection of any private hospital,
nursing or convalescent home by the Public Safety Committee or by the
Chief of the Fire Department and may order any alterations or changes
made or the installation of any safety appliance that may be necessary to
render the premises sanitary, safe or suitable for the purposes for which
they are used. In the event of failure to comply with any such requirements
within a period of thirty (30) days, then such license may be revoked.
Section 605.1750. Increase in Maximum Accommodations. [R.O.
2009 §12-305; Code 1969 §20-40]
The licensee, may at any time, make written application to the Board of
Aldermen for an increase in the maximum accommodation of his/her private
hospital, etc., permitted under the license then in force. Such application
shall be accompanied by an inspection fee of ten dollars ($10.00). Upon
such application, an inspection shall be made as upon an original
application. Upon approval by the Board of Aldermen of any increase in the
permitted maximum accommodation, the licensee shall pay an additional
license fee for the balance of the calendar year of three dollars ($3.00) per
person, upon such addition to the permitted maximum accommodation, and
an amended license shall be issued to the licensee.
Section 605.1760. through Section 605.1790. (Reserved)
Section
605.1740
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.1760
AO:982
ARTICLE XII
Secondhand Car Dealers And Junk Dealers
DIVISION 1
Generally
Section 605.1800. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
JUNK — Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash,
rubber debris, waste, or junked, dismantled, or wrecked automobiles, or
parts thereof, iron, steel, and other old or scrap ferrous or non-ferrous
material.
SECONDHAND AUTOMOBILE DEALER — Any establishment, area, or
place of business maintained, used, or operated for storing, keeping,
buying, or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or dismantled motor vehicles
or parts thereof.
Section 605.1810. through Section 605.1830. (Reserved)
Section
605.1800
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.1810
AO:983

DIVISION 2
License
Section 605.1840. Secondhand Dealer's License Required. [R.O.
2009 §12-323; Code 1969 §8-7]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a business for the buying
and selling of used automobiles or other vehicles, machinery, equipment
or apparatus or, of maintaining any place for storage in quantities of used
automobiles or other vehicles, machinery, equipment or apparatus within
this City, without first acquiring a license from the City to do so and paying
the license fee as provided in this Division.
Section 605.1850. Junk Dealer's License Required. [R.O. 2009
§12-324; Code 1969 §8-8]
It shall be unlawful to operate, within this City, the business of junk dealer
or, the business of buying and selling junk or, the business of maintaining
yards or storage places for the purpose of storing and keeping within this
City any junk, without first obtaining a license to do so from the City and
paying a license fee as provided in this Division.
Section 605.1860. License Application and Fee — Term — Proration
of Fee. [R.O. 2009 §12-325; Code 1969 §8-9]
Any person desiring to engage in the business of buying and selling junk or,
operating the business of a junk dealer or, the business of storing junk or,
the business of used car dealer or, the storage of used cars, shall first apply
to the City Clerk/Administrator for a license to do so and such application
shall be in writing. The City Clerk/Administrator shall submit the same
to the Board of Aldermen and, upon the approval of such Board and the
payment of the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) by the applicant,
which sum is hereby fixed and imposed as a license fee for such businesses,
the City Clerk/Administrator shall issue the license which shall also describe
the business authorized thereunder. The license so issued shall extend to
and terminate on June thirtieth (30th) following the date of its issue. If
such application for license is made after January first (1st) and before June
thirtieth (30th) of any year, then the applicant of such license may pay onehalf
(½) of the annual fee, the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00), and such license
shall expire on June thirtieth (30th) following, provided that any person may
engage in the business of used car dealer or of junk dealer, or both, at
the same time and place under one (1) license issued in pursuance to the
provisions of this Article.
Section 605.1870. Safety and Sanitary Conditions to Be Maintained
— Revocation of License. [R.O. 2009 §12-326; Code 1969 §8-10]
Any person who shall seek and procure a license under the provisions
of this Article shall be deemed to have contracted and agreed with the
City to comply with the provisions of this Article and that the place of
Section
605.1840
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.1870
AO:985
business conducted under any such license and any junk kept at such place
of business, shall be handled in such manner as to prevent, as far as is
reasonable, breeding places for rodents, mosquitoes, flies and bugs and to
prevent the development and continuance of stagnant pools of water or
receptacles containing water and in general to prevent the existence of
any condition that may constitute a hazard to public health and safety. If
the person to whom any such license has been issued fails to comply with
any of the provisions of this Article, the Board of Aldermen shall have the
right to forfeit and revoke such license and in case of any such forfeiture or
revocation, fees paid for the issuance of such license shall not be returnable
to the former licensee.
Section 605.1880. Inspections. [R.O. 2009 §12-327; Code 1969
§8-11]
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and all regular and special
Police Officers of this City to make monthly inspections within the City
to determine whether any person is carrying on or conducting any of the
businesses mentioned in this Article and whether any of the provisions of
this Article are being violated and to report and complain to the Municipal
Judge when any such violations are found to exist.
Section 605.1890. through Section 605.1900. (Reserved)
Section
605.1870
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.1890
AO:986
ARTICLE XIII
Mobile Food Vendors142
Section 605.1910. Purpose. [Ord. No. 4471 §1, 11-4-2013; Ord. No.
4603 §1, 1-5-2015]
The purpose of this Article is to promote the health, safety and welfare
by permitting mobile food vendors and providing regulations for their
operation on public and private property in the City of Brentwood.
Section 605.1920. Definitions. [Ord. No. 4471 §1, 11-4-2013; Ord.
No. 4603 §1, 1-5-2015]
A. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ICE CREAM TRUCK VENDOR — Mobile food vendors typically known
as "ice cream truck" vendors whose sales are limited to that of ice
cream, frozen desserts, sherbets and ices. Ice cream truck vendors
shall comply with all regulations of this Article except that they may
operate in all zoning districts in the City of Brentwood, Missouri ("A"
Single-Family, "B" Single-Family, "AR" Attached Single-Family, "MR"
Multifamily Residential, "RSC" Retail Service Commercial, "GC"
General Commercial, "PD" Planned Development, "UD" Urban
Development and "LID" Light Industrial).
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR — Any person, whether owner, agent,
consignee, or employee who, for any period of time, operates a mobile
truck, trailer, or cart from which food is prepared and/or sold for
immediate consumption that is not permanently fixed to a single
location. Mobile food vendors shall be permitted to operate, subject to
the regulations contained within this Article within City-owned parks.
With the exception of City-owned parks, mobile food vendors are
prohibited in the "A" Single-Family, "B" Single-Family, "AR" Attached
Residential and "MR" Multifamily Residential Districts. This definition
is not intended to include, nor shall it be interpreted to include, mobile
food vendors typically known as "ice cream trucks" whose sales are
limited to that of ice cream, frozen desserts, sherbets and ices.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR OPERATION — Any time a mobile food vendor
truck, trailer, or cart is parked and offering, or preparing to offer, food
for sale and immediate consumption.
142. Editor's Note — Ord. No. 4471 §1, Adopted 11-4-2013, Deleted Art. XIII, §§605.1910 To
605.2080 Of Ch. 605, Street Vendors And Enacted The New Provisions Set Out Herein.
Former Art. XIII Derived From R.O. §§12-341 — 12-350, 12-361 — 12-363; Code 1969
§§36-1 — 36-7, 36-10 — 36-13; Ord. No. 3656 §1, 6-21-1999. Editor's Note — Section 1 Of
Ord. No. 4471, Enacted On November 4, 2013, Sets Out That These Regulations Are Only
In Effect For A Twelve (12) Month Period, Thus No Longer Being In Effect As Of November
4, 2014. The City Is Currently Reviewing These Regulations And Will Either Repeal Or
Amend This Article Based Upon That Review.
Section
605.1910
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.1930
AO:987
Section 605.1930. Mobile Food Vendor Permits. [Ord. No. 4471 §1,
11-4-2013; Ord. No. 4603 §1, 1-5-2015]
A. The Director of Planning and Development may permit a mobile food
vendor based on the following criteria:
1. Any permit is issued for special events in City-owned park locations
and shall specify the exact locations permitted.
2. No mobile food vendor shall operate, conduct business, or have
merchandise, equipment, or other materials visibly present on the
property before 9:00 A.M. and after 10:00 P.M.
3. No merchandise, equipment, or materials shall be located on a
public sidewalk, street, right-of-way, or any other public property.
4. The City-owned park area dedicated to the temporary vendor shall
not occupy more than two parking spaces or two hundred (200)
square feet; provided that no mobile food vendor shall occupy any
designated parking spaces for the disabled.
5. Freestanding signs shall not be permitted. Signs shall be confined
to those already attached, affixed, or applied to the truck, trailer, or
cart used by the mobile food vendor. Under no circumstances shall
any signs be permitted which violate any portion of the Revised
Code of Ordinances of Brentwood.
6. Canopies, awnings, or umbrellas attached to the MFV's truck,
trailer, or cart shall be permitted. However, tables, chairs or other
customer seating provided by the MFV shall not be permitted.
7. Mobile food vendors shall obtain, in writing, the express permission
of the property owner.
8. The area in and around the MFV's truck, trailer, or cart shall be
kept clean and orderly. A receptacle for trash shall be provided. The
MFV shall be responsible to clean up all trash, litter and spills
within a minimum twenty-foot radius of the MFV's truck, trailer, or
cart.
9. Mobile food vendors shall not sell alcohol.
10. Mobile food vendor merchandise, equipment and other materials
shall be arranged in such a manner that vehicular and pedestrian
traffic is not impeded.
11. No permanent improvements shall be constructed or installed on
the site to accommodate the mobile food vendor.
12. The mobile food vendor shall comply with all applicable local,
County, City, and State ordinances and other laws and regulations,
and shall not cause any nuisance or allow the presence of any
deleterious condition.
Section
605.1930
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.1930
AO:988
Section 605.1940. through Section 605.2100. (Reserved)
13. The mobile food vendor shall provide motorized food truck vehicle
insurance information [one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) liability
insurance shall be provided]. The certificate of insurance shall
name the City of Brentwood as an additional insured and indemnify
and hold harmless the City of Brentwood.
14. A mobile food vendor permit fee shall be twenty-five dollars
($25.00). No permit shall be issued for a period longer than thirty
(30) days.
15. The City may, from time to time, advertise for, solicit, or otherwise
make arrangements with one or more food truck operators for City
or City-owned business-sponsored food truck events to be held in
City-owned parks.
16. Any application for special events on private property may be
allowed only with approval by the City Administrator on a case-bycase
basis.
17. Permits are limited to no more than two (2) per year per private
property.
Section
605.1930
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.1940
AO:989

ARTICLE XIV
Taxicabs
DIVISION 1
Generally
Section 605.2110. Taxicab Defined. [R.O. 2009 §12-376; Code 1969
§39-1]
The term "taxicab", as used in this Article, shall apply to every motor vehicle
having a seating capacity of one (1) or more persons, which is offered for or
engaged in conveying passengers with or without baggage, for hire, within
the City and when the charge for carrying is made on the basis of the time
consumed or the distance traveled from one designated place to another
designated place.
Section 605.2120. Applicability of State and City Motor Vehicle and
Operator Licensing Requirements. [R.O. 2009 §12-377; Code 1969
§39-8]
The license tax required under this Article shall be a tax on the business
of conveying passengers over and upon the public streets and places in the
City and nothing contained in this Article shall be construed to exempt the
owner from paying to the City the tax imposed as a registration or license
by the City in licensing motor vehicles or automobiles to be operated on its
streets, nor shall anything in this Article be construed to exempt the owner
or driver of a motor vehicle from the qualifications which the City or the
State may require of persons who operate motor vehicles or automobiles
upon the public streets or places.
Section 605.2130. Unsafe Taxicabs. [R.O. 2009 §12-378; Code 1969
§39-9]
If upon inspection any mechanical defects are found affecting the safe
operation and use of such taxicab, it shall be forthwith taken out of service
and remain out of use until such defects have been repaired or otherwise
provided for and approved by the Chairman of the Public Safety Committee.
Section 605.2140. Physical Condition of Operator — Vehicles to Be
Clean and in Good Working Order. [R.O. 2009 §12-379; Code 1969
§39-11]
No person shall drive or operate such vehicle who has any infirmity of body
or mind which might render him/her unfit for the operation thereof, nor
shall any such vehicle be driven or operated by any person who is addicted
to the use of intoxicating liquors. All such vehicles shall be kept in a clean
and sanitary condition and the motor, brakes and other mechanism thereof
shall be kept in good working order.
Section
605.2110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.2150
AO:991
Section 605.2150. Meters. [R.O. 2009 §12-380; Code 1969 §39-10]
All taxicabs shall be equipped with an automatic meter for the purpose of
measuring the fare to be charged and the face of such meter shall at all
times be in plain view of the passenger.
Section 605.2160. Insurance. [R.O. 2009 §12-381; Code 1969
§39-12]
Every applicant for a license to operate a taxicab, whether the same is
to be operated by the owner or some other person, in addition to the
other requirements of this Article, shall maintain and file with the Board
of Aldermen for each taxicab to be operated a policy of liability insurance.
Such policy of liability insurance shall be in the sum of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any one (1) person and in the sum
of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any two (2) or more
persons who may be injured in one (1) accident at any time by reason of
the carelessness or negligence of the driver or operator of such taxicab
and in the sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for damage
to property which may be sustained by reason of the carelessness or
negligence of the driver or operator of such taxicab. Such insurance shall
be carried in a firm which has been duly licensed or permitted to do
an insurance business in the State and shall be kept and maintained
continually in force and effect so long as such applicant shall be licensed
to operate such taxicab on the streets of the City. There shall be attached
to all liability insurance policies issued pursuant to the requirements of this
Section, the following endorsement:
"In consideration of the premium stated in the policy to which this
endorsement is attached, the company hereby waives a description of the
motor vehicles to be insured hereunder and agrees to pay any final
judgment for personal injury, including death, resulting therefrom or,
damage to property, caused by any and all motor vehicles operated by the
assured pursuant to the taxicab license issued by the City of Brentwood,
within the limits set forth in the schedule shown hereon and further agrees
that upon its failure to pay any such final judgment, the judgment creditor
may maintain an action in any court or competent jurisdiction to compel
such payment. Nothing contained in the policy or any endorsement thereon,
nor the violation of any of the provisions thereof by the assured, shall
relieve the company from liability hereunder or from the payment of such
judgment. The policy to which this endorsement is attached shall not expire,
nor shall cancellation take effect until after ten (10) days' notice in writing
by the company shall have been given to the Board of Aldermen of the
City of Brentwood at its office in the City Hall, said ten (10) days' notice
to commence to run from the date notice is actually received at the office
of the Board. Attached to and forming a part of policy number_, issued by
company to".
Section 605.2170. through Section 605.2190. (Reserved)
Section
605.2150
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.2170
AO:992
DIVISION 2
Permit
Section 605.2200. Required Prior to Issuance of License. [R.O.
2009 §12-391; Code 1969 §39-5]
No taxicab license shall be issued until a permit shall have been obtained
from the Board of Aldermen permitting the operation of such taxicabs as
provided in this Division.
Section 605.2210. Application. [R.O. 2009 §12-392; Code 1969
§39-6]
Section 605.2220. Revocation. [R.O. 2009 §12-393; Code 1969
§39-7]
Permits issued by the Board of Aldermen may be revoked by the Board of
Aldermen at any time for good cause, but before revoking any such permit,
the licensee shall be given ten (10) days' previous notice specifying the
grounds or causes for which such permit is proposed to be revoked and the
date and time when such licensee may show cause why such permit should
not be revoked.
Section 605.2230. through Section 605.2250. (Reserved)
A. Before granting a permit, the Board of Aldermen shall require the
applicant to file a written application verified by the oath of the owner
of such taxicabs and shall state the following:
1. The owner desires a permit from the City to operate a taxicab for
the conveyance of passengers with or without baggage for hire
over and upon the public streets and places of the City;
2. The name and address of the owner and, if a corporation, in
addition to its name and address, those of the officers thereof;
3. The State license number of the taxicab and the amount and holder
of any mortgage on the taxicab;
4. The rates to be charged and the name and address of the operator
of the taxicab;
5. The points where such taxicabs will be stationed for calls.
Section
605.2200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.2230
AO:993

DIVISION 3
License
Section 605.2260. Required. [R.O. 2009 §12-401; Code 1969 §39-2]
No taxicab shall be offered for and engaged in carrying passengers with or
without baggage for hire over or upon the public streets or places in the
City until a license for each taxicab so operated shall have been obtained as
provided in this Division.
Section 605.2270. Tax — Issuance — Non-Transferable — Term.
[R.O. 2009 §12-402; Code 1969 §39-3]
Upon permission being granted by the Board of Aldermen for the operation
of taxicabs, the applicant shall present the permit to the City Clerk/
Administrator and upon the payment to the City Clerk/Administrator of
a license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each taxicab proposed to be
operated, as specified in the permit, the City Clerk/Administrator shall issue
to the applicant a license therefor, which license shall be non-transferable
and non-assignable and shall expire on December thirty-first (31st) next
following its date, provided that if such license is granted after July first
(1st) in any year, a license tax of one-half (½) the above amount may be
charged for the remaining portion of such calendar year.
Section 605.2280. Posting. [R.O. 2009 §12-403; Code 1969 §39-4]
The taxicab license issued by the City Clerk/Administrator shall be posted
and kept posted at all times in a prominent place in the taxicab for which it
is issued.
Section 605.2290. through Section 605.2300. (Reserved)
Section
605.2260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.2290
AO:995

ARTICLE XV
Vending Machines
Section 605.2310. Stickers. [R.O. 2009 §12-416; Code 1969
§20-24(a)]
Upon payment of the annual license fee as provided in this Chapter, the
City Clerk/Administrator shall issue a vending license sticker emblem
designating the year for which the license is issued and a number identical
with the number of such license. It shall be the duty of the licensee to
affix such license sticker to the device for which the same was issued and
such license shall not be used for any other device. It shall be unlawful
for any person to operate or expose for operation any such device without
first obtaining and displaying in a prominent place on such device, a license
emblem for the current year thereon.
Section 605.2320. Seizure, Impoundment and Disposition. [R.O.
2009 §12-417; Code 1969 §20-24(b), (e)]
A. The City Clerk/Administrator is hereby authorized to seize and impound
any coin-operated vending and dispensing machines found in the City
which are being operated or exposed for operation in violation of the
provisions of this Article. The City Clerk/Administrator is required to
leave a receipt that describes any and all machines or devices seized
and that receipt shall bear the signature of the person seizing the
machine or device along with the address and telephone number of the
City Clerk/Administrator's office. Such vending machines so seized may
be held by the City Clerk/Administrator for a period of thirty (30) days
and if not claimed by the owner or person in whose possession or
custody such machine or device was found within that time, the same
shall be sold thereafter at a public auction, notice of such sale to be
published in an official legal publication of the County at least ten (10)
days prior to the date of sale and from the proceeds of such sale the City
Clerk/Administrator shall collect the license fee due thereon plus the
sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) as a civil penalty, together with the
cost of seizing and storing such machines or devices. The balance from
the sale shall be paid over to the City Treasurer to be kept in a special
account and to be paid over to the owner or person in whose possession
or custody such machine or device was found if the person makes a
claim within twelve (12) months from the date the machine was seized
by the City Clerk/Administrator. All money held over twelve (12) months
is to be paid into the General Revenue Fund of the City.
B. Such seizure and sale shall not be deemed to relieve any person from
any other duty or penalty for violation of this Article.
C. Any person violating the provisions of this Article upon the conviction
thereof, shall be guilty of an offense.
Section
605.2310
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.2330
AO:997
Section 605.2330. Redemption. [R.O. 2009 §12-418; Code 1969
§20-24(d)]
No seized coin-operated service device shall be released until the owner
or the person in whose possession or custody such machine or device was
found has paid to the City Clerk/Administrator the license fee due and civil
penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), together with costs of seizing and
storing such machines.
Section 605.2340. through Section 605.2370. (Reserved)
Section
605.2330
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
605.2340
AO:998
Chapter 610
AMUSEMENTS
Cross References — As to dance halls and dancing schools, §§605.610 et
seq.
Section
605.2340
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.2340
AO:999

ARTICLE I
In General
Section 610.010. through Section 610.050. (Reserved)
Section
610.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
610.010
AO:1001

ARTICLE II
Coin-Operated Video Games
Section 610.060. Definition. [R.O. 2009 §4-21; Code 1969 §5-2A;
Ord. No. 2820 §1, 7-21-1986]
The term "coin-operated video games", as used in this Chapter, means
any coin-operated electronic video game and/or pinball game used for the
purposes of providing amusement.
Section 610.070. Registration and Report. [R.O. 2009 §4-22; Code
1969 §5-2A]
A. No coin-operated video game shall be brought into, installed, set up or,
moved or, maintained in the City until the owners thereof have
registered and received a stamp or sticker from the City Clerk/
Administrator and affixed the latter to the machine, table or device.
B. Every business establishment, individual proprietor or other person
having any machine on their premises shall make a report to the City
Clerk/Administrator showing:
1. The type of machine;
2. The coin used to operate such machine and whether it is capable of
taking more than one (1) coin per game;
3. The name and address of the person owning such machine and
keeping it supplied;
4. If the applicant be a partnership, the names and addresses of all
active and silent partners;
5. Whether the applicant has received or is receiving financial
assistance in any way whether by loan, special credit terms,
subsidation or otherwise from any person who either sold or
distributed or manufactured the coin-operated video games.
C. It shall be the duty of every person owning or operating any machine to
register with the Chief of Police. The registration shall show the names
and addresses of all persons interested in the business, the names of
the employees and other persons who service the machines in the City
and if the owner and operator is a corporation, the name of its
registered agent in the State, the address of its registered office in the
State and whether it is a domestic or foreign corporation, the address of
its principal office for the conduct of business in the State, the names
and addresses of its President, Vice President, Secretary and Treasurer
and all directors, the names and addresses of its five (5) largest
stockholders and the percentage of the total stock owned by each of
them, the name and address of the person that will have custody of the
books and records of the applicant relating to the receipts to be derived
from any of the devices for which a registration has been applied for
Section
610.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
610.070
AO:1003
Section 610.080. Stamps. [R.O. 2009 §4-23; Code 1969 §5-2A]
and if no officer is a resident of the State, the name and address of
the chief management in the State and all other information required
by the Chief of Police which will establish whether or not persons of
a disreputable police record are known to be associated with persons
who have unfavorable police records are interested in any manner in
the machines.
A. If a coin-operated video game is owned, operated and maintained by a
benevolent, charitable or other non-profit organization, the City Clerk/
Administrator shall issue a stamp or sticker and put a letter or symbol
after the number on the stamp or sticker to indicate that it is owned by
a benevolent, charitable or other non-profit organization. In order for
video games to qualify as being owned, operated and maintained by a
benevolent, charitable or other non-profit organization, the person
desiring to locate such machine in the City shall produce a letter from a
recognized benevolent, charitable or other non-profit organization to be
filed with the City Clerk/Administrator stating such organization has an
interest in the receipts derived from such machine and that it will
promptly notify the City if and when its interest in such receipts is
terminated. The letter shall also state the number of machines which it
has located or desires to locate in the City on which it will receive all or
a share of the receipts.
B. If the report from the Chief of Police does not show that the location of
the machine in the City is causing hoodlums and persons having
disreputable police records, or known as associates of persons with
such records, to congregate in the City and cause any condition having
an adverse effect upon the City and its inhabitants, the City Clerk/
Administrator shall issue a stamp or sticker to the applicant, which
shall be affixed to the machine for which it is issued and one (1) other.
The City Clerk/Administrator shall number, date and initial all such
stamps or stickers and keep a record of them in a separate book to be
provided for that purpose.
C. If the Chief of Police has reason to believe the location of any machine
in the City will cause undesirable persons as aforesaid to congregate in
the City and have an adverse effect upon the City and its inhabitants,
he/she shall promptly refer the matter to the Board of Aldermen which
shall notify the applicant for the stamp or sticker to appear before the
Board for examination.
D. In the case of machines concerned where there is any doubt as to the
effect upon the City and its inhabitants for any of the reasons above set
forth, the Board of Aldermen may refuse to issue the stamp or sticker or
direct that the stamp or sticker be issued upon such terms and
conditions as it may appear necessary for the welfare of the City and its
inhabitants, and violation of such terms and conditions shall be cause
for revocation of the stamp or sticker.
Section
610.070
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
610.080
AO:1004
Section 610.090. Unregistered Machines — Maximum Number.
[R.O. 2009 §4-24; Code 1969 §5-2A]
It shall be unlawful for any person to have on his/her premises any
unregistered coin-operated video game required to be registered under the
provisions of this Article. No more than three (3) coin-operated video games
shall be in any one (1) establishment.
Section 610.100. Location of Premises. [R.O. 2009 §4-25; Code 1969
§5-2A]
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or exhibit any coin-operated
amusement device on any premises situated within three hundred (300) feet
of the grounds of any school, except music- vending machines.
Section 610.110. Display of Owner's Name. [R.O. 2009 §4-26; Code
1969 §5-2A]
Section 610.120. Hours of Operation. [R.O. 2009 §4-27; Code 1969
§5-2A]
Coin-operated amusement devices shall not be operated except between
10:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. Monday through Thursday, 10:00 A.M. to 10:00
P.M. Friday and Saturday (except those located in cocktail lounges and
taverns) and 1:00 P.M. to 9:00 P.M. Sunday.
E. All stamps or stickers shall expire on the following December thirty-first
(31st) and new stamps or stickers shall be applied for as provided in
this Article.
F. The cost of registration shall be the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) per
machine or device, which shall be payable annually.
G. Stamps or stickers may be renewed from year to year upon the owner of
machines complying with the requirement that he/she register with the
Chief of Police and upon the Chief giving a favorable report.
A. The owner of a coin-operated video game in the City shall display in a
prominent place on the machine a sticker or a securely fastened metal
or plastic plate showing in clearly legible form the name and address of
the owner of the machine. If the ownership changes, the new owner
shall comply with this Section within ten (10) days from the date of his/
her acquisition.
B. Any coin-operated video game not so identified by a sticker or a plate
shall be confiscated by the Police and it shall be unlawful for any
purpose to keep or maintain or permit the use of such machine, unless
it bears such sticker or plate.
Section
610.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
610.130
AO:1005
Section 610.130. Inspections. [R.O. 2009 §4-28; Code 1969 §5-2A]
All coin-operated amusement devices and all premises on which such
devices and machines are maintained or exhibited shall be open to
inspection by the Chief of Police.
Section 610.140. Confiscation. [R.O. 2009 §4-29; Code 1969 §5-2A]
Section 610.150. Issuance of Temporary Permit to Any Qualified
Organization. [R.O. 2009 §4-31; Ord. No. 3278 §1, 5-3-1993]
A. If the Chief of Police shall have reason to believe that any exhibitor of a
coin-operated amusement device is guilty of a violation or the failure to
comply with the provisions of the ordinances of the City relating to the
registering or the exhibiting of such machines and devices, the Chief
shall give notice to the exhibitor of such violations. If the exhibitor does
not, within five (5) days of such notice, cease such violations, the Chief
shall seize and impound all of the coin-operated amusement devices for
which the exhibitor has been granted a registration by the City or which
are situated within the City and required to be registered even if not
registered and shall hold the same pending the trial of such exhibitor
for such violation. If the exhibitor is found guilty of the violation as
charged by the Chief, the exhibitor shall pay to the Treasurer of the
City, in addition to any fine levied by the court, a service fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) plus the actual cost of impoundment, storage
and disposal for each machine or device impounded by the Chief and
obtain a receipt therefor and, upon exhibiting the receipt to the Chief,
shall be entitled to regain possession of each machine or device so
impounded.
B. If, after twenty (20) days from the notice given by the Chief of Police to
the owner or exhibitor of the machines or devices, the machines or
devices not redeemed by the exhibitor or owners shall be sold or
demolished, as may be authorized by the Mayor. All money salvaged
from the machine and realized for its sale and the sale of any
merchandise therein shall be paid to the City Treasurer for general
municipal purposes.
A. Authority To Issue Temporary Permit. Upon written application to the
City Clerk/Administrator by a qualified organization (as hereinafter
defined) (hereinafter the "applicant"), the City Clerk/Administrator may
grant to such applicant a temporary permit to bring, install upon, own,
operate and/or maintain on its property (or property leased to it) up to
twenty-five (25) coin-operated video games for a period not to exceed
three (3) consecutive days (plus such additional period of time as is
reasonably necessary for installation and removal of such coin-operated
video games) solely for use in connection with any carnival, picnic or
festival being held on such property.
B. Application. The application to the City Clerk/Administrator for a
temporary permit pursuant to the provisions of this Section 610.150
Section
610.130
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
610.150
AO:1006
shall set forth such information as the City Clerk/Administrator
reasonably requests including, without limitation, the name and
address of the applicant, the proposed date or dates on which the
carnival, picnic or festival is to be held, the proposed number of coinoperated
video games to be brought on the property and the proposed
time of operation. Each application shall pay to the City an application
fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
C. Qualified Organization.
1. Any public or private elementary or secondary school, and
2. Any committee duly appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the
Board of Aldermen including, without limitation, the Maddenfest
committee.
D. Content Of Permit. Any temporary permit granted hereunder shall set
forth the name of the applicant, the period of time during which such
permit is valid, its expiration date and the number of coin-operated
video games for which such permit is granted.
E. Effect Of Issuance Of Permit. Any applicant to whom a temporary
permit is granted under this Section 610.150 shall be exempt from
compliance with the following provisions, all of which are waived solely
for the period during which such permit is valid:
1. The registration and reporting requirements set forth in Section
610.070,
2. The stamp and/or sticker requirement set forth in Section 610.080;
3. The annual registration cost for each coin-operated video game as
set forth in Section 610.080(F);
4. The limitation on the number of coin-operated video games which
may be brought on an applicant's property as set forth in Section
610.090;
5. The restriction on the location of coin-operated video games as set
forth in Section 610.100; and
6. The display requirements set forth in Section 610.110.
Except as otherwise provided in this Section 610.150, the
applicant to whom a temporary permit is granted shall comply
with all provisions of Chapter 610, Article II.
F. Appeal Procedure. In the event the City Clerk/Administrator denies any
request for a temporary permit pursuant to the provisions of this
Section 610.150, the applicant shall have the right to appeal said denial
to the Board of Aldermen, provided such appeal is in writing,
accompanied by a concise statement of the reasons why such applicant
is entitled to such permit and is delivered to the City not later than
Section
610.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
610.150
AO:1007
thirty (30) days from the date on which the City Clerk/Administrator's
decision is rendered. The Board of Aldermen shall have the right to
sustain or overrule the City Clerk/Administrator's decision and the
decision of the Board of Aldermen shall be final.
Section
610.150
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
610.150
AO:1008
Chapter 615
VIDEO SERVICE
Section 615.010. Ratification of Existing Franchises. [Ord. No. 4089
§1, 10-15-2007]
Section 615.020. Video Service Regulations. [Ord. No. 4089 §2,
10-15-2007]
A. To the extent permitted by the 2007 Video Services Providers Act, the
City of Brentwood of the State of Missouri hereby ratifies all existing
agreements, franchises, and ordinances regulating cable television
operators and other video service providers, including the imposition of
a franchise fee of five percent (5%) imposed on the gross revenues of all
such providers, and further declares that such agreements, franchises,
and ordinances shall continue in full force and effect until expiration as
provided therein, or until pre-empted by the issuance of video service
authorizations by the Missouri Public Service Commission or otherwise
by law, but only to the extent of said pre-emption.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to provide video services, as defined
in Section 615.020 hereof, within the City without either an agreement,
franchise, or ordinance approved by the City or a video service
authorization issued by the Missouri Public Service Commission.
A. Definitions. The following terms shall have the following meanings
unless otherwise defined by context:
FRANCHISE AREA — The total geographic area of the City authorized
to be served by an incumbent cable television operator or incumbent
local exchange carrier, or affiliate thereof.
GROSS REVENUES — The total amounts billed to subscribers or
received from advertisers for the provision of video services within the
City, including:
1. Recurring charges for video service;
Event-based charges for video service, including, but not limited to,
pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges;
2.
3. Rental of set top boxes and other video service equipment;
Service charges related to the provision of video service, including,
but not limited to, activation, installation, repair, and maintenance
charges;
4.
Administrative charges related to the provision of video service,
including, but not limited to, service order and service termination
charges; and
5.
Section
610.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
615.020
AO:1009
HOUSEHOLD — An apartment, a house, a mobile home, or any other
structure or part of a structure intended for residential occupancy as
separate living quarters.
LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with an average annual
household income of less than thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000.00)
as determined by the most recent decennial census.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, organization,
corporation, trust, or government entity.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person who receives video services in the
franchise area.
VIDEO SERVICE — The provision of video programming provided
through wireline facilities, without regard to delivery technology,
including Internet protocol technology, whether provided as part of
a tier, on demand, or a per-channel basis, including cable service as
defined by 47 U.S.C. Section 522(6), but excluding video programming
provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C.
Section 332(d), or any video programming provided solely as part of
and via a service that enables users to access content, information,
electronic mail, or other services offered over the public Internet.
A pro rata portion of all revenue derived, less refunds, rebates,
or discounts, by a video service provider for advertising over the
video service network to subscribers, where the numerator is the
number of subscribers within the City and the denominator is the
total number of subscribers reached by such advertising; but gross
revenues do not include:
Discounts, refunds, and other price adjustments that reduce
the amount of compensation received by a video service
provider;
a.
b. Uncollectibles;
c. Late payment fees;
Amounts billed to subscribers to recover taxes, fees, or
surcharges imposed on subscribers or video service providers
in connection with the provision of video services, including
the video service provider fee authorized herein;
d.
e. Fees or other contributions for PEG or I-Net support; or
6.
Charges for services other than video service that are aggregated
or bundled with amounts billed to subscribers, provided the video
service provider can reasonably identify such charges on books
and records kept in the regular course of business or by other
reasonable means. Except with respect to the exclusion of the
video service provider fee, gross revenues shall be computed in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
7.
Section
615.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
615.020
AO:1010
VIDEO SERVICE AUTHORIZATION — The right of a video service
provider or an incumbent cable operator, that secures permission from
the Missouri Public Service Commission pursuant to Sections 67.2675
to 67.2714, RSMo., to offer video service to subscribers.
VIDEO SERVICE NETWORK — Wireline facilities, or any component
thereof, that deliver video service, without regard to delivery
technology, including Internet protocol technology or any successor
technology. The term "video service network" shall include cable
television systems.
VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE — The fee imposed under Subsection
(C) hereof.
VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER or PROVIDER — Any person authorized to
distribute video service through a video service network pursuant to a
video service authorization.
B. General Regulations.
1. A video service provider shall provide written notice to the City at
least ten (10) days before commencing video service within the
City. Such notice shall also include:
a. The name, address and legal status of the provider;
b. The name, title, address, telephone number, e-mail address,
and fax number of individual(s) authorized to serve as the point
of contact between the City and the provider so as to make
contact possible at any time (i.e., twenty-four (24) hours per
day, seven (7) days per week); and
c. A copy of the provider's video service authorization issued by
the Missouri Public Service Commission.
2. A video service provider shall also notify the City, in writing, within
thirty (30) days of:
a. Any changes in the information set forth in or accompanying its
notice of commencement of video service; or
b. Any transfer of ownership or control of the provider's business
assets.
3. A video service provider shall not deny access to service to any
group of potential residential subscribers because of the race or
income of the residents in the area in which the group resides. A
video service provider shall be governed in this respect by Section
67.2707, RSMo. The City may file a complaint in a court of
competent jurisdiction alleging a germane violation of this
Subsection, which complaint shall be acted upon in accordance
with Section 67.2711, RSMo.
Section
615.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
615.020
AO:1011
4. A video service provider shall comply with all Federal
Communications Commission requirements involving the
distribution and notification of emergency messages over the
emergency alert system applicable to cable operators. Any video
service provider other than an incumbent cable operator serving a
majority of the residents within a political subdivision shall comply
with this Section by December 31, 2007.
5. A video service provider shall, at its sole cost and expense,
indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the City, its officials, boards,
board members, commissions, commissioners, agents, and
employees against any and all claims, suits, causes of action,
proceedings, and judgments ("claims") for damages or equitable
relief arising out of:
a. The construction, maintenance, repair or operation of its video
services network;
b. Copyright infringements; and
c. Failure to secure consents from the owners, authorized
distributors, or licenses or programs to be delivered by the
video service network. Such indemnification shall include, but
is not limited to, the City's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred
in defending against any such claim prior to the video service
provider assuming such defense. The City shall notify the
provider of a claim within seven (7) business days of its actual
knowledge of the existence of such claim. Once the provider
assumes the defense of the claim, the City may at its option
continue to participate in the defense at its own expense. This
indemnification obligation shall not apply to any claim related
to the provision of public, educational, or governmental
channels or programming or to emergency interrupt service
announcements.
C. Video Service Provider Fee.
1. Each video service provider shall pay to the City a video service
provider fee in the amount of five percent (5%) of the provider's
gross revenues on or before the last day of the month following the
end of each calendar quarter. The City may adjust the video service
provider fee as permitted in Section 67.2689, RSMo.
2. A video service provider may identify and pass through on a
proportionate basis the video service provider fee as a separate line
item on subscribers' bills.
3. The City, not more than once per calendar year and at its own cost,
may audit the gross revenues of any video service provider as
provided in Section 67.2691, RSMo. A video service provider shall
make available for inspection all records pertaining to gross
Section
615.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
615.020
AO:1012
revenues at the location where such records are kept in the normal
course of business.
D. Customer Service Regulations.
1. For purposes of this Section, the following terms shall mean:
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS — Those hours during which most
similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers.
In all cases the term normal business hours must include some
evening hours at least one (1) night per week or some weekend
hours.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS — Those service conditions
which are within the control of the video service provider. Those
conditions which are not within the control of the video service
provider include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil
disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and
severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are
ordinarily within the control of the video service provider include,
but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events,
rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and
maintenance or upgrade of the video system.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION — The loss of picture or sound on one
(1) or more video channels.
2. All video service providers shall adopt and abide by the following
minimum customer service requirements.
a. Video service providers shall maintain a local, toll-free or
collect call telephone access line which may be available to
subscribers twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a
week.
b. Video service providers shall have trained company
representatives available to respond to customer telephone
inquiries during normal business hours. After normal business
hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an
automated response system, including an answering machine.
Inquiries received after normal business hours shall be
responded to, by a trained company representative, on the next
business day.
c. Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by
a customer representative, including wait time, shall not
exceed thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made. If the
call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed
thirty (30) seconds. These standards shall be met no less than
ninety percent (90%) of the time under normal operating
conditions, measured on a quarterly basis.
Section
615.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
615.020
AO:1013
d. Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a
busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time.
e. Customer service centers and bill payment locations shall be
open at least during normal business hours and shall be
conveniently located.
f. Under normal operating conditions, each of the following
standards shall be met no less than ninety-five percent (95%)
of the time measured on a quarterly basis:
(1) Standard installations shall be performed within seven (7)
business days after an order has been placed. "Standard"
installation are those that are located up to one hundred
twenty-five (25) feet from the existing distribution system.
(2) Excluding conditions beyond the control of the operator,
the video service provider shall begin working on "service
interruptions" promptly and in no event later than twentyfour
(24) hours after the interruption becomes known. The
video service provider must begin actions to correct other
service problems the next business day after notification of
the service problem.
(3) The "appointment window" alternatives for installations,
service calls, and other installation activities will be either
a specific time or, at maximum, a four (4) hour time block
during normal business hours. The operator may schedule
service calls and other installation activities outside of
normal business hours for the express convenience of the
customer.
(4) A video service provider shall not cancel an appointment
with a customer after the close of business on the business
day prior to the scheduled appointment.
(5) If a video service provider's representative is running late
for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to
keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer must be
contacted. The appointment shall be rescheduled, as
necessary, at a time convenient for the customer.
g. Refund checks shall be issued promptly, but no later than
either:
(1) The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of
the request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier; or
(2) The return of the equipment supplied by the video service
provider if the service is terminated.
Section
615.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
615.020
AO:1014
h. Credits for service shall be issued no later than the customer's
next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is
warranted.
i. Video service providers shall not disclose the name or address
of a subscriber for commercial gain to be used in mailing lists
or for other commercial purposes not reasonably related to the
conduct of the businesses of the video service provider or its
affiliates, as required under 47 U.S.C. Section 551, including
all notice requirements. Video service providers shall provide
an address and telephone number for a local subscriber to use
without toll charge to prevent disclosure of the subscriber's
name or address.
3. As required by Section 67.2692, RSMo., this Subsection (D) shall
be enforced only as follows:
a. Each video service provider shall implement an informal
process for handling inquiries from the City and customers
concerning billing issues, service issues, and other complaints.
If an issue is not resolved through this informal process, the
City may request a confidential non-binding mediation with the
video service provider, with the costs of such mediation to be
shared equally between the City and the video service
provider.
b. In the case of repeated, willful, and material violations of the
provisions of this Section by a video service provider, the City
may file a complaint on behalf of a resident harmed by such
violations with Missouri's Administrative Hearing Commission
seeking an order revoking the video service provider's Public
Service Commission authorization. The City or a video service
provider may appeal any determination made by the
Administrative Hearing Commission under this Section to a
court of competent jurisdiction, which shall have the power to
review the decision de novo. The City shall not file a complaint
seeking revocation unless the video service provider has been
given sixty (60) days' notice to cure alleged breaches but has
failed to do so.
E. Public, Educational, And Government Access Programming.
1. Each video service provider shall designate the same number of
channels for non-commercial public, educational, or governmental
("PEG") use as required of the incumbent cable television
franchisee as of August 28, 2007.
2. Any PEG channel that is not substantially utilized by the City may
be reclaimed and programmed by the video service provider at the
provider's discretion. If the City finds and certifies that a channel
that has been reclaimed by a video service provider will be
substantially utilized, the video service provider shall restore the
Section
615.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
615.020
AO:1015
reclaimed channel within one hundred twenty (120) days. A PEG
channel shall be considered "substantially utilized" when forty (40)
hours per week are locally programmed on that channel for at
least three (3) consecutive months. In determining whether a PEG
channel is substantially utilized, a program may be counted not
more than four (4) times during a calendar week.
3. The operation of any PEG access channel and the production of any
programming that appears on each such channel shall be the sole
responsibility of the City or its duly appointed agent receiving the
benefit of such channel, and the video service provider shall bear
only the responsibility for the transmission of the programming on
each such channel to subscribers. The City must deliver and submit
to the video service provider all transmissions of PEG content and
programming in a manner or form that is capable of being accepted
and transmitted by such video service provider holder over its
network without further alteration or change in the content or
transmission signal. Such content and programming must be
compatible with the technology or protocol utilized by the video
service provider to deliver its video services. The video service
provider shall cooperate with the City to allow the City to achieve
such compatibility.
4. The City shall make the programming of any PEG access channel
available to all video service providers in a non-discriminatory
manner. Each video service provider shall be responsible for
providing the connectivity to the City's or its duly appointed agent's
PEG access channel distribution points existing as of August 27,
2007. Where technically necessary and feasible, video service
providers shall use reasonable efforts and shall negotiate in good
faith to interconnect their video service networks on mutually
acceptable rates, terms, and conditions for the purpose of
transmitting PEG programming. A video service provider shall have
no obligation to provide such interconnection to a new video
service provider at more than one (1) point per headend, regardless
of the number of political subdivisions served by such headend. The
video service provider requesting interconnection shall be
responsible for any costs associated with such interconnection,
including signal transmission from the origination point to the
point of interconnection. Interconnection may be accomplished by
direct cable microwave link, satellite, or other reasonable method
of connection acceptable to the person providing the interconnect.
5. The franchise obligation of an incumbent cable operator to provide
monetary and other support for PEG access facilities existing on
August 27, 2007 shall continue until the date of franchise
expiration (ignoring any termination by notice of issuance of a
video service authorization) or January 1, 2012, whichever is
earlier. Any other video service provider shall have the same
obligation to support PEG access facilities as the incumbent cable
Section
615.020
BRENTWOOD CITY CODE Section
615.020
AO:1016
Section 615.030. Violation and Penalty. [Ord. No. 4089 §5,
10-15-2007]
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Chapter shall be
punished as set out in Section 100.080 of the City Code, and each day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
operator, but if there is more than one (1) incumbent, then the
incumbent with the most subscribers as of August 27, 2007. Such
obligation shall be prorated, depending on the nature of the
obligation, as provided in Section 67.2703.8, RSMo. The City shall
notify each video service provider of the amount of such fee on an
annual basis, beginning one (1) year after issuance of the video
service authorization.
6. A video service provider may identify and pass through as a
separate line item on subscribers' bills the value of monetary and
other PEG access support on a proportionate basis.
F. Compliance With Other Regulations. All video service providers shall
comply with the right-of-way use and zoning regulations established in
Chapter 515 and Section 400.1940 of this Code and with all other
applicable laws and regulations.
Section
615.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
615.030
AO:1017