CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF BALLWIN, MISSOURI 
____________ 
Published in 1992 by Order of the Board of Aldermen 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
BALLWIN, MISSOURI 
____________ 
Tim Pogue 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ward 1 
Jimmy Terbrock 
Michael Finley 
Ward 2 
Mark Stallmann 
Kevin Roach 
Ward 3 
Frank Fleming 
Jim Leahy 
Ward 4 
Raymond Kerlagon 
Ross Bullington 
Aldermen 
____________ 
Eric Hanson 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Robert E. Jones 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Ballwin, Missouri. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1973 Code, as supplemented through May 14, 1990, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of aldermen. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1973 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 3-1.1, 3-1.2 and 3-1.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Robert Kuntz, City Administrator, Mr. Thomas Aiken, Assistant City Administrator/City Planner, and Mr. Bert Eide, former City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 10-02  1-11-10 Included 18 10-04  2- 8-10 Included 18 10-06  2- 8-10 Included 18 10-07  2- 8-10 Included 18 10-11  4-26-10 Included 18 10-13  5-10-10 Included 18 10-15  5-24-10 Included 18 10-16  5-24-10 Included 18 10-17  6-21-10 Included 18 10-32  9-27-10 Included 18 10-35 10-25-10 Included 18 10-38 11-22-10 Included 18 11-02  1-10-11 Included 18 11-04  1-24-11 Included 19 11-07  2-14-11 Included 19 11-09  2-28-11 Included 19 11-12  3-14-11 Included 19 11-13  4-11-11 Included 19 11-19  5-23-11 Included 19 11-21  6-13-11 Included 19 11-33  8-15-11 Included 19 11-37  9-12-11 Included 19 11-38  9-12-11 Included 19 11-39  9-12-11 Included 19 11-40  9-12-11 Included 19 11-41  9-26-11 Included 19 11-46  9-26-11 Included 19 11-48 10-10-11 Included 19 11-49 10-10-11 Included 19 11-50 10-24-11 Included 19 11-53 11-14-11 Included 19 11-54 11-28-11 Included 19 11-55 11-28-11 Included 19 11-56 11-28-11 Included 19 11-57 11-28-11 Included 19 11-58 11-28-11 Included 19 11-59 11-28-11 Included 19 11-60 11-28-11 Included 19 11-61 11-28-11 Included 19 12-01  1- 9-12 Included 19 12-02  1- 9-12 Included 19 12-06  1-23-12 Included 19 12-07  1-23-12 Included 19 12-11  2-27-12 Included 20 12-16  4- 9-12 Included 20 12-17  4- 9-12 Included 20 12-18  4- 9-12 Included 20 12-19  4- 9-12 Included 20 12-20  4- 9-12 Included 20 12-21  4- 9-12 Included 20 12-25  5-14-12 Included 20 12-26  6-18-12 Included 20 12-22  4-23-12 Included 20 12-23  4-23-12 Included 20 12-36  8-20-12 Included 20 12-37 10- 8-12 Included 20 12-40 10-22-12 Included 20 12-43 11-26-12 Included 20 12-46 12-10-12 Included 20 13-04  1-28-13 Included 20 13-06  1-28-13 Omitted 20 13-07  2-11-13 Included 20 13-09  3-11-13 Included 20 13-11  4- 8-13 Included 20 13-12  4-22-13 Included 21 13-16  4-22-13 Included 21 13-21  5-13-13 Omitted 21 13-22  5-13-13 Included 21 13-23  5-13-13 Included 21 13-24  6-17-13 Omitted 21 13-25  6-17-13 Included 21 13-31  8-19-13 Included 21 13-34  8-19-13 Included 21 13-36  9- 9-13 Included 21 13-39 10-14-13 Included 21 13-40 10-28-13 Included 21 13-48 12- 9-13 Included 21 14-01  1-13-14 Included 21 14-02  1-13-14 Included 21 14-07  3-24-14 Included 21 14-22  7-21-14 Included 22 14-23  7-21-14 Included 22 14-24  8-18-14 Included 22 14-27  9- 8-14 Included 22 14-29 10-13-14 Included 22 14-30 10-27-14 Included 22 14-32 10-27-14 Included 22 14-39 12- 8-14 Included 22 15-05  1-12-15 Included 22 15-07  1-26-15 Included 22 15-10  2- 9-15 Included 22 15-14  2-23-15 Included 22 15-16  3- 9-15 Included 22 15-17  3-23-15 Included 22 15-20  3-23-15 Included 22 16-01  1-11-16 Included 22 16-06  2-22-16 Included 22 16-09  2-22-16 Included 22 16-10  2-22-16 Included 22 16-13  4-25-16 Included 23 16-14  5- 9-16 Included 23 16-15  5- 9-16 Omitted 23 16-18  5- 9-16 Included 23 16-19  6-13-16 Included 23 16-21  7-25-16 Included 23 16-23  8-22-16 Included 23 17-02  2-13-17 Included 23 17-03  2-13-17 Included 23 17-04  2-13-17 Included 23 17-06  2-27-17 Included 23 17-08  3-27-17 Included 23 17-09  3-27-17 Included 23 17-11  4-24-17 Included 23 17-12  4-27-17 Included 23 17-16  6-12-17 Omitted 24 17-20  7-10-17 Included 24 17-23  9-11-17 Included 24 17-25 10- 9-17 Included 24 17-26 10- 9-17 Included 24 18-03  3-26-18 Included 24 18-04  4-23-18 Included 24 18-05  4-23-18 Included 24 18-09  7-23-18 Included 24  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the Code of Ordinances, City of Ballwin, Missouri, and may be so cited. 
(Code 1973, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Ordinances to conform to state law, RSMo 71.010; subjects of ordinances, RSMo 79.110; ordinance enactment procedures, RSMo 79.130; prohibition of certain activities, RSMo 79.450. 
Sec. 1-1.5. - Rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, of the appendixes to this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules of construction shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of aldermen: 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned vehicle. The words "abandoned vehicle" mean any motor vehicle, or parts thereof, situated on property or upon any street or highway, and: 
(1)  Which does not have displayed thereon a permanent license plate or set of plates issued for that vehicle indicating current registration by one of the states; 
(2)  For which no arrangements have been made for its storage with the owner or occupant of the premises on which it is located; or 
(3)  The owner of which has indicated by his words or actions his intent to leave the same and no longer claims ownership thereof. 
    Accessory structure. The words "accessory structure" mean a detached structure and/or building subordinate to the main or principal structure and located on the same lot, the use of which is customarily incidental to the main building. 
    Actuarial or risk premium rates. The words "actuarial or risk premium rates" mean those rates established by the administrator pursuant to individual community studies and investigations which are undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with section 1307 of the Act and the accepted actuarial principles. "Risk premium rates" include provisions for operating costs and allowances. 
    Administrator. The word "administrator" means the city administrator for the City of Ballwin. 
    Advertising media. The words "advertising media" mean a banner, pennant, streamer, wind-operated mechanism, flashing lights, and any other type of fluttering or flashing device, or person or animal used for attracting attention. 
    Airport. The word "airport" means an area for the landing or taking off of aircraft, containing two or more runways, either surfaced or sodded, and having a length of at least 2,000 feet, and possessing facilities for the storing, servicing, or repairing of airplanes. 
    Alcoholic beverage. The words "alcoholic beverage" mean alcohol for beverage purposes, including beer; liquors; malt liquors or wine or any alcohol, whether spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt, or other liquors or combination of liquors, a part of which is spirituous, vinous or fermented and also includes beer or malt liquors manufactured from pure hops or pure extract of hops and pure barley malt or other wholesome grains or cereals and wholesome yeast and pure water and free from harmful substances, preservatives and adulterants and having any alcoholic content by weight or volume. 
    Alderman. The word "alderman" means any person elected to that office. 
    Alley. The word "alley" means a public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    Amusement device. The words "amusement device" mean any apparatus which, upon the insertion of a coin, token, slug or other insertion device or which by remote control or by the payment of a fee, operates or may be operated as a game, contest of skill or amusement of any kind or description for the amusement of the operator, whether or not registering a score, and whether or not activated or manipulated by the operator. The term "amusement device" shall not include "vending machine." 
    As applied to zoning, "amusement device" means any apparatus which, upon the insertion of a coin, token, slug or other insertion device or which by remote control or by the payment of a fee, operates or may be operated as a game, contest of skill or amusement of any kind or description for the amusement of the operator, whether or not registering a score, and whether or not activated or manipulated by the operator; provided, it has or contains no automatic payoff device for the return of money, trade-tokens or slugs and makes no provision whatever for the return of money to the operator. The term "amusement device" shall not include coin-operated vending machines dispensing food, drink or merchandise of any kind nor any machine or device prohibited by the laws of Missouri or of the United States. 
    Amusement place. As applied to section 3-56, the words "amusement place" mean any establishment whose business building contains a square footage of at least 10,000 square feet, and where games of skill, commonly known as bowling, are usually played, and which has annual gross receipts of at least $200,000.00 of which no more than 50 percent may be derived from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
    Angle parking. The words "angle parking" mean the standing of any vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a highway, road or street in a manner where the longitudinal axles of vehicles form an angle with the alignment of the roadway. 
    Annual additions. As applied to the police pension trust, the term "annual additions" means the sum for any plan year of: 
(1)  Employer contributions; 
(2)  The lesser of: 
a.  Any employee contributions (excluding any rollover contributions) in excess of six percent of such employee's compensation; or 
b.  One-half of the employee contributions; and 
(3)  Forfeitures, if any. 
    Annual gross receipts. The words "annual gross receipts" mean gross receipts during the calendar year preceding each license year. 
    Apartment. The word "apartment" means a room or suite of rooms in a multiple dwelling intended and designed for use as a residence by a single family. 
    Appeal. As applied to chapter 10, Flood hazard areas, the word "appeal" means a request for a review of the building commissioner's interpretation of any provision of chapter 10 or a request for a variance. 
    Appropriate. The word "appropriate" means to take, obtain, use, transfer, conceal or retain possession of. 
    Appropriate department head. The words "appropriate department head" mean that person supervising the day-to-day operations of the portion or branch of city operations for which an expenditure is to be made. 
    Area of shallow flooding. The words "area of shallow flooding" mean a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard. The words "area of special flood hazard" mean the land in the floodplain within a community subject to one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Athletic field. The words "athletic field" mean an outdoor area intended for the play of baseball, football, soccer and similar games. Such facility may include a grandstand, bleachers or similar unenclosed seating arrangements, and customary accessory uses such as refreshment stand, restrooms and parking, but having a roof or similar permanent structure over the playing field. 
    At large. As applied to animals, the words "at large" apply to any dog, cat or other animal off the premises of its owner's real property and not restrained by a competent person. 
    Attached. Connected in such a manner that a substantial portion of a construction is supported by another structure on the premises. A connection that involves superficial interconnection to or is joined only to a non-structural member of another structure does not constitute "attached" for the purposes of this definition. 
    Authorized emergency vehicle. The words "authorized emergency vehicle" mean: 
(1)  A vehicle publicly owned and operated as an ambulance, or a vehicle publicly owned and operated by the state highway patrol, police or fire department, sheriff, constable or deputy sheriff or traffic officer; 
(2)  Any privately owned vehicle operated as an ambulance responding to emergency calls; 
(3)  Any privately owned wrecker or towtruck, or a vehicle owned and operated by a public utility or public service corporation while performing emergency service, provided they are registered as such with the county; 
(4)  Any privately owned vehicle operated by a member of the county police department, sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, deputy constable, coroner, deputy coroner or member of a police department of any municipality in the county, in the performance of their official duties; or 
(5)  Any public works vehicle involved in snowplowing or other emergency situations. 
    Automobile dealership. The words "automobile dealership" mean any association, individual, corporation, partnership or other entity that has contracted with the manufacturer for the sale, lease and service of new automobiles, buses, trucks or other motor vehicles required by the state to be licensed for use on the highways. 
    Automobile mall. The words "automobile mall" mean one or more automobile dealerships located at the same location that have contracted with two or more manufacturers or one manufacturer with two or more product lines for the sale, lease or service of two or more product lines of new automobiles, buses, trucks or other motor vehicles required by the state to be licensed for use on the highways. 
    Awning. The word "awning" means any device or structure entirely supported by the structure to which it is attached and which is covered by canvas, cloth or other material, which may be retractable or rolled to the structure by which it is supported. 
    Bar. As applied to section 17-65, "bar" means an establishment that is licensed to serve alcoholic beverages for consumption by-the-drink, including an establishment that may also be considered a restaurant and/or a food service establishment that serves food and serves alcoholic beverages for consumption by-the-drink. 
    Base flood. The words "base flood" mean the flood having one-percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement. The word "basement" means a portion of a building located partly underground, next below the principal floor. 
    As applied to the housing code, "basement" means a story partly or wholly underground, or that portion of a building having its floor below the surface of any abutting ground. 
    As applied to zoning, "basement" means a story having a part of its height below grade. A basement shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height regulations, if used for any purpose other than storage, parking, heating, cooling, and similar accessory purpose or for the dwelling of a janitor employed on the premises. 
    Bathing place. The words "bathing place" mean any body of water used collectively by numbers of persons for swimming and recreational bathing together with the shores, structures and equipment, other areas and enclosures pertaining to such bathing places, but do not include baths where the object is the cleansing of the body, or the practice of healing under medical supervision, unless such baths contain pools or tanks which are used collectively by a number of individuals. 
    Bathroom. The word "bathroom" means a room containing bathing and sanitary facilities provided within each living unit consisting of a water closet, a tub or shower and a lavatory; and a bathroom shall afford complete privacy. 
    Bicycle. The word "bicycle" means every device propelled solely by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels, except scooters and similar devices. 
    Billboard sign. A freestanding sign, erected outside of a fully enclosed building, being primarily intended for monthly or term lease rental of advertising or announcement of a product, service or position not necessarily sold on or associated with the premises of the sign. 
    Billboard sign support structure. A free standing structure consisting of support element(s) for a billboard sign. 
    Board. The word "board," when used in appendix A, article XIX, means the board of adjustment. 
    Board of aldermen, board. Except as otherwise provided in this section, whenever the term "board of aldermen" or the word "board" is used, unless the context requires otherwise, such term or word shall be construed to refer to the board of aldermen of the city. 
    Break in service. As applied to the police pension trust, the words "break in service" mean a plan year during which the participant does not complete more than 500 hours of service, other than by reason of an authorized leave of absence pursuant to section 20-91(2.4). 
    Building. As applied to the moving of buildings, the word "building" means a structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter or roofed enclosure for persons, animals or property and used for residential, business, mercantile, storage, commercial, industrial, institutional, assembly, educational or recreational purposes. 
    As applied to zoning, "building" means any structure, including a roof supported by walls or columns, for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind, and when separated by dividing walls without openings, each portion of such building so separated shall be deemed a separate building. The word "building" includes the word "premises." 
    Building commissioner. The words "building commissioner," as applied to the housing code, mean the building commissioner of the city or such other person, designated by resolution of the board of aldermen, to enforce any provisions of the housing code. 
    Building, height of. The words "height of building" means the vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. 
    Building line. The words "building line" mean the line parallel to the street line, that passes through the point of the principal building nearest the front lot line. In the case of an undeveloped and vacant lot, the building line shall be the setback line demarking the minimum setback of the applicable zoning district. 
    Bus. The word "bus" means a motor vehicle designed or regularly used for carrying more than ten passengers. 
    Business or occupation. The word "business" or "occupation" means any person, his lessees and his trustees or receivers appointed by any court whatsoever, engaged in any business, occupation, pursuit, profession or trade, or in the keeping or maintaining of any institution, establishment, articles, utilities or commodities specified in this Code or in any ordinance of the city, within the city, except as may be otherwise provided by ordinance. 
    Business entity. The words "business entity" mean a corporation, association, firm, partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venture or other business entity of any kind or character. 
    Camping trailer. The words "camping trailer" mean a vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels and constructed with collapsible partial sidewalls which fold for towing by another vehicle and unfold at the campsite to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use. 
    Canopy. The word "canopy" means any structure other than an awning, attached to a building or structure and supported independently of that building or structure. Porticos and porte-cocheres shall be considered canopies for the purpose of this definition. 
    Cat. The word "cat" means any domestic species or variety of the genus Felis, male or female, six months of age or older. 
    Centerline. As applied to motor vehicles and traffic, the word "centerline" means a line marking the center of a roadway on which traffic moves in both directions, or dividing the roadway between lanes of traffic moving in opposite directions. 
    Certificate. In chapter 5, Animals and fowl, the word "certificate" means a certificate issued under the county rabies control code at the time of the vaccination of a dog and bearing thereon the signature of the vaccinator, the registration number, the name, color, breed and sex of the dog, the name and address of the owner, the date of the vaccination and the type of vaccine administered. 
    Charitable solicitation campaign. The words "charitable solicitation campaign" mean any course of conduct involving a solicitor as defined in this section whose activities in soliciting property or financial assistance of any kind or in selling or offering to sell any article, tag, service, emblem, publication, ticket, subscription or anything of value is made on the representation that such sale or solicitation or the proceeds therefrom are for a charitable, educational, patriotic or philanthropic purpose. 
    Chicken embryo origin vaccine. The words "chicken embryo origin vaccine" mean a vaccine which is manufactured using the embryo of the chicken as a growth medium and also known as the Flury strain vaccine. 
    Child pornography. The words "child pornography" mean any material or performance depicting sexual conduct, sexual contact, or a sexual performance as these terms are defined in RSMo 556.061 and which has as one of its participants or portrays as an observer of such conduct, contact or performance a child under the age of 18; provided, that it shall not include material which is not the visual reproduction of a live event. 
    Church bulletin board. The words "church bulletin board" mean a sign attached to the exterior of a church or located elsewhere on the church premises and used to indicate the services and/or other activities of the church. 
    City, corporation. Whenever the term "the city," "this city," "the corporation" or "this corporation" is used, it shall be construed as if the words "of Ballwin, St. Louis County, Missouri," followed it. 
    City hall areas. The words "city hall areas" include the aldermanic meeting room, courtroom, restrooms, lobby and stairwells in the city hall. 
    Clinic. As applied to zoning, the word "clinic" means an establishment where patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians practicing medicine together. 
    Closed meeting, closed record, closed vote. The words "closed meeting," "closed record," or "closed vote" mean any meeting, record or vote closed to the public. 
    Club. As applied to zoning, the word "club" means a building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by a corporation, association, or person for a social, educational or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
    Coercion. As applied to stealing, the word "coercion" means a threat, however communicated: 
(1)  To commit any crime; or 
(2)  To inflict physical injury in the future on the person threatened or another; or 
(3)  To accuse any person of any crime; or 
(4)  To expose any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule; or 
(5)  To harm the credit or business repute of any person; or 
(6)  To take or withhold action as a public servant, or to cause a public servant to take or withhold action; or 
(7)  To inflict any other harm which would not benefit the actor. 
A threat of accusation, lawsuit or other invocation of official action is not coercion if the property sought to be obtained by virtue of such threat was honestly claimed as restitution or indemnification for harm done in the circumstances to which the accusation, exposure, lawsuit or other official action relates, or as compensation for property or lawful service. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of justification as to any threat. 
    Commercial district. A type of zoning district intended primarily for retail commercial and office uses and activities. Zoning districts that are primarily intended for residential uses and activities but also allow some limited commercial uses and activities shall not be considered commercial districts. 
    Commercial motor vehicle and/or commercial vehicle: The words "commercial motor vehicle" and "commercial vehicle" shall mean a device meeting the definition of "vehicle", "motor vehicle", "trailer" or "utility vehicle" and also having/meeting one or more of the following attributes or conditions: 
(1)  Having a gross weight, whether loaded or unloaded, in excess of 12,000 pounds. 
(2)  Exceeding 20 feet in overall length as measured from the front bumper or foremost projecting element of the vehicle to the rearmost element of the vehicle including permanently attached equipment such as but not limited to trailer hitches, gates, toolboxes, etc. 
(3)  Designed to accommodate passengers, chattels, freight, or merchandise. 
(4)  Being any form of construction equipment or attachment to construction equipment such as but not limited to tractor, compactor, backhoe, crane, scraper, bulldozer, front loader, cement mixer, blade, bucket, hydraulic components, cab, track, etc. 
(5)  Being a type of vehicle commonly known as a tow truck, dump truck, stake-bed truck, flat-bed truck, box truck, step van, refuse or garbage truck, bus, or other special purpose vehicle in excess of ten feet in overall length, 
(6)  Being any type of agricultural vehicle or component thereof typically known as a tractor, farm implement, mowing equipment, brush hog, trimmer, spreader, all attachments thereto, all towed-behind equipment and all turf maintenance equipment and attachments or other similar equipment or vehicle. 
(7)  For purposes of this definition, a commercial motor vehicle and/or commercial vehicle does not include pickup trucks or panel vans/trucks utilized for personal or commercial purposes. 
    Community building. The words "community building" mean a building or structure owned by a governmental agency or nonprofit institution and used primarily for nonprofit public events. 
    Compensation. The word "compensation," as used in the police pension plan, means actual salaries and wages earned by an employee for hours worked for the employer, excluding any meal allowances or similar noncash compensation, and any amount contributed for the employee by the employer to any retirement or pension plan, including this plan. 
    Competent person. In chapter 5, Animals and fowl, the words "competent person" mean a human being that is capable of controlling and governing the animal in question and to whose commands such animal is obedient. 
    Compost. The word "compost" means a mixture of decomposing vegetable matter and soil intended for use as fertilizer and organic enrichment of garden and yard soil. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall not be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall be counted. 
    Consumption in the building in which prepared. The words "consumption in the building in which prepared" mean and include consumption in a garden or sidewalk type dining area; provided, however, that such garden or sidewalk area is set off by a suitable enclosure compatible with the surrounding area and approved by the city planner and (1) is accessible through the building in which the food is prepared, or (2) has limited access from areas where food is served. 
    Continuously operated. The words "continuously operated" mean open for business at least eight hours per day, five days a week during regular business hours. 
    Controlled substance, counterfeit substance. The words "controlled substance" and "counterfeit substance" shall mean controlled substances and counterfeit substances as defined by the laws of the state. 
    Corporate limits, corporation limits, city limits. Whenever the term "corporate limits," "corporation limits" or "city limits" is used, it means the legal boundary of the City of Ballwin. 
    County. The term "the county" or "this county" means the County of St. Louis in the State of Missouri. 
    Court. As applied to zoning, the word "court" means an open space with or without direct street access around which is arranged a single building or a group of related buildings. 
    Covered. Constructed in such a manner that a substantial portion of the accessory structure is in any manner or fashion overlaid or protected and sheltered from sun, precipitation, and/or wind by anything more substantial than a removable, unattached vinyl or canvas umbrella of no greater size than three feet in its greatest dimension. 
    Criminal act. The words "criminal act" mean any act which violates the statutes of the United States, the statutes of the state or the ordinances of the city, other than traffic violations. 
    Crosswalk. The word "crosswalk" means: 
(1)  That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway; 
(2)  Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Curb. The word "curb" means the lateral boundaries of that portion of the street designated for the use of vehicles, whether marked with curbstones or not. 
    Dangerous buildings. As applied to chapter 7, article VI, the words "dangerous buildings" mean all buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects: 
(1)  Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumbline passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base. 
(2)  Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33 percent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or 50 percent of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
(3)  Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
(4)  Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the city. 
(5)  Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, insanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein. 
(6)  Those having light, air, and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein. 
(7)  Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other means of communication. 
(8)  Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property. 
(9)  Those structures which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to public health, safety, morals, or the general welfare of the people of this city. This shall include structures for which building permits have expired without the work covered by the permit having been satisfactorily completed within the period provided for such work, structures where work allowed by a permit may be completed but have not passed a final inspection, or structures on which work has been stopped by order of the building commissioner for more than 30 days and the owner and/or builder has not resolved the issue such that the stop work order can be lifted. 
(10)  Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of the building code of this city, or any provision of the fire prevention code, or other ordinances of this city. 
(11)  Those buildings or structures which have not been lawfully occupied and for which a certificate of use or occupancy cannot be granted because the building does not conform to the requirements of the building, electrical, mechanical or plumbing codes of the city by reason of the building or structure not being completed and no building permit is in effect are deemed dangerous buildings, a fire hazard and a public nuisance. 
(12)  Those buildings or structures that are not occupied or are vacant and have doorways, window openings, transoms, sidelights or skylights or other exterior openings that are not appropriately enclosed by properly installed glass or glazing material, doors or exterior siding materials conforming to the building, electrical, mechanical or plumbing codes of the city are deemed dangerous buildings, a fire hazard and a public nuisance. 
(13)  Those buildings or structures, other than an accessory building not intended for human occupation, which are not lawfully occupied or are vacant for a period of two or more years shall be deemed permanently abandoned. Any building or structure declared by the building commissioner to be permanently abandoned are deemed dangerous buildings, a fire hazard and a public nuisance. 
    Deceit. The word "deceit" means purposely making a representation which is false and which the actor does not believe to be true and upon which the victim relies, as to a matter of fact, law, value, intention or other state of mind. The term "deceit" does not, however, include falsity as to matters having no pecuniary significance, or puffing by statements unlikely to deceive ordinary persons in the group addressed. Deceptions as to the actor's intention to perform a promise shall not be inferred from the fact alone that he did not subsequently perform the promise. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
    Delivery/service vehicle: The words "delivery/service vehicle", "service vehicle", and "delivery vehicle" mean a motor vehicle or trailer regularly used for the delivery of freight, merchandise, supplies, tools, equipment, parts etc. and/or transportation for service personnel from a business location to customers, but not from or to a source, supplier or other business location and having signage on any side or face of the vehicles that does not exceed ten percent of the total area of said face of the vehicles. 
(1)  Regular use shall mean three or more days per week in which the vehicle is used for delivery or service purposes and such use shall be supported and verified by a written log or other permanent records of the delivery or service activity. 
(2)  A delivery/service vehicle may also be a commercial vehicle and subject to commercial vehicle regulations. 
    Deprive. As applied to stealing, the word "deprive" means: 
(1)  To withhold property from the owner permanently; or 
(2)  To restore property only upon payment of reward or other compensation; or 
(3)  To use or dispose of property in a manner that makes recovery of the property by the owner unlikely. 
    Derelict vehicle. The word "derelict vehicle" means any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked motor vehicle. 
    Deterioration. As applied to the housing code, the word "deterioration" means the condition or appearance of a building or part thereof, characterized by breaks, holes, rot, crumbling, peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, excessive use, or lack of maintenance. 
    Development. As applied to flood hazard areas, the word "development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
    Directly benefit. The words "directly benefit" mean to derive special private advantage as opposed to a general advantage derived as a member of a large class or of the public at large. 
    Director. In chapter 22, Signs, the word "director" means the director of public works of the city and any of his delegates or assistants. 
    Display-for-sale. The term "display-for-sale" shall mean the display and sale of small quantities of merchandise at retail. It may include the associated storage of additional merchandise stock in close physical proximity to the point of sale for the immediate and convenient restocking of sales merchandise. It shall not include bulk storage of large quantities of merchandise stock nor storage without associated display and sales at the same location. 
    Displays publicly. The words "displays publicly" means exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its contents or character distinguished by normal unaided vision viewing it from a street, highway, or public sidewalk; or from the property of others; or from any portion of a person's store; or an exhibitor's store or property when items and material other than this material are offered for sale or rent to the public. 
    Distribute means a conveyance to the public by sale, barter, gift or sample. 
    District. In appendix A, Zoning, the word "district" means any section of the city for which the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or the height and area of buildings are uniform. 
    Dog. The word "dog" means any domesticated member of the Canis familiaris species, male or female, six months of age or older. 
    Drive, driving, driver, operate, operates, operating, operated, operator. As applied to section 15-112, the words "drive," "driving," "driver," "operate," "operates," "operating," "operated," and "operator" mean physically driving or operating or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle, or the person doing same. 
    Drive-in. As applied to chapter 15, Motor vehicles and traffic, the word "drive-in" means a place where the occupants of motor vehicles are served while seated in the vehicle, including but not limited to drive-in theaters, restaurants and filling stations. 
    Driver. The word "driver" means any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle, including the rider of a horse or other animal and the rider of a bicycle. 
    Driveway. The word "driveway" means a weather resistant entrance that provides vehicular egress/ingress from a public or private street, road, highway or alley to a tract of land. Unless otherwise permitted, a driveway shall be constructed from concrete, asphalt or substantially equivalent material. 
    Drug paraphernalia. The words "drug paraphernalia" mean all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance or an imitation controlled substance in violation of sections 17-81 through 17-83 or the Comprehensive Drug Control Act of 1989 (RSMo 195.005 et seq.). It includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
(2)  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances or imitation controlled substances; 
(3)  Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or an imitation controlled substance; 
(4)  Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances or imitation controlled substances; 
(5)  Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances or imitation controlled substances; 
(6)  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances or imitation controlled substances; 
(7)  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana; 
(8)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances or imitation controlled substances; 
(9)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances or imitation controlled substances; 
(10)  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances or imitation controlled substances; 
(11)  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances or imitation controlled substances into the human body; 
(12)  Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
b.  Water pipes; 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
e.  Roach clips meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
g.  Chamber pipes; 
h.  Carburetor pipes; 
i.  Electric pipes; 
j.  Air-driven pipes; 
k.  Chillums; 
l.  Bongs; 
m.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
    Dwelling. As applied to the fair housing code, "dwelling" means any building, structure or portion thereof located within the city which is occupied as or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
    Dwelling district. Any zoning district that is intended primarily for the construction and occupancy of dwelling units. Zoning districts that are primarily intended for non-residential uses and activities but also allow some residential uses and activities shall not be considered dwelling districts. 
    Dwelling, multiple. The words "multiple dwelling" mean a building or portion thereof designed or used for occupancy by two or more families. 
    Dwelling, single-family. The words "single-family dwelling" mean a building designed or used for occupancy by one family. 
    Dwelling structure. The term "dwelling structure" shall mean any building or structure occupied in excess of 50 percent of its gross floor area by dwelling units and common areas associated primarily with the residential use of the structure. 
    Dwelling, two-family. The words "two-family dwelling" mean a building designed or used for occupancy by two families. 
    Dwelling unit. The terms "dwelling" and "dwelling unit" shall be used interchangeably and mean any building, structure, or portion thereof or group of rooms which is/are designed, used or intended for occupancy as a facility for living by an individual, family or group of individuals living in a single housekeeping unit and having as a minimum all of the following characteristics and/or facilities: 
(1)  Sleeping facilities; 
(2)  Bathroom facilities not shared by occupants of any other dwelling unit; 
(3)  Food preparation facilities; 
(4)  A separate means of ingress and egress not requiring access or passage through a private portion of another dwelling unit; 
(5)  The dwelling unit is completely isolated and secured from access to all other portions of the building of which it is a part. 
    Dynamic display sign. The words "dynamic display sign" mean a sign that has characteristics that appear to have movement or that appear to change, caused by any method other than physically removing and replacing the sign or its components, whether the apparent movement or change is in the display, the sign structure itself, or any other component of the sign. This includes a display that incorporates a technology or method allowing the sign face to display or project a changing image without having to physically or mechanically replace the sign face or its components. This also includes any rotating, revolving, moving flashing, blinking, or animated display and any display that incorporates rotating panels, projections, LED lights manipulated through digital input, "digital ink" or any other method or technology that allows the sign face or projection to present a series of images or displays. 
    Emergency vehicle . The words "emergency vehicle" means a vehicle of any of the following types: 
(1)  A vehicle operated by the state highway patrol, the state water patrol or a state park ranger, those vehicles operated by enforcement personnel of the state highways and transportation commission, police or fire department, sheriff, constable or deputy sheriff, federal law enforcement officer authorized to carry firearms and to make arrests for violations of the laws of the United States, traffic officer or coroner or by a privately owned emergency vehicle company; 
(2)  A vehicle operated as an ambulance or operated commercially for the purpose of transporting emergency medical supplies or organs; 
(3)  Any vehicle qualifying as an emergency vehicle pursuant to RSMo 307.175; 
(4)  Any wrecker, or tow truck or a vehicle owned and operated by a public utility or public service corporation while performing emergency service; 
(5)  Any vehicle transporting equipment designed to extricate human beings from the wreckage of a motor vehicle; 
(6)  Any vehicle designated to perform emergency functions for a civil defense or emergency management agency established pursuant to the provisions of RSMo ch. 44; 
(7)  Any vehicle operated by an authorized employee of the department of corrections who, as part of the employee's official duties, is responding to a riot, disturbance, hostage incident, escape or other critical situation where there is the threat of serious physical injury or death, responding to a mutual aid call from another criminal justice agency, or in accompanying an ambulance which is transporting an offender to a medical facility; 
(8)  Any vehicle designated to perform hazardous substance emergency functions established pursuant to the provisions of RSMo 260.500 to 260.550. 
    Employee. As applied to conflicts of interest, the word "employee" means a person performing services for or holding a position of employment with the city on a fulltime, regular, parttime or intermittent basis. 
    As applied to manufacturer's licenses, "employee" means any natural individual who performs services for any person who is required under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States or any regulations promulgated thereunder to withhold taxes from the compensation paid to such natural individual for the services performed. 
    As applied to the police pension plan, "employee" means any police officer of the city, employed on a hourly basis or on salary computed or payable weekly, monthly or annually, including officers and supervisory employees, for not less than 1,000 hours during a period of 12 consecutive months and for whom the employer is not making a contribution to an employee pension benefit plan or other retirement plan under a collective bargaining agreement. 
    As applied to section 17-65, "employee" means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his or her service for a non-profit entity. 
    Employer. The word "employer" means a person, business, partnership, association, limited liability company, or corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or non-profit entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
    Enclosed area. As applied to section 17-65, "enclosed area" means all space between floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by walls that extend from the floor to the ceiling, and/or windows and doorways. 
    Environmental Tobacco Smoke (ETS) or secondhand smoke. The words "environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) or "secondhand smoke" means the complex mixture formed from escaping smoke of a burning tobacco product (termed as "side-stream smoke") and smoke exhaled by the smoker. Exposure to ETS is also frequently referred to as "passive smoking" or "involuntary smoking". 
    Erect. As applied to signs, the word "erect" means to build, construct, attach, hang, rehang, place, affix, locate, relocate, paint or repaint. 
    Euthanasia. The word "euthanasia" means the act of putting to death in a humane manner. 
    Existing construction. The words "existing construction" (for the purposes of determining rates in chapter 10, Flood hazard areas) mean structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRM's effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Explicit sexual material. The words "explicit sexual material" mean any pictorial or three dimensional material depicting human masturbation, deviate sexual intercourse, sexual intercourse, direct physical stimulation or unclothed genitals, sadomasochistic abuse, or emphasizing the depiction of post-pubertal human genitals; provided, however, that works of art or of anthropological significance shall not be deemed to be within the foregoing definition. 
    Exposed to rabies. The words "exposed to rabies" apply to any dog, whether it has been registered or vaccinated for rabies or not, or other animal which has been bitten, been fighting with or has consorted with an animal known or suspected to have rabies or showing objective symptoms of rabies. 
    Extermination. As applied to the housing code, the word "extermination" means the control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the health commissioner. 
    Fall zone. The hemispherical area surrounding a sign or structure and measured from the highest point of the sign or structure to the perimeter of a circle upon the ground having a radius equal to the height of the sign or structure with the center point at the base of the sign or structure and enclosing the three-dimensional area that would be passed through, or otherwise impacted if the sign or structure were to fall. 
    Family. As applied to the housing and zoning codes, the word "family" shall mean any number of persons related within the second degree of consanguinity, or a group of four or fewer unrelated, nontransient adults and their dependent children living together as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit, sharing a common kitchen facility, but not including group quarters such as dormitories, fraternities, sororities, motels, hotels, rooming houses, or boardinghouses. 
    As applied to user fees set forth in chapter 18, "family" means the head of a household, his or her spouse, and all dependents residing in the household who are 23 years of age or younger. 
    This definition shall not be interpreted to prohibit short term residential rentals, as defined and regulated in Appendix A, Article XVI, Section 30.15 of this Code. 
    Family pool. The words "family pool" mean a swimming pool used or intended to be used by and available only to the owner or lessee of a single-family residence and his family, and his private guests. 
    Farm. As applied to zoning, the word "farm" means an area which is used for the growing of the usual farm products such as vegetables, fruit, trees and grain, and their packing or storage on the area, as well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals, such as horses, cattle, sheep and swine. The term "farming" includes the operating of such an area for one or more of the above uses, including dairy farms, with the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or storing produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal farming activities, and provided further that farming does not include the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals. 
    Fee. As applied to chapter 14, Licenses and business regulations, the word "fee" means that sum of lawful money of the United States of America required to be paid to the city by any merchant, business or occupation for a license before commencing business as such. 
    Fence. As applied to chapter 7, article VIII, the word "fence" means any structure serving as an enclosure, barrier, screen or partition which is in excess of two feet in height above the existing grade, which is constructed of posts, poles, supports, stakes, rails, boards, chain, chain link or wire, whether made of brick, canvas, cloth, stone, masonry, metal, plastic, wood or any other material. 
    Fence or screen. As applied to chapter 7, article VIII, the word "fence" or "screen" means any partition erected and setting off one property from another. 
    Filling. As applied to Chapter 11, "filling" has the same meaning as "grading" given in section 11-2. 
    Filling station. The words "filling station" mean any building, structure, or land used for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuels, oils or accessories, including lubrication of automobiles and replacement or installation of minor parts and accessories but not including major repair work such as motor replacement, body and fender repair or spray painting. 
    Fireworks. The term "fireworks" means and includes any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances or any article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation and includes blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are used, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, dago bombs or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablet or other device containing any explosive substance. The term "fireworks" shall not include sparklers, colored flares, toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices using paper caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times. 
    Flagpole. The word "flagpole" means a pole constructed of metal or similar material permanently affixed to the ground or a structure designed for the display of a flag. 
    Flat fee. The words "flat fee" mean a business license fee, paid to the city for certain types or classifications of businesses or occupations, which is fixed and does not vary according to size, area, business volume or other similar criteria. 
    Flood, flooding. The word "flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The words "flood insurance rate map" or "FIRM" mean an official map of a community, on which the flood insurance study has delineated the flood hazard boundaries and the zones establishing insurance rates applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study. The words "flood insurance study" mean the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary/floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Floodway fringe. The words "floodway fringe" mean that area of the floodplain, outside of the floodway, that on the average is likely to be flooded once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one percent chance of flood occurrence in any one year). 
    Floodway, regulatory floodway. The term "floodway" or "regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    Floor area. As applied to zoning, the words "floor area" mean the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors, including basements, cellars and penthouses (but excluding such areas within a building which are used for parking) measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls of a building. 
    As applied to offstreet parking requirements, "floor area" means the gross floor area of the specific use. 
    Food service establishment. As applied to section 17-65, "food service establishment" means an area of restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "food establishment" shall include an establishment that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere and is also licensed to serve alcoholic beverages for consumption by-the-drink. 
    Former participant. As applied to the police pension trust, the words "former participant" mean any person who has ceased to be a participant under the police pension plan because of termination of employment for any reason other than death. 
    Freeboard. The word "freeboard" means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, clogged bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    Frontage. The word "frontage" means all the property on one side of a street or place between two intersecting streets or places (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the street or place, or if the street or place is dead ended, then all of the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street or place and the dead end of the street or place. 
    Fuel. Any liquid, solid or gaseous flammable material such as but not limited to gasoline, coal, propane, etc. burned or intended to be burned for heat or power. 
    Fully enclosed building. The term "fully enclosed building" means a structure with walls and/or doors on all sides and designed in a manner that the contents of the structure cannot be observed from any point on the property line of the premises containing the structure except normal observation through windows or doors associated therewith. A fully enclosed structure shall not include carports, porte cocheres, porches or other similar open structures unless they are enclosed with walls and/or doors. 
    Furnish. The word "furnish" means to issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or otherwise provide. 
    Garage. As applied to chapter 7, article IX, the word "garage" means a building or structure, or portion thereof, for parking or storage of private automobiles of not more than nine-passenger capacity each and not including provisions for the repair and servicing of automobiles. 
    Garage, private. As applied to zoning, the words "private garage" mean an accessory building or portion of the main building designed or used for the storage of not more than four motor-driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. 
    Garage, public. As applied to zoning, the words "public garage" mean a building or portion thereof, other than a private or storage garage, designed or used for servicing, repairing, equipping, hiring or storing motor-driven vehicles, but not including body and fender repair or spray painting. 
    Garage, storage. As applied to zoning, the words "storage garage" mean a building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for term storage, by prearrangement, of motor-driven vehicles, and at which motor fuels and oils are not sold, and at which motor-driven vehicles are not equipped, repaired, hired or sold. 
    Garbage. The word "garbage" means putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Generator, portable . The term "portable generator" means an electricity-generating device that is not permanently mounted and uses temporary wiring to supply electrical service. 
    Grade. As applied to zoning, the word "grade" means: 
(1)  For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the street. 
(2)  For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, the average of the elevation of the sidewalk at the centers of all walls adjoining the streets. 
(3)  For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. 
Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than five feet from a street line is to be considered as adjoining the street. 
    Grading. The term "grading" has the meaning given in section 11-2. 
    Gross receipts. As applied to occupational licenses, the words "gross receipts" mean the aggregate amount of all sales, transactions, fees, commissions, rental and leasing fees, and shall include the receipt of cash, credits and property of any kind or nature without any deductions therefrom on account of the cost of any items sold or materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or any losses or any other expenses whatsoever; provided, however, that the following shall be excluded from any computations of gross receipts if the books of accounts segregate the amount so as to reflect such exclusions: 
(1)  Receipt of taxes levied by state and federal governments collected by the seller. 
(2)  Receipts from sales, goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property for delivery outside the state to nonresidents of the state. 
(3)  Receipts of traded merchandise recorded as cash receipts and resold and recorded as a sale upon such resale. 
(4)  Interdepartmental sales within the organization of the seller. 
(5)  Such part of the sales price of goods, wares, merchandise or personal property returned by the purchaser as is refunded either in cash or by credit. 
(6)  Receipts of refundable deposits, except that portion of refundable deposits forfeited and taken in the gross receipts of the seller. 
    As applied to the taxation of gas or gas service, "gross receipts" means the aggregate amount of all sales and charges for the commodities or services described in section 14-231 during any period less discounts, credits, refunds, sales taxes and uncollectible accounts actually charged off during the period. 
    Gross receipts fee. The words "gross receipts fee" mean a business license fee paid to the city for certain types or classifications of businesses or occupations which is based upon actual gross receipts for the calendar year preceding the license year. 
    Habitable building. As applied to the housing code, the words "habitable building" mean any structure or part thereof that shall be used as a home or place of abode by one or more persons. 
    Habitable room. As applied to the housing code, the words "habitable room" mean every room in any building in which persons sleep, eat or carry on their usual domestic or social vocations or avocations. It shall not include private laundries, bathrooms, toilet rooms, pantries, storerooms, corridors, rooms for mechanical equipment for service in the building, or other similar spaces not used by persons frequently or during extended periods. 
    Hard-surfaced. For purposes of parking on residential property, "hard-surfaced" means property surfaced with a minimum of four inches of crushed stone or a hard-paved surface such as asphalt, concrete or brick. For purposes of parking on commercial property, "hard-surfaced" has the same meanings and conforms to the standards and conditions as set out for "parking lots" in appendix A, Zoning. 
    Hazardous waste. The words "hazardous waste" mean waste materials that are toxic or poisonous, corrosive, irritating or sensitizing, radioactive, biologically infectious, explosive, or flammable or that present a significant hazard to human health and the environment. 
    Health care facility. As applied to section 17-65, "health care facility" means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not limited to hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semi-private rooms, and wards within health care facilities. 
    Health department, commissioner, health commissioner. The words "health department," "commissioner," or "health commissioner" mean the department of public health of the county, or the commissioner of public health of the county, or any person or agent employed by the county department of public health to enforce the county rabies control code and the other health ordinances of the county. 
    Health official. The words "health official" mean the St. Louis County health commissioner or the health commissioner for the city or any of their designated representatives. 
    Highest adjacent grade. As applied to flood hazard areas, the words "highest adjacent grade" mean the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historical structure. The words "historical structure" mean any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on the Ballwin Historical Commission's [1] list of historical structures and places as approved by ordinance of the Ballwin Board of Aldermen. 
    Hotel. The word "hotel" means a building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours, and which is open to transient guests, in contradistinction to a boardinghouse or lodginghouse. 
    Household. As applied to chapter 5, Animals and fowl, the word "household" means those members of a family including servants and attendants living in the same dwelling unit. 
    Immediate family. As applied to conflict of interest, the words "immediate family" mean an officer or employee and his spouse and their parents, children, brothers, sisters and spouses thereof. 
    Impound. As applied to chapter 5, Animals and fowl, the word "impound" means the apprehending, catching, trapping, netting, tranquilizing, confining, or if necessary, the destruction of any animal by the health commissioner or his agent, or by any employee or agent of the city. 
    Impounding facilities. As applied to chapter 5, Animals and fowl, the words "impounding facilities" mean any premises designated by resolution of the board of aldermen for the purpose of impounding and caring for all animals in violation of this article. 
    Industrial connection sewer. The words "industrial connection sewer" mean that portion of a sewer line required to carry the sewage of any industrial or commercial establishment from the last point of sewage entry on the premises to a sewer or to carry the discharge from any industrial pretreatment facility to a sewer. 
    Industrial waste. The words "industrial waste" mean any industrial liquid wastewater, garbage or toxic substance from any industrial process. 
    Industrial waste treatment plant. The words "industrial waste treatment plant" mean any treatment plant used or intended to be used for the specific treatment of industrial wastes in which other wastes may or may not be present, except that a treatment plant in a public sewerage system shall not be so designated. 
    Infectious waste. The words "infectious waste" include isolation wastes, cultures, and stocks of etiologic agents, blood and blood products, pathological wastes, other wastes from surgery and autopsy, contaminated laboratory wastes, sharps, dialysis unit wastes and discarded biologicals known or suspected to be infectious. The term "infectious waste" does not include any waste treated in a manner prescribed by the county or the state department of natural resources so as to be classified as special waste. 
    Infestation. The word "infestation" means the presence within or around a building of any insects, rodents or other pests. 
    Institution. As applied to zoning, the word "institution" means a building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit establishment for public use. 
    Intersection. The word "intersection" means: 
(1)  The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict; 
(2)  Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
    Intoxicated condition. The words "intoxicated condition" apply to a person under the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a drug, or any combination thereof. 
    Intoxicating liquor. The term "intoxicating liquor" shall mean and include alcohol for beverage purposes, alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt or other liquors, or combination of liquors, a part of which is spirituous, vinous or fermented, and all preparations of mixtures for beverage purposes, containing in excess of one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume. 
    Investment manager. The words "investment manager" mean an investment advisor registered under the Investment Advisors Act of 1940, a bank (other than the trustee) as defined in that Act, or any insurance company qualified to discharge such responsibility under the laws of more than one state, acknowledged in writing as a fiduciary. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Jukebox. The word "jukebox" means any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice or other opening, or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement. 
    Juvenile. The word "juvenile" means any child under the age of 17 years. 
    Keeper, proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" mean persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
    Kennel . The word "kennel" means any place or tract of land whether indoors or outdoors, whether enclosed or not, in, at or upon which, and whether for pleasure or profit, dogs and other animals are kept, housed, bred, raised, fed, displayed, exhibited or sold. The owner of three or more dogs and other animals, whether owned for pleasure or profit, breading or exhibiting, shall be deemed to be the operator of a kennel. This definition of a "kennel" notwithstanding, three dogs may be kept on the premises in residential zoning districts, provided at least one of those animals is a seeing eye dog or equivalent service dog or is a dog actively utilized by a law enforcement agency. 
    Kitchen. As applied to the housing code, the word "kitchen" means a space of not less than 50 square feet, which contains a sink with counter working space, adequate space for installing cooking and refrigeration equipment and for the storage of cooking utensils. 
    Kitten. The word "kitten" means any domestic species or variety of the genus Felis, male or female, under the age of six months. 
    Landing strip. As applied to zoning, the words "landing strip" mean an area for the landing or taking off of aircraft having an engine rating not exceeding 350 horsepower, containing a single runway, either surfaced or sodded, having a length of less than 2,000 feet and containing no facilities for the commercial storage or repairing of airplanes. 
    Laned roadway. The words "laned roadway" mean a roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
    Law and enforcement officer, arresting officer. The term "law and enforcement officer" or "arresting officer" includes the definition of law enforcement officer in RSMo 556.061(17), and military policemen conducting traffic enforcement operations on a federal military installation under military jurisdiction in the state. 
    License year. "License year" means a period of 12 calendar months beginning on April 1 in each year, or in the case of businesses or occupations established subsequent to April 1, at the beginning of doing business, and shall end on the following March 31. 
    Light wines. The words "light wines" mean liquor not in excess of 14 percent of alcohol by weight manufactured exclusively from grapes, berries and other fruits and vegetables. 
    Liquor license. The words "liquor license" mean any license issued under the provisions of section 3-6 et seq. 
    Live or gross load. The words "live or gross load" mean the weight of the cargo of a commercial motor vehicle, in addition to that of the chassis and body of the vehicle. 
    Loading space. As applied to zoning, the words "loading space" mean a space within the main building or on the same lot therewith, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks, and having a minimum dimension of 12 by 35 feet and a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet. 
    Local businesses and contractors. The words "local businesses and contractors" mean a business or contractor which has a regular and established place of business within the limits of the Cities of Ballwin, Ellisville, Manchester and Winchester and is licensed in accordance with the provisions of the licensing ordinance of the city where the business is located. 
    Lodging or rooming house. The words "lodging or rooming house" mean a building where lodging only is provided for compensation to three or more but not exceeding 20 persons pursuant to previous arrangement in contradistinction to hotels open to transients. 
    Lot. As applied to zoning, the word "lot" means a parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in the zoning ordinance, including one main building together with its accessory buildings and the open spaces and parking spaces required by the zoning ordinance and having its principal frontage upon a street or upon an officially approved place. 
    Lot, corner. The words "corner lot" mean a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
    Lot, depth of. The words "depth of lot" mean the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, double frontage. The words "double frontage lot" mean a lot having a frontage on two nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
    Lot, interior. The words "interior lot" mean a lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot of record. The words "lot of record" mean a lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the county recorder of St. Louis County, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in the office of the county recorder of St. Louis County. For the purpose of the zoning ordinance and regulations thereunder, any preliminary plat of a subdivision which has been approved by official action of the St. Louis County planning commission prior to June 23, 1958, shall have the same status as if the subdivision plan was officially recorded in the office of the county recorder of St. Louis County. 
    Maintain a kennel. The words "maintain a kennel" mean owning, keeping or harboring at any one time, whether at one or more locations in the city, three or more dogs over the age of four months. 
    Malt liquor. The words "malt liquor" mean liquor manufactured from pure hops, or pure extract of hops, or pure barley malt, or wholesome grains or cereals and wholesome yeast and pure water, and commonly called and known as beer, and containing alcohol in excess of 3.2 percent by weight and not in excess of five percent by weight. 
    Manufactured home. As applied to flood hazard areas, the words "manufactured home" mean a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision. The words "manufactured home park or subdivision" mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Manufacturer. As applied to manufacturer's licenses, the word "manufacturer" means any person and his lessees, and his trustees or receivers appointed by any court whatsoever, who holds or purchases personal property for the purpose of adding to the value thereof, by any process of manufacturing, refining or by the combination of different materials, or who purchases and sells manufactured articles such as he manufactures or uses in manufacturing, except as is or may be otherwise provided by ordinance. 
    Manufacturer's license fee. The words "manufacturer's license fee" mean that sum of lawful money of the United States of America required to be paid to the city by any manufacturer for a license before commencing business as such. 
    Marquee. The word "marquee" means a device or structure entirely supported by the structure to which it is attached which is permanent in nature and projects over the entrance or door of a building. 
    Material. The word "material," as applied to pornography, means anything printed or written; or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture film, videotape or videotape production or pictorial representation; or any statue or other figure; or any recording or transcription; or any mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction; or anything which is or may be used as a means of communication. "Material" includes undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates and other latent representational objects. 
    Used in conjunction with the word "obscene," "material" means any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written material; or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture or other pictorial representation; or any statue or other figure; or any recording or transcription; or mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction; or any other articles, equipment, or machines. 
    May. The word "may" is permissive. 
    Membership association. As applied to section 17-65, "membership association" means a private organization in existence prior to November 30, 2004, and where all of the duties with respect to the operation of such association, including, but not limited to the preparation of food and beverages, and service of food and beverages, reception and secretarial work, and the security services of the membership association are performed by members of such membership association who do not receive compensation of any kind from the membership association or any other entity for the performance of such duties; and: 
(1)  Is organized primarily for the benefit of its members; and 
(2)  Its members are required to pay dues; and 
(3)  Is organized primarily as: 
a.  A recreational association; or 
b.  A fraternal association; or 
c.  An athletic association; or 
d.  A military veterans association; or 
e.  A religious association; or 
f.  A kindred association; and 
(4)  Is a not-for-profit organization; and 
(5)  Is managed and operated by a board consisting entirely of its members; and 
(6)  Is not primarily engaged in the preparation and serving of alcoholic beverages by-the-drink and/or food. 
    Merchant. The word "merchant" means any person, his lessees and his trustees or receivers appointed by any court whatsoever, who deals in the selling, at wholesale or retail, of any goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any description or the rendering of any service in connection therewith, at any store, stand or place within the city, except as is or may be otherwise provided by ordinance. 
    Mining. The word "mining" means the removal of any natural material from a parcel of land. 
    Minor for the purposes of sections 17-63 and 17-64 means a person under the age of 18. 
    As applied to parental responsibility, "minor" means any person under the age of 21 years. 
    "Minor," for the purposes of section 17-63, means a person under the age of 18. 
    Mobile home. The words "mobile home" mean a movable or portable dwelling built on a chassis which does not have its own motive power and which is designed for yearround living without a permanent foundation which is more than eight feet in width and 32 feet in length. 
    Month. The word "month" means a calendar month. 
    Motel. The word "motel" means a building or group of buildings having units containing sleeping accommodations which are available for temporary occupancy by automobile transients. 
    Motorcycle. The word "motorcycle" means every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
    Motor-driven vehicle. The words "motor-driven vehicle" mean every vehicle which is self-propelled by a motor and which is used for the purpose of carrying persons or commodities. 
    Motor home. The words "motor home" mean a vehicular unit built on a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis, primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use. 
    Motor tricycle. The words "motor tricycle" mean a motor vehicle operated on three wheels including a motorcycle while operated with any conveyance, temporarily or otherwise, requiring the use of a third wheel. 
    Motor vehicle. The words "motor vehicle" mean any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively upon tracks, including those with rubber tires for use on roads and/or highways. 
    Motorized bicycle. The term "motorized bicycle" means any two- or three-wheeled device having an automatic transmission and a motor with a cylinder capacity of not more than 50 cubic centimeters, which produces less than three gross brake horsepower, and is capable of propelling the device at a maximum speed of not more than 30 miles per hour on level ground. A motorized bicycle shall be considered a motor vehicle for purposes of any homeowners' or renters' insurance policy. 
    Multiple-family dwelling. The term "multiple family dwelling" means a dwelling unit in a building containing more than one dwelling unit that is located within a multiple family zoning district, or a dwelling unit located on a parcel of land having more than one dwelling unit located thereon within a multiple family zoning district. 
    Multiple family dwelling district. A type of zoning district intended primarily for multiple family residential uses and activities in which more than one dwelling unit may be erected on a single parcel of land. 
    Nerve tissue origin. The words "nerve tissue origin" refer to a vaccine which is manufactured, using tissue of the nervous system as a growth medium. 
    New construction. The words "new construction" mean, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision. The words "new manufactured home park or subdivision" mean a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    No passing zones. The words "no passing zones" mean zones determined and indicated by signs or markings where overtaking and passing is deemed unsafe, and under chapter 15, Motor vehicles and traffic, is declared unlawful. 
    Nonconforming use. The words "nonconforming use" mean any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the time of passage of the zoning ordinance or amendments thereto which does not conform after the passage of such ordinance or amendments thereto with the use regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
    Nondomestic animal. The words "nondomestic animal" mean all felines (other than the domestic house cat), nonhuman primates, bears, wolves, coyotes, foxes, venomous and constrictor reptiles, and any crossbreed of such animals which have similar characteristics of the animals specified herein. In order to properly administer the provisions of this section, the city administrator may add to or remove from the classification of nondomestic animal any bird, mammal, reptile, aquatic and amphibious forms, or other members of the animal kingdom. Additions or deletions to the list may be made only if the city administrator determines, after public hearing, that such species because of habit, mode of life or natural instinct is incapable of being domesticated; requires the exercise of art, force or skill to keep them safely in subjection; and would create a reasonable likelihood of hazard to the public. Each determination by the city administrator as to additions or deletions shall become effective when approved by the board of aldermen. 
    Nonintoxicating beer. The words "nonintoxicating beer" mean any beer manufactured from pure hops, or pure abstract of hops; and pure barley, malt and other wholesome grains or cereals; and wholesome yeast and pure water; and free from all harmful substances, preservatives and adulterants; and having an alcoholic content of more than one-half of one percent by volume and not exceeding 3 2/10 percent by weight. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Nudity. The word "nudity" means the showing of post-pubertal human genitals or pubic area, with less than a fully opaque covering. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person or thing, and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons and things. 
    Nursing or convalescent home. The words "nursing or convalescent home" mean a home for the aged, chronically ill or incurable persons in which three or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept and provided with food, or shelter and care, for compensation, but not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis, treatment or care of the sick or injured. 
    Oath. The word "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Obscene. Any work, matter, material or performance is obscene if: 
(1)  Applying contemporary community standards, its predominant appeal is to prurient interest in sex; and 
(2)  Taken as a whole with the average person, applying contemporary community standards, it depicts or describes sexual conduct in a patently offensive way; and 
(3)  Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
    Occupant. As applied to the housing code, the word "occupant" means any person (including an owner or operator) living and sleeping in a dwelling or rooming unit or having actual possession of such dwelling or rooming unit. 
    Of another. As applied to stealing, property or services are that "of another" if any natural person, corporation, partnership, association, governmental subdivision or instrumentality, other than the actor, has a possessory or proprietary interest therein, except that property shall not be deemed property of another who has only a security interest therein, even if legal title is in the creditor pursuant to a conditional sales contract or other security arrangement. 
    Office building. The words "office building" mean a building occupied by two or more businesses or noncommercial entities. 
    Officer. As applied to conflicts of interest, the word "officer" means a person holding any office, position as department or division head, membership on any board or commission, whether by election or appointment, and whether serving with or without compensation, under any provision of any law or any ordinance of the city. 
    One-way street. The words "one-way street" mean a street where vehicles are by law required to move in one designated direction only. 
    Open space. As applied to the mixed use development zoning district, the words "open space" include all the land and water areas of a site that are not covered by structures (except recreational), roadways, driveways, parking areas and loading zones. Useable open areas may be included in open space computations. Undeveloped building sites, proposed rights-of-way and similar areas are not to be considered in open space computations. 
    Operator. The word "operator" means any person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle or who has charge, care or control of a building, or part thereof. 
    When applied to the housing code, "operator" means any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
    Ordinary minimum winter conditions. The words "ordinary minimum winter conditions" mean the temperature 15 degrees Fahrenheit above the lowest recorded temperature for the previous ten-year period. 
    Original package. The words "original package" mean, with reference to the sale of malt liquor or beer, any package containing three or more standard containers of beer. With reference to the sale of intoxicating liquor other than malt liquor or beer, the term means a package or container containing a quantity of not less than one-half pint of intoxicating liquor. 
    "Original package," with reference to nonintoxicating beer as defined in this section, means any package containing three, six, 12 or 24 small standard beer bottles and any package containing three, six or 12 large standard beer bottles. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    When applied to an animal, "owner" means any person who owns, harbors, shelters, keeps, controls, manages, possesses or has part interest in any dog, cat or kennel in the city. The occupant of any premises on which a dog or cat remains for a period of seven days or to which it customarily returns for a period of ten days is presumed to be harboring, sheltering or keeping the aforementioned dog or cat, within this definition. Under no circumstances are the normal and ordinarily accepted definitions of the terms "harboring," "sheltering" or "keeping" to be limited to the words of the aforementioned presumption. If a minor owns a dog, puppy or other animal subject to the provisions of chapter 5, Animals and fowl, the head of the household of which such minor owner is a member shall be deemed to be the owner of such dog, puppy or animal for the purpose of such chapter, and under such chapter shall be responsible as the owner, whether or not such household head is himself a minor. If not a member of a household, such minor owner shall himself be directly subject to the provisions of such chapter. 
    When applied to the housing code, "owner" means any person who, alone, jointly or severally with others, shall be in actual possession of, or have charge, care or control of, any dwelling or dwelling unit within the city as owner, employee or agent of the owner, or as trustee or guardian of the estate or person of the title holder, and such person shall be bound to comply with the provisions of the housing code to the same extent as the owner. 
    When applied to nonresidential buildings, "owner" means any person who alone, or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Shall have legal title to any building or space with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Shall have charge, care or control of any building or space, as owner, agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of section 7-246 et seq. to the same extent as if he were the owner. 
    Panel van/truck. The words "panel van/truck" mean a motor vehicle not having a multiple axle configuration and having a box like fully enclosed personnel/driver and/or cargo hauling areas within the same single enclosed manufacturers original equipment body. Such vehicles may include permanently mounted add-on fixtures such as toolboxes, racks, carriers, etc. as long as the original factory installed body remains on the vehicle. 
    Parade, procession. For the purposes of section 15-206 et seq., the word "parade" or "procession" means any group of ten or more persons or ten or more vehicles, except the military forces of the United States or of the state and the forces of the police and fire departments. 
    Parent. As applied to section 17-10, the word "parent" means the mother, father, legal guardian or any person having the care or custody of a minor or such other adult with whom a minor may be found residing. 
    Park. The word "park," when used as a noun, means a park, reservation, playground, beach, swimming pool, recreation center or grounds, golf course or any other area in the city, owned or used by the city, and devoted to active or passive recreation, which specifically includes, but is not limited to, George Vlasis Park and additions thereto and the city recreational complex. 
    Park, parking. The word "park" or "parking," when used as a verb, means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
    Parking lot. As applied generally to chapter 15, Motor vehicles and traffic, the words "parking lot" mean an area on public or private property where spaces are provided gratuitously or for hire for the parking of motor vehicles; provided that, nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to include driveways or other portions of single-family residential lots used by the occupant and his invitees for parking automobiles, nor to spaces on public streets where parking is permitted. 
    As applied to parking lot marking, "parking lot" means a paved area containing 3,500 square feet or more, including driveways and traffic lanes on public or private property where spaces are provided gratuitously or for hire for the parking of vehicles by the public. 
    As applied to zoning, "parking lot" means any place, lot, parcel or yard used in whole or in part for storing or parking of two or more vehicles where such usage is not incident to or in connection with a dwelling district, and located on the same tract. 
    As applied to chapter 24, "parking lot" means a paved, graveled or otherwise designated area intended for the parking and/or storage of motor vehicles and trailers. Parking lots are not located within public rights-of-way, generally have no discernible physical separation between the area intended for parking spaces and the adjoining area intended for vehicular access to the parking spaces except painted lines, or raised islands, and function for the parking and storage of vehicles and trailers. A parking lot does not function as a conduit (roadway) for vehicular traffic, except for that vehicular traffic which intends to utilize the parking provided for or within a facility or in an adjoining facilities. 
    Parking space. As applied to zoning, the words "parking space" mean a surfaced area, unenclosed or enclosed in the main building or in an accessory building, being a rectangle 19 feet in length and nine feet in width, exclusive of driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one automobile and connected with a street or alley by a driveway. The layout, arrangement, and dimensions of drives and parking spaces shall be as follows: 
Parking Table 
PARALLEL PARKING 
On-site parallel parking stalls shall be 9.0 feet × 22.0* feet adjacent to a 22-foot two-way lane or 15-foot one-way lane. Curbed islands are required at ends of aisles where necessary for traffic-control and/or drainage. 
Parallel Parking 
*Additional width may be required where the aisle serves as the principal means of access to onsite buildings or structures. 
In parking structures, one-half of the area occupied by supporting columns may be included in determining the width and area of each adjacent space. 
    Past service credits. The words "past service credits," as used in the police pension plan, mean the benefit which was granted, pursuant to the original plan adopted in 1969, to each employee of the employer who was eligible to participate in the plan as of its effective date, which was June 1, 1969. The past service credit granted to each participant eligible therefor is the right to an additional annual contribution equal to 0.25 percent of such participant's compensation for the plan year, multiplied by such employee's number of full years of service prior to June 1, 1969. 
    Pedestrian. The word "pedestrian" means any person afoot. 
    Performance. The word "performance" means any play, motion picture film, videotape, dance or exhibition performed before an audience of one or more. 
    Person. The word "person" means any individual, association, organization, society, firm, entity, joint stock company, syndicate, club, partnership, copartnership, corporation, conservator or any body politic or corporate or combination of individuals, of whatever form or character, or any other group acting as a unit. It shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other officer appointed by any state or federal court, or any representative otherwise appointed according to law. Whenever the word "person" is used in any section of this Code prescribing a penalty or fine as to partnerships or associations, the word shall include the partners or members thereof who are responsible for any violation of such section. 
    As applied to the regulation of fences, "person" means any person, firm, partnership or corporation whether as owner, tenant, occupant or lessee of any real estate in the city or as the contractor or subcontractor of such owner, tenant, occupant or lessee. 
    As applied to zoning, "person" means any individual, partnership, firm, corporation or association. As applied to partnerships, firms and associations, the term includes the individual partners or members thereof. With respect to special events, "person" means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
    Person solicited. The words "person solicited" mean any person whom a solicitor approaches for the purpose of attempting to transact his business. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein described. 
    Pickup truck: The words "pickup truck" mean a motor vehicle not having a multiple axle configuration and having a fully enclosed passenger body (cab) with a separate factory-installed open-top rear cargo bed. Such vehicles may feature chassis mounted body elements or unibody style construction. Such vehicles may include permanently mounted add-on fixtures such as, but not limited to, toolboxes, racks, carriers, tops, trailer hitches, etc., as long as the original factory-installed body elements, in substantially their original condition, remain on the vehicle. 
    Place. As applied to zoning, the word "place" means an open unoccupied space other than a street or alley permanently reserved as the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Place of employment. As applied to section 17-65, "place of employment" means an area under the control of a public or private employer in which employees of the employer perform services, and shall include, but not be limited to offices, classrooms and school grounds, retail stores, banquet facilities, theaters, food stores, banks, financial institutions, factories, warehouses, employee cafeterias, lounges, auditoriums, gymnasiums, restrooms, elevators, hallways, museums, libraries, bowling establishments, employee medical facilities, rooms or areas containing photocopying equipment, other office equipment used in common, and company vehicles. A private residence is not a "place of employment" unless used as a childcare, adult day care, or health care facility. 
    Plan year. As applied to the police pension trust, prior to June 1, 1986, "plan year" means a consecutive 12-month period beginning June 1 and ending May 31 of each year. There will be a short plan year commencing on June 1, 1986, and ending on December 31, 1986. On and after January 1, 1987, "plan year" means a consecutive 12-month period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of each year; provided that, notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the period from June 1, 1986, through and including December 31, 1986, shall constitute a complete plan year for all purposes under the police pension plan. 
    Plumbing. The word "plumbing" means all of the following facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, steam pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, toilets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines, catchbasins, drains, vents and any other similar fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines. 
    Pneumatic tires. The words "pneumatic tires" mean tires of rubber or other substance and fabric, inflated with air. 
    Police or traffic officer. The words "police or traffic officer" mean every officer of the city police department or any officer lawfully and duly authorized, deputized, assigned or called upon to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations, including members of the police reserve force of the city. 
    Pornographic for minors. Any material or performance is pornographic for minors if the following apply: 
(1)  The average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find that the material or performance, taken as a whole, has a tendency to cater or appeal to a prurient interest of minors; and 
(2)  The material or performance depicts or describes nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse in a way which is patently offensive to the average person applying contemporary adult community standards with respect to what is suitable for minors; and 
(3)  The material or performance taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value for minors. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used, it shall mean place or places. 
    When applied to intoxicating liquor, "premises" means that portion of any building in which a licensee under article II of chapter 3 has his place of business, and any additional building or portion thereof used in connection therewith, and the entire lot or lots, parcel or parcels of land on which such buildings are situated, or which are used in connection with such buildings. 
    When applied to nonintoxicating beer, "premises" means the entire building in which the licensee hereunder has his place of business, and any additional building used in connection therewith, and the entire lot or lots, parcel or parcels of land on which such buildings are situated, or which are used in connection with such buildings. 
    When applied to nonresidential buildings, "premises" means the platted lot or part thereof or unplatted lot or parcel of land either occupied or unoccupied by any building or structure. 
    Primary front yard. The front yard of a parcel of land having multiple front yards that lies in front of the primary structure. The front of the structure is defined by the location of the primary entry door and the building façade in which it is located. If a parcel of land only adjoins one right-of-way its only front yard is a primary front yard. 
    In situations where the primary structure is oriented on an angle toward an intersection such that it faces two front yards, the primary front yard shall extend between the lines that are the extension of the front building line of the primary structure in each direction to the points of intersection with the nearest right-of-way lines. The area between these lines shall be the primary front yard in this situation. 
    Private driveway, private parking lot, private property. For the purpose of subsection 15-5(b), "private driveway," "private parking lot" and "private property" mean any driveway, parking lot or property other than public streets and including any other driveway, parking lot or property, even if owned by a governmental entity. 
    Private road or driveway. The words "private road or driveway" mean every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
    Private roadway easement. The words "private roadway easement" mean a designated accessway for the servicing of and access to individual lots within a subdivision. 
    Promote. The word "promote" means to manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail, deliver, transfer, transmute, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit, or advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same. 
    Proof of age means a driver's license or other generally accepted means of identification that contains a picture of the individual and appears on its face to be valid. 
    Property. The word "property" includes real and personal property. 
    As applied to abandoned vehicles, "property" means any real property within the city which is not a street or highway. 
    As applied to stealing, "property" means anything of value, whether real or personal, tangible or intangible, in possession or in action, and shall include but not be limited to the evidence of a debt actually executed but not delivered or issued as a valid instrument. 
    Protective headgear. The words "protective headgear" mean a safety helmet designed for wear by the rider and passenger of vehicles for the purpose of mitigating the effects of a blow on the head. Protective headgear may include motorcycle crash helmets, but shall not include such items as industrial or construction hardhats, baseball, football or other athletic headgear, or helmets designed for a purpose other than for protective headgear for riders and occupants of vehicles. Safety helmets shall be constructed essentially to the form of a shell around the head and shall be constructed to absorb impact energy. The shell shall begin above the eyes, covering the forehead, and be formed over or on top of the head above a plane level with the base of the shell covering the forehead. It may be formed around the back and sides of the head. The shell of safety helmets shall have a reasonably smooth external surface, and there shall be no external projection greater than one-eighth inch above the outer surface thereof, except a clip for goggles or face protector where provided for in the construction. Safety helmets shall be constructed of heavy plastic or other durable material that will not deteriorate appreciably when exposed to rain, snow, sleet, sun, cold, dust, vibrations, contact with the skin, effects of sweat or of products applied to the skin or hair, or with age. Safety helmets shall be equipped with a harness or chin strap for maintaining them in position on the wearer's head. 
    Provided. The word "provided" means any material furnished, supplied, paid for or under the control of the owner. 
    Public governmental body. The words "public governmental body" mean any legislative or administrative governmental entity created by the Constitution or statutes of this state by order or ordinance of any political subdivision or district, or by executive order, including any body, agency, board, bureau, council, commission, committee, board of regents or board of curators of any institution of higher education, supported in whole or in part from state funds; advisory committee or commission appointed by the governor by executive order, department, or division of the state; any political subdivision of the state, any county or any municipal government, school district or special purpose district; any other legislative or administrative governmental deliberative body under the direction of three or more elected or appointed members having rulemaking or quasijudicial power; any committee appointed by or under the direction or authority of any of the abovenamed entities and which is authorized to report to any of the above-named entities and any quasipublic governmental body. 
    Public hall. The words "public hall" mean a hall, corridor or passageway for egress from a dwelling not within the exclusive control of one family. 
    Public meeting. The words "public meeting" mean any meeting of a public governmental body subject to sections of this Code at which any public business is discussed, decided, or public policy formulated. The term "public meeting" shall not include an informal gathering of members of a public governmental body for ministerial or social purposes when there is no intent to avoid the purposes of such sections. 
    Public place. The term "public place" means any public street, park, cemetery, schoolyard, public library, municipal building or open space adjacent thereto or any building or area to which the public is expressly or impliedly invited. 
    Public record. As applied to chapter 2, article V, the words "public record" mean any record retained by or of any public governmental body including any report, survey, memorandum, or other document or study prepared and presented to the public governmental body by a consultant or other professional service paid for in whole or in part by public funds; provided, however, that personally identifiable student records maintained by public educational institutions shall be open for inspection by the parents, guardian or other custodian of students under the age of 18 years and by the parents, guardian or other custodian and the student if the student is over the age of 18 years. 
    Public vote. The words "public vote" mean any vote cast at any public meeting of any public governmental body. 
    Pup, puppy. The word "pup" or "puppy" means any domesticated member of the Canis familiaris species, male or female, under six months of age. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Recreational motor vehicle. The words "recreational motor vehicle" mean any motor vehicle designed, constructed or substantially modified so that it may be used and is used for the purpose of temporary housing quarters, including therein sleeping and eating facilities, which are either permanently attached to the motor vehicle or attached to a unit which is securely attached to the motor vehicle. 
    Recreational vehicle. The words "recreational vehicle" mean a vehicular-type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle, including travel trailers, camping trailers, truck campers, motor homes, boats of any type, all-terrain vehicles and all equipment of a similar nature. 
    As applied to floodplain areas, "recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
    Refuse. The word "refuse" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid and/or liquid waste including ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, excrement, abandoned vehicles, abandoned machinery, vehicle and machinery components, industrial wastes, junk, brush, debris, leaves, clippings, stone, wood, rubble, construction debris, rock, plaster, broken concrete, building materials, paper, cardboard, metal, glass, crockery and similar materials, but not including compost. 
    Regularly parked overnight. For the purposes of section 15-263, the words "regularly parked overnight" mean two consecutive periods of at least six hours each, between the time of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
    Rental service store. The words "rental service store" mean a building or portion thereof used for the rental of tools, equipment, furniture and other items. 
    Repair. As applied to the housing code, the word "repair" means to restore to a sound and acceptable state of operation, serviceability or appearance. Repairs shall be expected to last approximately as long as would the replacement by new items. 
    Replace. As applied to the housing code, the word "replace" means to remove an existing item or portion of a system and to construct or install a new item of similar or improved quality as the existing item when new. Replacement will ordinarily take place when the item is incapable of repair. 
    Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
    Restaurant. The word "restaurant" means any place of business, the main purpose and activity of which is to serve meals, sandwiches, short orders and other food to be eaten by its customers on the premises and which does not provide or furnish to the public lodging or sleeping rooms. 
    Restaurant bar. The words "restaurant bar" mean any establishment having a restaurant or similar facility on the premises at least 50 percent of the gross income of which is derived from the sale of prepared meals or food consumed on such premises or which has an annual gross income of at least $275,000.00 from the sale of prepared meals or foods consumed on such premises. 
    Restraint. A dog, cat or any other animal off the premises of its owner's real property is under restraint for the purpose of chapter 5, Animals and fowl, if: 
(1)  It is controlled by a line or leash not more than six feet in length when such line or leash is held by a competent person; or 
(2)  It is within an enclosed vehicle which is parked, stopped or being driven. 
    Right-of-way. The term "right-of-way" means the right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other. 
    Roadway. The word "roadway" means that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways the term "roadway" as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
    Rolling papers means paper designed, manufactured, marketed or sold for use primarily as a wrapping or enclosure for tobacco, which enables a person to roll loose tobacco into a smokable cigarette. 
    Rooming unit. The words "rooming unit" mean any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
    Sadomasochistic abuse. The words "sadomasochistic abuse" mean flagellation or torture by or upon a person as an act of sexual stimulation or gratification. 
    Safety zone. The words "safety zone" mean the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
    Sale by drink. The words "sale by drink" mean the sale of any intoxicating liquor, except malt liquor, in the original package in any quantity less than 50 milliliters. 
    Sample for the purposes of section 17-63 and section 17-64 means a tobacco product distributed to members of the general public or tobacco product samples. 
    Sampling for the purposes of section 17-63, means the distribution to members of the general public of tobacco product samples. 
    Satellite earth station. The words "satellite earth station" refer to antennas designed to receive electromagnetic wave energy relayed by earth-orbiting satellites. 
    School zone. The words "school zone" mean a space in any highway, road or street lawfully designated by ordinance for the safety of persons going to and returning from public, private or parochial schools. 
    Seal. Whenever the word "seal" is used, it means the city or corporate seal. 
    Secondary dwelling unit. Any dwelling unit which is built or otherwise created within an existing building or portion thereof or on a parcel of land and within or upon which another use or activity is in place and authorized by the provisions of the zoning district in which it is located. Secondary dwelling units are incidental and secondary to the primary use or activity conducted on the premises. 
    Secondary front yard. Any front yard or portion thereof on any parcel of land that is not a primary front yard. 
    Self-service laundry. The words "self-service laundry" mean a building or portion thereof equipped with coin-operated, automatic-type laundry and/or dry cleaning machines, drying machines and ironing machines of the ordinary home type. 
    Services. As applied to stealing, the word "services" includes transportation, telephone, electricity, gas, water or other public service, accommodation in hotels, restaurants or elsewhere, admission to exhibitions and use of vehicles. 
    Set of seat safety belts. The words "set of seat safety belts" mean a combination of belts, buckle and brackets meeting SAE J-4 or higher standards. 
    Sewage. The word "sewage" means any waterborne waste, industrial waste or human excrement which may exist or accumulate on any premises. 
    Sewage treatment plant. The words "sewage treatment plant" mean any works or devices for treatment of sewage. 
    Sewer. The word "sewer" means any public, semipublic or private lateral or main sewer, constructed in a street, alley, place or right-of-way, exclusive of a building or industrial connection sewer. 
    Sewerage system. The words "sewerage system" mean any sewage treatment facility, sewer, appurtenance, equipment or any combination thereof used or intended to be used for the purpose of conveying, treating or disposing of any wastewater, industrial waste or human excrement accumulating on any premises; provided, such term shall not include "building sewer" as defined in the plumbing code. 
    Sexual conduct. The words "sexual conduct" mean actual or simulated, normal or perverted acts of human masturbation; deviate sexual intercourse; sexual intercourse; or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or the breast of a female in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification or any sadomasochistic abuse or acts including animals or any latent objects in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification. 
    Sexual excitement. The words "sexual excitement" mean the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
    Shall. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Shopping plaza, shopping center. The words "shopping plaza" and "shopping center" mean a tract of ground occupied by two or more businesses or commercial entities. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    As applied to motor vehicle and traffic regulations, sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians. 
    Sign. The word "sign" means a device that utilizes any letter, word, model, design, light, sound, tactile expression, representation, name, identification, description, display, projection, or illustration by which anything is made known and/or which is intended to communicate a message or idea which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, idea or business. However, the definition of a sign shall not include the flag of the United States of America, the State of Missouri, other states or foreign countries; provided however, such flags shall not exceed five feet by eight feet and no more than four may be displayed at any location. The definition of a sign also shall not include any display of official court or public office notices, nor shall "sign" include any letter, name, word, display, model, design, device, representation, identification, description or illustration located completely within an enclosed building. 
    Sign area. The words "sign area" mean the total area of the space to be used for message purposes, including the spaces between open-type letters and figures, including the background structure, or other decoration or addition which is an integral part of the sign. Sign supports shall be excluded in determining the area of a sign. Both faces of a multiple-faced sign shall be considered part of and count toward the sign area of such sign. 
    Sign, attached. The words "attached sign" mean a wall sign or projecting sign attached to a building wall or the generally vertical plane of a mansard- type roof. 
    Sign, construction. The words "construction sign" mean a sign placed or erected on a construction site during the period of a valid construction permit. 
    Sign, directional/informational. The words "directional/informational sign" mean a sign which indicates a direction or provides information for vehicular or pedestrian traffic or other movement information not related to advertising. 
    Sign, directory. The words "directory sign" means a sign erected on a property or development with multiple users and containing locations for the placement of multiple smaller signs for the potential utilization of the multiple users on the site. 
    Sign face. The words "sign face " mean any surface of a sign upon, against or through which the message is displayed, including any structural element or trim, which displays or upon which is displayed any message or portion of the sign's message provided that the edges, or thickness, of a sign shall not be counted as a separate sign face unless a message is conveyed thereon. 
    Sign facing or surface. The words "sign facing or surface" mean any surface of a sign upon, against or through which the advertising message is displayed or illustrated on the sign, including structural trim, which displays or upon which is displayed any color, message, name or symbol of any kind for the purpose of advertising, announcing, directing or attracting attention from the outside of a building and which can be seen from a single location on an adjacent street, provided that the ends, or thickness, of a sign shall not be counted as a separate sign face unless an advertising message is conveyed thereon. 
    Sign, flashing. The words "flashing sign" mean a sign on which emitted or reflected light is not steady or consistent in intensity and color at all times. Signs meeting the definition of dynamic display signs are not flashing signs. 
    Sign, fluttering. The words "fluttering sign" mean a sign which flutters and moves with the wind or by some artificial means and includes but is not limited to pennants, banners, flags or other devices made of flexible fabrics and loosely attached hanging material. 
    Sign, ground. The words "ground sign" mean any detached sign mounted on the ground. 
    Sign, hanging. The words "hanging sign" mean any sign attached firmly to and hanging entirely beneath a canopy, portico or marquee, or similar structure. 
    Sign, institutional or governmental. The words "institutional or governmental sign" mean a sign erected at an institutional or government facility. 
    Sign, marquee, canopy or awning. The words "marquee, canopy or awning sign" mean a sign part of attached to illustrated or projected on a marquee, canopy, or awning respectively. 
    Sign, moveable. The words "moveable sign" mean a sign which is not permanently affixed to a structure or the ground and can easily be moved from one location to another. 
    Sign, moving. The words "moving sign" mean a sign, all or any part of which moves by any means. Such sign includes a fluttering sign. 
    Sign, nonconforming. The words "nonconforming sign" mean a sign legally erected under any previously existing ordinances of the city which does not conform to the provisions of chapter 22, Signs. 
    Sign, onsite informational. The words "onsite informational sign" mean an informational sign located on a commercial, institutional, governmental, or other similar site which gives parking, fire protection, traffic flow (other than directional signs), height clearance, pedestrian, or other similar information and which does not advertise the business or use located on the site. 
    Sign, political. The words "political sign" mean a temporary sign advocating or opposing any political proposition or candidate for public office. 
    Sign, post. The words "post sign" mean any detached sign which is supported by one or more posts. 
    Sign, projecting. The words "projecting sign" mean any sign which projects more than 12 inches beyond the plane of the generally vertical surface on which the sign is erected or attached. 
    Sign, reader board. The words "reader board sign" mean any permanent sign upon which a changeable message may be placed by physically removing and replacing the sign or its components. 
    Sign, real estate. A ground or wall sign temporarily located on a piece of real estate while that real estate is available for sale or development. 
    Sign, roof. The words "roof sign" mean any sign erected on a roof. For the purposes of chapter 22, signs, signs erected on top of a marquee, portico, canopy or similar structure shall be considered roof signs. Signs erected on the generally vertical plane of a mansard or similar style roof shall not be considered roof signs. 
    Sign structure. The words "sign structure" mean the sign and all parts associated with its construction or support. 
    Sign, subdivision. The words "subdivision sign" mean a sign erected at the entrance to a residential subdivision or residential development. 
    Sign supports. The words "sign supports" mean all structures and trim by which a sign is held in position and displayed, including, for example, poles, braces, guys and anchors. All such supports shall be considered part of the sign as defined in this section. 
    Sign, temporary. The words "temporary sign" mean any sign intended for a limited period of display which is determined and established as a part of the process of issuing a temporary sign permit. 
    Sign, wall. The words "wall sign" mean a sign erected or attached against the wall of any building or against the generally vertical plane of a mansard-type roof with the plane for the sign face parallel to the plane of the wall below the roof line. 
    Signature, subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    Single-family dwelling district. A type of zoning district intended primarily for residential uses and activities in which no more than one dwelling unit may be erected or maintained on a single parcel of land. 
    Smoking. As applied to section 17-65, "Smoking" means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant, or other combustible substance in any manner or in any form. 
    Solicitor. The word "solicitor" means any individual: 
(1)  Traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any type of conveyance from house to house, or place to place; or 
(2)  Soliciting property or financial assistance of any kind; or 
(3)  Selling or offering for sale any article, tag, service, emblem, publication or ticket; or 
(4)  Taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares, books, charts, maps, magazines or other merchandise for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed then or in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he collects advance payments on such sales or not. Provided, however, that the provisions of sections 14-3-14-7 shall not apply to salesmen soliciting orders from or selling to retail dealers for resale, wholesalers and manufacturers for manufacturing purposes; or to bidders for public works or supplies. The term "solicitor" shall include a "canvasser", "peddler", "hawker", "handbiller" and "salesman", but shall not include the following: 
a.  Any candidate that has filed for election to a public office; or 
b.  A volunteer solicitor that is also a member of such organization, conducting such activities for a nonprofit or charitable organization recognized as such by the Internal Revenue Service, the Better Business Bureau of St. Louis or any other recognized charitable screening organization. 
    Solid tires. The words "solid tires" mean tires of rubber or other resilient material, other than pneumatic tires. 
    Solid waste. The words "solid waste" mean waste in a solid or semisolid state, but not including hazardous waste or special waste. 
    Special event. The words "special event" mean: A planned event, activity or temporary grouping of people in any zoning district that deviates from the normal land use that occurs on the site on city, public, or privately owned property, and interferes with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian traffic, vehicular traffic, or parking in any manner. This shall also include any event, activity or temporary grouping of people which will require special city services which include, but are not limited to, provision of barricades, signage, special traffic or parking arrangements, and/or special police services or protections. 
(1)  Examples of special events include but are not limited to: parades, bicycle races, fairs, outdoor music performances/concerts including events with DJs and live bands, craft fairs, block/neighborhood parties, carnivals, shows, outdoor cultural/community events, fund-raisers, organized run/walks, exhibitions, public speaking events, and/or sales and promotions. 
    Special waste. The words "special waste" mean waste that is declared by the county or the state department of natural resources to be nonhazardous but requiring handling other than normally used for waste, such as sludge. 
    Speed limit. The words "speed limit" mean the maximum speed as prescribed by ordinance within a zone determined and indicated with numerical signs or markings designating such speeds, travel in excess of which is unlawful under chapter 15. 
    Sports arenas. As applied to section 17-65, "sports arenas" means any indoor or outdoor athletic fields, sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events. 
    Stable, private. The words "private stable" mean a stable with a capacity of not more than two horses or mules. 
    Stadium. The word "stadium" means a fully or partially enclosed facility intended for the play of baseball, football, soccer and similar games, and having all or a portion of the playing area covered by a permanent structure. 
    Stand or standing. As applied to chapter 15, Motor vehicles and traffic, the word "stand" or "standing" means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
    Start of construction. The words "start of construction" (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)) include substantial improvements and mean that the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footing, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Missouri. 
    Stop. The word "stop," when required, means complete cessation from movement. 
    Stop, stopping. The word "stop" or "stopping," when prohibited, means any halting even momentarily of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal, as otherwise provided in chapter 15, Motor vehicles and traffic. 
    Stormwater. The word "stormwater" means any water resulting from precipitation mixed with the accumulation of dirt, soil and other debris or substances collected from the surfaces on which such precipitation falls or flows. 
    Story. The word "story" means that portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Story, half. The words "half story" mean a space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds of the floor area is finished off for use. A half story containing independent apartments or living quarters or used for any office or commercial purpose shall be considered as a full story. 
    Street line. The words "street line" mean the dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and the right-of-way of a contiguous street. 
    Street, road, highway or alley. The word "street," "road," "highway," or "alley" means the entire length and width of any way, place, right-of-way, easement or thoroughfare, including state and county roads, bridges and highways, open for vehicular traffic or movement by the traveling public, regardless of whether it has been legally established by constituted authority or by use for the statutory period of time as a public highway. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
    As applied to zoning, "street" means all property dedicated or intended for public or private street, highway, freeway, or roadway purposes or subject to public easements therefor. 
    Structural alteration. The words "structural alteration" mean any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls, not including, however, changes in doors or windows or alterations which affect primarily the appearance and not the life of the structure. 
    Structural trim. The words "structural trim" mean the molding, battens, cappings, nailing strips, latticing and platforms which are attached to a sign structure. 
    Structure. The word "structure" means anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having location on the ground, including a fence or freestanding wall. A sign, billboard or other advertising medium, detached or projecting, shall be construed to be a structure. 
    As applied to the flood hazard provisions, "structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home, and a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. 
    As applied to zoning, "structure" means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, including, but not limiting the generality of the foregoing, advertising signs, billboards, fences, backstops or tennis courts, and pergolas. 
    Subdivision of land. The words "subdivision of land" mean: 
(1)  The division of land into two or more tracts, sites, parcels or lots where one or more of the parcels are of three acres or less in area. 
(2)  The division of land into tracts of more than three acres where the proposed lot frontage on a roadway is less than 300 feet. 
(3)  Dedication or establishment of a road, highway or street through a tract of land regardless of area. 
(4)  Resubdivisions of land heretofore divided or platted into lots, sites or parcels, containing one acre or more or a total area of one acre or more. 
    Substandard. The word "substandard" is applicable to all buildings used for purposes of human habitation which do not conform to the minimum standards established by the housing code and by any other provision of this Code or other ordinances. 
    Substantial damage. The words "substantial damage" mean damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement. The words "substantial improvement" mean any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost or which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Substantial interest. The words "substantial interest" mean ownership by the individual or any member of his immediate family, directly or indirectly, of ten percent or more of any business entity. 
    Supplied. The word "supplied" means paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of the owner or operator. 
    Swimming pool. The words "swimming pool," as applied to public and semipublic pools, means an artificial pool of water, wading pool or spray pool, and auxiliary structures including dressing and locker rooms, toilets, showers and other areas and enclosures that are intended for the use of persons using the pool; but do not include pools and auxiliary structures and equipment at single-family private residences intended only for the use of the owner or lessee, his family and his private guests. 
    As applied to family pools, "swimming pool" means an artificial or semiartificial receptacle or other container, whether located indoors or outdoors, above the ground or in the ground, for water, having a depth of or in excess of 24 inches at any point or with a surface area exceeding 250 square feet, used or intended to be used for swimming or bathing including all structures, appurtenances, equipment, appliances and other facilities appurtenant to and intended for the operation and maintenance of a swimming pool. 
    Tamper. As applied to fire hydrants, the word "tamper" means and includes, but not be limited to, the removal of the cap or any other part of such device; the insertion of any object or material into such device; the application of any wrench, tool, implement or other object or material to such device; the attachment of a hose or any other instrument to such device; and/or the use of such device in any fashion so as to permit water to flow therefrom. 
    Taxicab. The word "taxicab" means a motor vehicle other than a bus offered for or engaged in carrying passengers for hire. 
    Temporary housing. The words "temporary housing" mean any tent, trailer or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure or to any utilities system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days. 
    Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such buildings or lands, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Through highway, road or street. The words "through highway, road or street" mean every highway, road or street or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways, roads or streets is required by law to yield the right-of-way to vehicles on such through highways, roads or streets, in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign when such signs are erected as provided in chapter 15, Motor vehicles and traffic. 
    Time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
    Title of officer, etc. Whenever the title of an officer, department, board or commission is given it shall be construed as though the words "of the City of Ballwin" were added. 
    Tobacco products means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco. 
    Total and permanent disability. As applied to the police pension trust, the words "total and permanent disability" mean a physical or mental condition of a participant in the police pension plan resulting from a bodily injury or disease or mental disorder which renders him incapable of continuing in gainful employment. 
    Tourist or trailer camp. The words "tourist or trailer camp" mean an area containing one or more structures designed or intended to be used as living facilities of two or more families and intended primarily for automobile transients or providing spaces where two or more tents or auto trailers can be parked. 
    Tractor. The word "tractor" means any motor vehicle designed primarily for agricultural use or used as a traveling power plant or for drawing other vehicles or farm or road building implements and having no provision for carrying loads independently. 
    Traffic. The word "traffic" means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, bicycles, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances either singly or together, while using any highway, road or street for purposes of travel. 
    Traffic control device. The words "traffic control device" mean all signs, signals, markings, intersection lighting and devices not inconsistent with this Code, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of directing, regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
    Traffic control signal. The words "traffic control signal" mean any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
    Traffic lane. The words "traffic lane" mean a way open to the use of the public for the purpose of providing access to parking spaces from a driveway or entrance drive. 
    Trailer. The word "trailer" means any vehicle without motive power designed for carrying property or passengers on its own structure and being drawn by a self-propelled vehicle or other means; and/or a structure used for living, sleeping, business and/or storage purposes and having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, support horses, or skirting and which is, has been, or reasonably can be equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from place to place whether by motive power or other means. The term "trailer" includes, without limitation, utility trailer, camp car, house car and semitrailer or vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in conjunction with a means of motive power or self-propelled vehicle such that at least part of the trailer and/or the trailer's connection is carried by means of motive power or the towing vehicle, but does not include vehicles running exclusively on tracks. 
    Transportation company. The words "transportation company" mean any individual or individuals, or incorporated or unincorporated company, engaged in the business of transportation for hire of goods and merchandise by use or means of any vessel, railroad car, motor vehicle, airplane or other means of conveyance whatsoever, to whom or to which any of the provisions of this Code applies or may apply. 
    Trash hauler. The words "trash hauler" shall mean any person, business, company or entity collecting, removing, disposing, hauling or otherwise transporting garbage or rubbish from any premises or on any roadway within Ballwin. 
    Travel trailer. The words "travel trailer" mean a vehicular portable unit, mounted on wheels, of such a size or weight as not to require special highway movement permits when drawn by a motorized vehicle, primarily designed and constructed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, with a body width of no more than eight feet and a body length of no more than 32 feet when factory equipped for the road. 
    Trees, street. Trees and woody shrubs in excess of 30 inches in height growing or located on land lying within the right-of-way lines, on either side of all city streets, avenues or ways within the city. 
    Trees, park. Trees and woody vegetation growing or located within all public parks, and other properties owned by the city. 
    Trespass. The word "trespass," as applied to golf courses, means playing golf without having in possession a valid greens fee receipt or permit, and horseback riding at any time, as well as walking, jogging or running upon any city-owned or city-operated golf course during the hours established for its operation by the board of aldermen or at such time as the course is used for play for city-authorized tournaments, league play or special events; provided, however, that persons walking, jogging or running shall not cut across any tee or green at any time. 
    Truck camper. The words "truck camper" mean a portable unit designed to be loaded onto, or affixed to, the bed or chassis of a truck and constructed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use. Truck campers shall include: 
(1)  Slide-in campers defined as a portable unit designed to be loaded onto and unloaded from the bed of a pickup truck, constructed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, travel or camping use; and 
(2)  Chassis-mount campers defined as a portable unit designed to be affixed to a truck chassis, and constructed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, travel or camping use. 
    Undertaking establishment . As applied to zoning, the term "undertaking establishment" means a business which prepares the human dead for burial and/or cremation and arranges and manages funerals, including not more than two crematory retorts associated with the particular location of the business. 
    Useable open area. The words "useable open area" mean an open and unobstructed space having an area of at least 6,000 square feet. The smallest dimension shall be no less than 40 linear feet. A useable open area may have no slope in excess of six percent. 
    Utility trailer. The term "utility trailer" means a vehicular structure or device built on a chassis or frame designed to be towed or drawn by a motor vehicle or other means and/or a "trailer" as defined herein above. 
    Vaccinate. For the purposes of chapter 5, Animals and fowl, the word "vaccinate" means the injection by a veterinarian or his authorized agent of a specified dose of antirabies vaccine into the body of a dog, such vaccine having the U.S. government license number approval stamped on the label of the vaccine container and having been approved by the health commissioner. Vaccine used for the vaccination of dogs shall be stored and kept under conditions proper for the vaccine and shall show no signs of spoilage or otherwise be unfit for producing immunity against rabies. 
    Vaccination-registration. For the purposes of chapter 5, Animals and fowl, the term "vaccination-registration" means the procedure of vaccinating for rabies and issuing an identification number and an appropriate certificate under the county rabies control code. The above words shall be interchangeable. 
    Value. As applied to stealing, the word "value" means the market value of the property at the time and place of the crime, or if such cannot be satisfactorily ascertained, the cost of replacement of the property within a reasonable time after the crime. 
    Variance. The word "variance" means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of the flood hazard ordinance which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by such ordinance where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
    Vehicle. The word "vehicle" means any mechanical device for carrying, working on or transporting something. 
    Vending machine for the purposes of sections 17-63 and 17-64 means any mechanical, electric or electronic self-service device that, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses tobacco products. 
    Veterinarian. The word "veterinarian" means any person holding a current Missouri license as a veterinarian and operating on a participating basis with the health department, as required by the county rabies control code. 
    Weeds. The word "weeds" includes all rank vegetable growth including trees and shrubs as specified in section 29-1(b). 
    Week. The word "week" means seven days. 
    Wholesaler. For the purposes of section 3-196 et seq., the word "wholesaler" means a person who exposes for sale or makes one or more sales for resale of intoxicating liquor within the limits of the city, or who conducts a business of exposing for sale or selling intoxicating liquor for resale from an established place of business within the limits of the city. 
    Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" includes any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Yard. As applied to the housing code, the word "yard" means an open space at grade on the same lot as a building or structure located between the main building and the adjoining lot line, and/or street line. The measurement of a yard shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the building or structure. 
    As applied to zoning, "yard" means an open space, other than a court, on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in the zoning ordinance. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard, or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the nearest portion of the main building shall be used. 
    Yard, front. As applied to zoning, the words "front yard" means a yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projection thereto, other than steps, uncovered balconies, uncovered porches and terraces, including primary and secondary front yards, as defined in this section. 
    Yard, rear. As applied to zoning, the words "rear yard" mean a yard extending across the rear of a lot, measured between the side lot lines and being a minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections, other than steps, uncovered (1) balconies, (2) porches, (3) decks, (4) patios, or (5) terraces. Rear yard shall, in all cases, be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. In the case of steps, uncovered (1) balconies, (2) porches, (3) patios, (4) decks, or (5) terraces, there shall be at least ten feet between such uncovered structure and the property line, and at least 20 feet between such uncovered structure and any other structure or building on adjacent property. 
    Yard, side. As applied to zoning, the words "side yard" mean a yard between the building and the sideline of the lot and extending from the front yard line to the required rear yard, being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the main building or any projections thereto. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
    Year of service. The words "year of service," as applied to the police pension plan, mean a plan year during which the employee has accrued not less than 1,000 hours of service for the employer or a plan year during which the employee has failed to accrue 1,000 or more hours of service solely due to an authorized leave of absence. 
    Zoning ordinance. The words "zoning ordinance" mean the zoning ordinance of the city and/or article IV of chapter 6 of this Code and the current district map related thereto. 
(Code 1973, §§ 1-2, 2-4, 2-32, 2-260, 2-410, 3-17, 3-38, 3-44, 3-67, 3-84, 5-1, 5-13, 5-55, 6-81, 6-105, 6-151, 6-172, 10-1, 101/2-1, 12-5, 12-102, 13-4, 13-13, 13-66, 13-113, 13-199, 14-2, 14-15, 14-97, 14-126, 14-156, 14-204, 14-205, 14-211, 14-296, 16-9, 16-43, 16-47, 16-48, 16-49(a), 16-62, 16-64, 17-55, 17-102, 19-185, 20-3, 21-1, 23-1, 24-16, 24-46, 26-1, 27-1, app. A, art. I, § 3, art. XIIA, § 11, art. XIV, § 1, art. XV, § 1, art. XVI, § 25, art. XIX, § 1; app. B, art. II, § 1; Ord. No. 2153, § 1(16-100), 3-11-91; Ord. No. 2159, §§ 1, 2, 4-22-91; Ord. No. 2417, § 1, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 2418, § 1, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 2423, § 1, 1-23-95; Ord. No. 2437, § 2, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 2474, § 1, 10-9-95; Ord. No. 2530, § 1, 7-8-96; Ord. No. 2536, § 3, 8-12-96; Ord. No. 2544, § 1, 9-9-96; Ord. No. 2595, § 1, 4-28-97; Ord. No. 2651, § 1, 11-10-97; Ord. No. 2661, § 4, 1-26-98; Ord. No. 99-26, § 1, 5-24-99; Ord. No. 00-49, § 1, 9-25-00; Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 1-22-01; Ord. No. 01-41, § 1, 6-11-01; Ord. No. 02-13, § 1, 2-11-02; Ord. No. 03-57, § 1, 10-27-03; Ord. No. 03-61, § 1, 10-27-03; Ord. No. 04-07, § 1, 1-26-04; Ord. No. 04-24, § 1, 6-14-04; Ord. No. 04-37, § 1, 9-13-04; Ord. No. 05-01, § 1.A.-K., 1-10-05; Ord. No. 05-23, § 1, 5-9-05; Ord. No. 05-25, § 1, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 05-38, § 1, 8-22-05; Ord. No. 05-42, § 1, 9-26-05; Ord. No. 09-26, § 1, 8-24-09; Ord. No. 11-02, § 1, 1-10-11; Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 2-28-11; Ord. No. 12-06, § 1, 1-23-12; Ord. No. 12-25, § 1, 5-14-12; Ord. No. 13-12, § 1, 4-22-13, eff. 6-1-13; Ord. No. 14-30, § 2, 10-27-14; Ord. No. 14-32, § 1, 10-27-14; Ord. No. 16-18, § 2, 5-9-16; Ord. No. 18-05, § 2, 4-23-18) 
State Law reference- Definitions, rules of construction, etc., generally, RSMo 1.020 et seq.; definitions relating to traffic, RSMo 300.010; definitions relating to alcoholic beverages, RSMo 311.020, 311.030, 311.097, 311.100, 311.200(2); definitions relating to nonintoxicating beer, RSMo 312.010. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 01-12, § 1, adopted Feb. 26, 2001, changed the name of the Ballwin Historical Society to the Ballwin Historical Commission. References throughout this Code to the Historical Society should be interpreted as referring the the Historical Commission. 

Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of each section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, or as any part of the section; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1973, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Authorization of deputies and agents. 
    Any act or duty required or authorized to be performed under the provisions of this Code by any officer or agency of the city may be performed by any duly authorized agent or deputy of such officer or agency. 
(Code 1973, §§ 13-15, 13-68) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 1-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 1.140. 
Sec. 1-6. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code, ordinance or resolution the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any such provision of this Code, ordinance or resolution shall, unless specifically provided otherwise by statute, be punished by a fine of not exceeding $1,000.00 and costs, or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Imprisonment shall be in the city jail. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance or resolution shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  When a person has been found guilty of violating any provision of this Code involving the operation of a motor vehicle, the municipal judge may suspend sentencing pending the successful completion by the convicted person of a course of educational training designed to improve the safety habits of drivers; or the municipal judge may order the convicted person to attend such a course in lieu of or in addition to the penalty otherwise provided for the offense. 
(Code 1973, § 1-8; Ord. No. 03-07, § 1, 1-27-03) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 79.470; city prisoners, labor on public works, fines payable in installments, RSMo 71.220; suppression of nuisances, RSMo 71.780. 
Sec. 1-7. - Prosecution where different penalties exist for same offense. 
    In all cases where the same offense may be made punishable or shall be created by different clauses or sections of the ordinances of the city, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery of fine or imprisonment shall be had against the same person for the same offense. 
(Code 1973, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-8. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented. 
(Code 1973, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-9. - Enactment of ordinances, procedure. 
    In transacting legislative business, whenever the board of aldermen shall act by ordinance, the following procedure shall be utilized: 
(1)  The style of the ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the board of aldermen of the City of Ballwin, St. Louis County, Missouri, as follows:" 
(2)  No ordinance shall be passed except by bill and no bill shall become an ordinance unless on final passage the majority of the members elected to the board of aldermen shall vote for it, and the ayes and nays are entered on the journal. 
(3)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced to the board of aldermen in writing and shall be read by title or in full two times prior to passage; both readings may occur at a single meeting of the board of aldermen. 
(4)  Bills shall be read in their entirety, except a bill may be read by title only when copies of the bill have been made available to the public for public inspection prior to consideration of the bill by the board of aldermen. 
(5)  No bill shall become an ordinance until it shall have been signed by the mayor or person exercising the duties of the mayor's office, or shall have been passed over the mayor's veto. 
(Code 1973, § 1-6.1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 79.130, 79.140. 
Sec. 1-10. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the board of aldermen. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Ballwin, Missouri, is hereby amended to read as follows: ____________ (set out new provisions in full) ____________ ." 
(c)  When the board of aldermen desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the Code, which the board desires to incorporate into the Code, a section in substantially the following language shall be made a part of the ordinance: "Section ____________ . It is the intention of the board of aldermen, and it is hereby ordained that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of the Code of Ordinances, City of Ballwin, Missouri, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1973, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-11. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1973, § 1-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 1.150, 1.180. 
Sec. 1-12. - Recording by clerk; certificate of publication. 
    All ordinances passed by the board of aldermen shall be recorded by the city clerk in a proper book or books, with indexes. The originals shall be filed in the city clerk's office; and due proof of the publication of notice in connection with all ordinances requiring such publication, by the certificate of the publisher or printer, shall be procured by the clerk and filed. 
(Code 1973, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-13. - Effective date of ordinances. 
    All ordinances shall be effective as provided by state law. 
(Code 1973, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-14. - Certain ordinances and actions not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  The administrative ordinances of the city, not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city. 
(5)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by the board of aldermen to any person. 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city. 
(9)  Any ordinance establishing or altering sewer districts, or providing for local improvements, or assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(11)  Any ordinance annexing property to the city. 
(12)  Any ordinance consistent with this Code fixing utility rates and charges. 
(13)  Any ordinance prescribing personnel rules or regulations not inconsistent with this Code. 
All such ordinances and actions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1042, § 3, 5-14-73) 
Sec. 1-15. - Cost recovery with respect to certain enumerated violations of the Code. 
(a)  Failure to obtain proper construction and sign permits. This Code requires obtaining permits in a number of situations, including, for example, construction of all types, fences, basement finishes, water heater installations, furnace replacements, deck additions, pool construction, and the erection or construction of certain signs. In the event the respective permit(s) is/are not obtained in the first instant, an offender shall be required to obtain the necessary construction permit, post the necessary surety, if required, and an administrative recovery fee shall be paid to the city in the amount of the required permit fee, but not less than $100.00. In the case where a contractor is in violation, no additional permits shall be issued to the contractor for any location in the city until the necessary permits are obtained and the administrative recovery fee paid. 
(b)  Failure to obtain occupancy permits. A landlord who permits occupancy of property without first obtaining the required occupancy permit shall reimburse the city $50.00 in addition to the occupancy inspection fee for each unit found to be occupied without a proper inspection having been conducted and an occupancy permit issued prior to such occupancy. 
(c)  Grass cutting by the city for violations of weed and vegetation requirements. A property owner who fails to observe the weed and vegetation requirements of the city shall reimburse the city for the administrative cost related to notification in an amount of $100.00, in addition to any other costs imposed by this Code. 
(d)  Plan review. The submission of the applicable permit fee or $50.00, whichever is less, required for certain permits under this Code shall be made at the time of submission of the plan for the necessary permit and shall be called the permit application fee. The fee paid shall be non refundable, but it shall be applied toward the cost of the required permit fee. 
(e)  Reinspection requests. The fee paid for a certificate of occupancy inspection shall include the original inspection and one reinspection. If items of deficiency cited in the original inspection have not been corrected at the time of the reinspection an additional reinspection must be scheduled. All additional reinspections in excess of the first reinspection shall require a fee of $50.00 which amount shall be paid to the city before each subsequent reinspection is conducted. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all of the cited items from the original inspection have been corrected. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 1, 10-9-07) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; authorization of deputies and agents, § 1-4; boards and commissions, ch. 6; building commissioner, § 7-21 et seq.; emergency management, ch. 8; emergency management coordinator, § 8-5 et seq.; administration of flood hazard provisions, § 10-26 et seq.; conformance to law required of public employees, § 15-2; administration and enforcement of traffic provisions, § 15-31 et seq.; municipal court, ch. 16; municipal judge, § 16-21 et seq.; municipal court clerk, § 16-51 et seq.; public defender, § 16-71 et seq.; prosecuting attorney, § 16-91 et seq.; impersonating officers or employees, § 17-6; parks and recreation, ch. 18; planning and development, ch. 19; police, ch. 20; sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 21; institutional and governmental signs, § 22-55; solid waste, ch. 23; streets and sidewalks, ch. 24; taxation, ch. 27. 
State Law reference- Cities and towns, RSMo 71.010 et seq.; fourth class cities, RSMo 79.010 et seq.; offenses affecting government, RSMo 576.010 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City seal. 
    There is hereby established an official seal for the city which shall be of a design as adopted by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-1) 
State Law reference- Authority to have seal, RSMo 79.010. 
Sec. 2-2. - Wards. 
    The City of Ballwin shall be divided into four wards as shown on the boundary map attached to Ordinance No. 01-57 as Exhibit 1, and incorporated herein by reference. The verbal description of the ward boundaries are described as follows: 
(1)  Ward 1. That portion of Ballwin lying within an area described as follows: 
Beginning at a point being the intersection of the northward prolongation of the centerline of Old Ballwin Road and the centerline of Manchester Road (Route 100), thence westwardly along said centerline of Manchester Road to a point of intersection with the southward prolongation of the east line of the Driftwood Subdivision; thence northwardly along said subdivision line and its southward prolongation to a point in the north line of said subdivision; thence westwardly along said north subdivision line, said line also being the south line of the Mark Twain Apartments, to a point of intersection with the northwest line of the Mark Twain Apartments; thence northeastwardly along said line and its northeastward prolongation to a point of intersection with the centerline of Kehrs Mill Road; thence southeastwardly along said centerline to the point of intersection with the centerline of Holloway Road; thence northeastwardly, eastwardly and northwardly along said centerline of Holloway Road to a point of intersection with the centerline of Baxter Road; thence southeastwardly along said centerline to a point of intersection with the westward prolongation of the south line of Wildwood - Addition Subdivision Plat 2; thence eastwardly along said south subdivision line to a point of intersection with the east line of said subdivision, said line also being the east line of Oakleigh Woods Subdivision Plat 6; thence southwardly along said east subdivision line to a point of intersection with the joint city limits line of the cities of Manchester and Ballwin; thence southwardly along said joint city limits line to a point of intersection with the west line of the city limits of the City of Winchester; thence southwardly, westwardly, southwestwardly and eastwardly along the joint city limits lines of the cities of Winchester and Ballwin to a point of intersection with the west city limits line of the City of Manchester; thence southwardly along the joint city limits line of the cities of Manchester and Ballwin to a point in the north line of the Sorrento Subdivision; thence westwardly, southwardly and westwardly along the city limits of the City of Ballwin to a point of intersection with the southward prolongation of the centerline of Ries Road; thence northwardly along said centerline and centerline prolongation to a point of intersection with the eastward prolongation of the south line of the Ries Heights Subdivision; thence westwardly along said south subdivision line and subdivision line prolongation to the point of intersection with the north line of Westglen Woods Subdivision; thence westwardly along said north subdivision line to a point of intersection with the southward prolongation of the centerline of the north-south portion of Old Ballwin Road; thence northwardly along said centerline and its southward and northward prolongations to the point of beginning. 
(2)  Ward 2. That portion of Ballwin lying within an area described as follows: 
Beginning at a point being the intersection of the joint city limits line of the cities of Ellisville and Ballwin, said point also being the intersection of the southward prolongation of the west line of Westridge Acres Subdivision, and the centerline of Manchester Road; thence northwardly, southwestwardly, westwardly and northwardly along said joint city limits line to the point of intersection of the joint city limits line of the cities of Ballwin and Clarkson Valley; thence following said joint city limits line eastwardly, southwardly, eastwardly, northeastwardly, westwardly, northwardly, westwardly northeastwardly and northwardly to the point of intersection with the joint city limits line of the cities of Ballwin and Chesterfield; thence southeastwardly, southwardly and southeastwardly along said joint city limits line to a point of intersection with the centerline of Kehrs Mill Road; thence southeastwardly along said centerline to the point of intersection with the southwestern prolongation of the northwest line of Blue Ridge Place Subdivision; thence northeastwardly and eastwardly along the northwest and north lines of Blue Ridge Place Subdivision, eastwardly along the north lines of Downing Square and Kehrs Mill View Subdivisions, and southwardly along the east line of Kehrs Mill View subdivision to a point of intersection with the north line of Pleasant Grove Subdivision; thence eastwardly and southwardly along the north and east lines respectively of the Pleasant Grove Subdivision and the southeastward prolongation of the east line of said subdivision to a point of intersection with the centerline of Kehrs Mill Road; thence northwestwardly along said centerline to the point of intersection with the northeastward prolongation of the northwest line of Mark Twain Apartments; thence southwestwardly along said line to a point of intersection with the south line of the Mark Twain Apartments, said line also being the north line of Driftwood Subdivision; thence eastwardly along said north subdivision line to a point of intersection with the east line of Driftwood Subdivision; thence southwardly along said east subdivision line and its southward prolongation to a point of intersection with the centerline of Manchester Road (Route 100); thence eastwardly along said centerline to a point of intersection with the northward prolongation of the centerline of the north-south portion of Old Ballwin Road; thence southward along said centerline to the point of intersection with the centerline of the east-west portion of Old Ballwin Road; thence westwardly along said east-west centerline and its westward prolongation to the point of intersection with the centerline of New Ballwin Road; thence southwardly along said centerline to the point of intersection with the eastward prolongation of the south line of Westglen Village Subdivision-Plat 1; thence westwardly along said south subdivision line to a point of intersection with the east line of Westglen Village Subdivision-Plat 6; thence southwardly along said east subdivision line to the point of intersection with the eastward prolongation of the south line of Westglen Village-Plat 7; thence westwardly along said south subdivision line and its eastward prolongation to a point in the west line of said subdivision; thence northwardly, westwardly and northwardly along said subdivision lines to the point of intersection with the west line of Westglen Village Subdivision-Plat 8; thence northwardly and northwestwardly along said subdivision line to a point of intersection with the south line of Westbrooke Woods Subdivision-Plat 8; thence eastwardly along said south subdivision line to the point of intersection with the east line of said subdivision, thence northwardly along said east subdivision line to a point of intersection with the south line of Castle Ridge Subdivision; thence westwardly along the south line of said subdivision to the point of intersection with the west line of outlot "A" of Castle Ridge Subdivision; thence northwardly, westwardly and northwestwardly along said outlot line to the point of intersection with the north line of Castle Ridge Subdivision; thence westwardly, northwardly, westwardly and southwardly along the perimeter of said subdivision to the point of intersection with the north line of Westbrooke Woods Subdivision-Plat 11, thence westwardly along said north subdivision line to the point of intersection with the west line of said subdivision; thence southwardly and southwestwardly along said west subdivision line to a point of intersection with the northwest line of Westbrooke Woods Subdivision-Plat 6; thence southwestwardly along said northwest subdivision line to the point of intersection with the south line of The Ridges of Oakwood Farms Subdivision-Plat 2; thence westwardly along said south subdivision line to the point of intersection with the east line of The Ridges of Oakwood Farms Addition Subdivision; thence southwardly, westwardly, northwestwardly and northwardly along the perimeter of said subdivision to the point of intersection with the joint city limits line of the cities of Ballwin and Ellisville; thence eastwardly, northwardly, eastwardly, southwardly, eastwardly, northwardly, eastwardly, northwardly and westwardly along said joint city limit lines of the cities of Ballwin and Ellisville to the point of beginning. 
(3)  Ward 3. That portion of Ballwin lying within an area described as follows: 
Beginning at a point being the intersection of the centerline of Kehrs Mill Road and the centerline of Clayton Road; thence northwardly, along said centerline of Kehrs Mill Road to the point of intersection with the joint city limits line of the cities of Ballwin and Chesterfield, said point also being the intersection of the westward prolongation of the north line of Meadowbrook Country Club Estates Subdivision; thence eastwardly, northwardly, eastwardly, northwardly, eastwardly, southwestwardly, southwardly, eastwardly and southwardly along said joint city limits line to a point of intersection with the south line of the Clayton Road right-of-way, said point also being the intersection of said right-of-way line with the southward prolongation of the east property line of the Meadowbrook County Club Estates Subdivision; thence northeastwardly, southwardly, eastwardly, northwardly, eastwardly, northeastwardly, northwestwardly, northeastwardly eastwardly and northeastwardly along said Clayton Road south right-of-way line, said line also being the joint city limits line of the cities of Ballwin and Chesterfield; to a point of intersection with the joint city limits line of the cities of Ballwin and Town and Country; thence southeastwardly, northeastwardly, southeastwardly and northeastwardly, along said joint city limits line to a point of intersection with the west right-of-way line of Woods Mill Road (State Highway 141); thence southwardly along said west right-of- way line to a point of intersection with the joint city limits line of the Cities of Ballwin and Manchester; thence southwestwardly, southeastwardly, and westwardly along said joint city limits line to the point of intersection with the east line of Oakleigh Woods Subdivision-Plat 6; thence northwardly along said eastern subdivision line to a point of intersection with the south line of Wildwood Addition-Plat 2 Subdivision; thence westwardly along said south subdivision line and its westward prolongation to a point of intersection with the centerline of Baxter Road; thence northwestwardly along said right-of-way line to a point of intersection with the centerline of Holloway Road; thence southwardly, westwardly and southwestwardly along said centerline to a point of intersection with the centerline of Kehrs Mill Road; thence northwestwardly along said centerline to a point of intersection with the southward prolongation of the east line of Pleasant Grove Subdivision; thence northwardly and westwardly along the east and north lines of said subdivision to a point of intersection with the east line of Kehrs Mill View Subdivision; thence northwardly and westwardly along the east and north lines respectively of said subdivision, westwardly along the north line of Downing Square Subdivision, and westwardly and southwestwardly along the north, northwest and southwest prolongation respectively of Blue Ridge Place Subdivision to a point of intersection with the centerline of Kehrs Mill Road; thence northwestwardly along said centerline to the point of beginning. 
(4)  Ward 4. That portion of Ballwin lying within an area described as follows: 
Beginning at a point being the intersection of the centerline of New Ballwin Road and the centerline of the east-west portion of Old Ballwin Road; thence eastwardly along said centerline of Old Ballwin Road to the point of intersection with the centerline of the north-south portion of Old Ballwin Road; thence southwardly along the southward prolongation of the centerline of the north-south portion of Old Ballwin Road to the point of intersection with the north line of Westglen Woods Subdivision; thence eastwardly along said subdivision north line to the point of intersection with the south line of Ries Heights Subdivision; thence eastwardly along said south subdivision line and its eastward prolongation to a point of intersection with the centerline of Ries Road; thence southwardly along said roadway centerline and its southward prolongation to the point of intersection with the city limits line of the City of Ballwin; thence westwardly, southwardly, southwestwardly, northwestwardly and eastwardly along the city limits line of the City of Ballwin to the point of intersection with the west line of the Ridges of Oakwood Farms Addition Subdivision; thence southwardly, southeastwardly, eastwardly and northwardly to the point of intersection with the south line of The Ridges of Oakwood Farms Subdivision-Plat 2, thence eastwardly along said south subdivision line to the point of intersection with the northwest line of Westbrooke Woods Subdivision-Plat 6; thence northeastwardly along said northwest subdivision line to the point of intersection with the northwest line of Westbrooke Woods Subdivision-Plat 11; thence northeastwardly, northwardly and eastwardly along the northwest, west and north lines respectively of said subdivision to a point of intersection with the west line of Castle Ridge Subdivision; thence northwardly, eastwardly and southwardly along the respective west, north and east lines of said subdivision to the point of intersection with the west line of outlot "A" of Castle Ridge Subdivision; thence southeastwardly, eastwardly and southwardly along the west lines of said Outlot "A" to the point of intersection with the south line of Castle Ridge Subdivision; thence eastwardly along said south subdivision line to the point of intersection with the east line of Westbrooke Woods Subdivision-Plat 8; thence southwardly along said east subdivision line to its point of intersection with the south line of said subdivision; thence westwardly along said south subdivision line to the point of intersection with the southwest line of Westglen Village Subdivision-Plat 8; thence southeastwardly, and southwardly respectively along the southwest and west lines of said subdivision to the point of intersection with the west line of Westglen Village Subdivision-Plat 7; thence southwardly and eastwardly along the west, south and eastward prolongation of the south lines of said subdivision to the point of intersection with the east line of Westglen Village-Plat 6; thence northwardly along said east subdivision line to the point of intersection with the south line of Westglen Village Subdivision-Plat 1; thence eastwardly along said south subdivision line and its eastward prolongation to the point of intersection with the centerline of New Ballwin Road; thence northwardly along said roadway centerline to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 2-2; Ord. No. 2521, § 1, 6-10-96; Ord. No. 99-31, § 1, 7-26-99; Ord. No. 01-57, § 1, 9-10-01) 
State Law reference- City to be divided into wards, RSMo 79.060. 
Sec. 2-3. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin on January 1 and end on December 31 of each year. 
(Code 1973, § 2-3) 
Sec. 2-4.1. - Approval for expenditures. 
    Whenever the city negotiates any purchase, sale, or other contract, including contracts for public improvements, there shall be ample opportunity for competitive bidding in the following manner and with due regard to obtaining products, resources, terms and conditions most advantageous to the city. No contract may be subdivided for the purpose of evading the requirements of competitive bidding. 
(a)  In the purchase of services, capital improvements and equipment, including, but not limited to, building improvements, police cars and street department equipment, if the consideration is estimated to be $3,000.00 or less, bids shall be solicited, and solicitations noted, from at least three sources, in the manner prescribed by the city administrator, unless multiple sources are not available. Items in this category, if budgeted, may be approved by a department head. 
(b)  If the consideration is estimated to be at least $3,000.00 but less than $15,000.00, written bids shall be solicited, and solicitations noted, from at least three sources, unless multiple sources are not available. Items in this category, if budgeted, may be approved by the city administrator. 
(c)  If the consideration is estimated to be more than $15,000.00, written bids shall be solicited, and solicitations noted, from at least three sources in the manner prescribed by the city administrator, with due regard for obtaining the most competitive prices on a consistent basis most advantageous to the city. Purchases of public improvements, services, products or resources costing $15,000.00 or more must be approved by the board of aldermen. 
(d)  If the consideration is estimated to be $10,000.00 or more, requests for bids shall be advertised in any local newspaper of general circulation and/or online bidding site or relevant trade publication. The number of bids shall not be restricted or curtailed, but shall be open to all persons complying with the terms upon which the bids are requested or solicited. 
(e)  Irrespective of the amount of consideration in the contract, no contract that has continued for ten years or more without competitive bidding and involving the same vendor shall be extended without a request for proposals and competitive bidding. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 2-8-10; Ord. No. 12-36, § 1, 8-20-12; Ord. No. 17-08, § 1, 3-27-17) 
Sec. 2-4.2. - Bidding not required. 
(a)  Competitive bidding shall not be required for contracts for service of professional persons, including, but not limited to, accountants, architects, attorneys, physicians or other services requiring expert or specialized knowledge or skill, including, but not limited to, planning consultants, building consultants, insurance advisors and brokers, auditors, financial services, public relations consultants, real estate brokers, landscape architects and designers. Except as otherwise provided, the City Administrator or the appropriate department head shall report individuals and firms interviewed, membership of any screening committee, and the reasons for his recommendation. At a minimum, such recommendation shall include scope of proposed service, experience of personnel performing work, and evaluation of the firm's or individual's experience on similar projects. 
(b)  In the event that there is only one vendor capable of providing a particular good or service for which the estimated expenditure is $15,000.00 or less, the competitive procedures outlined in this policy may be waived by the city administrator. A department head should document why only one company or individual is capable of providing the goods or services required whenever it is determined that goods or services must be purchased from a sole source vendor. The documentation should be attached to the purchase order and shall be recorded in the minutes of the next regular meeting of the board of aldermen. Competitive procedures for expenditures estimated to exceed $15,000.00 may be waived by the board of aldermen. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Competitive bidding shall not be required in situations calling for competitive negotiations. Where it can be demonstrated that the city receives the best value on a purchase through informal discussion and bargaining rather than through the conventional bidding process, the department head shall not be required to follow the conventional bidding process exclusively. Such purchases shall be documented by the director of finance and approved by the city administrator. When a department head seeks to invoke this process, a report shall be delivered to the board of aldermen and a range of negotiation authority shall be granted by motion. After the purchase, a report shall be delivered to the board of aldermen. Examples would include, but not be limited to, circumstances when time is a crucial factor, when the procurement involves technology items, or when there is obvious inherent economy in purchasing from a particular vendor. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 2-8-10; Ord. No. 16-01, § 1, 1-11-16; Ord. No. 17-08, §§ 2, 3, 3-27-17) 
Sec. 2-4.3. - Criteria for awarding contracts. 
    Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder. In determining the lowest and best bidder, in addition to price, the mayor and the board of aldermen shall consider, when applicable, these criteria: 
(a)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required. 
(b)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference. 
(c)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder. 
(d)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services. 
(e)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or services. 
(f)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use required. 
(g)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject contract. 
(h)  The number and scope of any conditions attached to the bid. 
(i)  It is the desire of the city to purchase from Ballwin vendors whenever possible. This can be accomplished by insuring that local vendors who have supplies or services that meet the needs of the city be included in the competitive procurement process that will precede most purchases. The city administrator shall credit competitive estimates made by local businesses and contractors with a two percent adjustment to the comparative estimate but not to exceed a credit of $5,000.00. Local businesses and contractors shall mean a business or contractor which has a regular and established place of business within the City of Ballwin and is licensed in accordance with the provisions of the licensing ordinance of the City of Ballwin. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 2-8-10) 
Sec. 2-4.4. - Ability to waive criteria. 
    The board of aldermen shall have the power to waive all or any of the above criteria if, in the opinion of the majority of its members, it is beneficial or expeditious to the city to do so. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 2-8-10) 
Sec. 2-4.5. - Ability to participate in cooperative purchasing plans. 
    Departments are encouraged to use cooperative purchasing programs, including those sponsored by the State of Missouri and St. Louis County, Missouri. Cooperative purchasing can prove advantageous to the city both by relieving department heads of the paperwork necessary to document the purchase and by taking advantage of quantity purchases. Purchases made through these programs have met the requirements of competitive shopping and require only sufficient information to show the purchase is from such a program and the applicable referenced purchase price. Department heads are encouraged to check with the state or county regarding cooperative procurement contracts in effect prior to making any large purchase. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 2-8-10; Ord. No. 17-08, § 4, 3-27-17) 
Sec. 2-4.6. - Ability to extend contracts/change orders. 
    Whenever the city administrator determines that it is in the city's best interest to do so, the requirements of this article may be waived for the purchase of goods, materials or services from any person or entity that, within the previous 12 months, was the successful bidder pursuant to the competitive bid process required herein and such person or entity is willing to furnish the goods, materials or services at the same or more favorable price, terms and conditions as those provided under the previously awarded contract; however, any such purchase must have prior approval of the board of aldermen at a public meeting 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 2-8-10) 
Sec. 2-4.7. - Emergency repairs/purchases. 
    Whenever the city administrator determines that it is in the city's best interest, emergency repairs and/or purchases totaling $15,000.00 or more, necessary to maintain essential operations, may be authorized for purchase at the lowest obtainable price. A full explanation of the circumstances of the emergency purchase shall be recorded in the minutes of the next regular meeting of the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 2-8-10; Ord. No. 17-08, § 5, 3-27-17) 
Sec. 2-4.8. - Purchase of Missouri products. 
    All departments of the city shall purchase and use only those materials, products, supplies, provisions and other needed articles produced, manufactured, compounded, made or grown within the State of Missouri, when they are found in marketable quantities in the state and are of a quality suited to the purpose intended and can be secured without additional cost over foreign products or products of other states; provided, however, that quality and fitness of articles shall be considered in purchasing or letting contracts for articles herein mentioned. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 2-8-10) 
Sec. 2-4.9. - Conflicts of interest. 
(a)  Purchases for employees by the city generally are prohibited. Exceptions may be made where the city administrator has determined that the purchase benefits the city, such as allowing employees to purchase personal computers or clothing with the city's logo from the city's approved vendor. City employees are also prohibited from using the city's name or the employee's position to obtain special consideration in personal purchases. 
(b)  No officer or employee of the City of Ballwin shall participate in a contract for supplies or services when that person knows: 
(1)  The officer or employee or any member of the officer's or employee's immediate family has a financial interest pertaining to the contract; or 
(2)  A business or organization in which the officer or employee of the city has a financial interest pertaining to the contract; or 
(3)  Any contract in which any officer or employee of the city has a financial interest, directly or indirectly, shall be void, except when said contract is awarded as a result of open bidding. No officer or employee of the city shall directly or indirectly solicit any gift or accept or receive any gift, whether in the form of money, services, loans, promises or any other form, under circumstances in which it could reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence them, or could reasonably be expected to influence them, in the performance of their official duties or was intended as a reward for any official action on their part. 
(c)  Bribery, in any form, represents malfeasance in office and means that public funds are being mismanaged. Attempts to influence decisions regarding the expenditures of public funds may be directed towards any employee or city official who has influence over the selection of vendors. The penalty for accepting a bribe is immediate termination for city employees. 
(d)  It is the City of Ballwin's policy not to endorse, or in any way permit an employee's name or position or the city's name to be used and advertised as supporting a product or vendor without the expressed approval of the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 2-8-10) 
Sec. 2-5. - Indemnification of city and city personnel. 
(a)  The city may in its discretion indemnify any person who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending or completed action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative, other than an action by or in the right of the city, by reason of the fact that he is or was a public official whether elected or appointed, officer, employee or agent of the city or its boards or commissions or was serving at the request of the city on any other governmental board or commission against expenses, including attorney fees, judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement or compromise, actually and reasonably incurred by him in connection with such action, suit or proceeding if he acted in good faith and in a manner he reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interest of the city and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had no reasonable cause to believe his conduct was unlawful or unconstitutional. The termination of any action, suit, or proceeding by judgment, order, settlement, conviction, or upon a plea of nolo contendere or its equivalent, shall not, of itself, create a presumption that the person did not act in good faith and in a manner which he reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interest of the city, and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had reasonable cause to believe that his conduct was not unlawful; except that no indemnification shall be made in respect to any claim, or matter as to which such person shall have been adjudged to be liable for negligence or misconduct in performance of his duty to the city unless and only to the extent that the court in which the action or suit was brought determines upon application that, despite the adjudication of liability and in view of all the circumstances of the case, the person is fairly and reasonably entitled to indemnity for such expenses which the court may deem proper. 
(b)  Expenses incurred in defending a civil or criminal action, suit or proceeding may be paid by the city in advance of the final disposition of the action, suit or proceeding as authorized by the board of aldermen in the specific case upon receipt of an undertaking by or on behalf of the public official, employee or agent to pay the expense of such action. 
(c)  Any person seeking indemnification from the city shall in the event of any occurrence and upon receipt of notice of any claim, suit, action or proceeding promptly notify in writing the city administrator of the identity of the person seeking indemnification and also reasonably obtainable information with respect to the time, place and circumstance that give rise to the occurrence including the name and address of the injured party and of any witnesses. 
(d)  The person seeking indemnification shall cooperate with the city in any investigation, defense, negotiation or compromise of any claim, suit or action, even if any of the allegations of the suit are groundless, false or fraudulent, and the city may make such investigation and settlement of any claim or suit as it deems expedient, but the city shall not be obligated to pay any claim or judgment or expense including attorney fees unless and until the benefits of any insurance, whether provided by the city or by the person seeking indemnification, have been exhausted and in no event in excess of $1,000,000.00 for any one claimant or an aggregate of $2,000,000.00 for all claims arising out of and upon the same act or an aggregate of $2,000,000.00 during any one calendar year. 
(e)  Any investigation, defense, negotiation or compromise covered by this section shall be conducted by the city attorney or his designees. 
(f)  The city may, in its discretion, purchase and maintain insurance on behalf of the city or any person who is or was a public official, whether elected or appointed, or an employee or agent of the city, its boards or commissions, or is or was serving on any other board or commission at the request of the city, against claims or causes of action for property damage or personal injuries, including death, caused while in the exercise of government functions. 
(g)  The indemnification provided herein is intended for the personal enjoyment, protection and welfare of the city, its public officials whether elected or appointed, its employees or agents as herein set forth and no such person can assign, sell, pledge, hypothecate or in any other manner anticipate or dispose of such right to indemnification; and no party recovering any such judgment, fines, amounts paid in settlement or compromise of claim or cause of action or expense including attorney fees against a person eligible for indemnification can sue the city to recover or enforce any claim for indemnification. 
(h)  Nothing herein shall be construed to broaden the liability of the city, its public officials whether elected or appointed, or its employees or agents, nor to abolish or waive any defense at law which might otherwise be available to the city, its public officials whether elected or appointed, its employees or agents. 
(i)  The payment of such amounts as may be necessary for the benefit of any person covered hereby are deemed necessary and proper public purposes for which funds of this city may be expended. 
(Ord. No. 2148, §§ I-IX, 1-14-91; Ord. No. 2231, §§ I-IX, 1-13-92) 
Sec. 2-6. - Nondiscrimination policy and grievance procedure. 
(a)  Statement of nondiscrimination policy. The city does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, creed, sex, national origin, age, marital status, veteran status or handicapped status in employment, participation in and access to all programs and activities and access to public buildings and facilities. 
(b)  Grievance procedure. 
(1)  Filing procedure. All complaints alleging any action prohibited under the provisions of this policy and applicable federal regulations must be filed within 180 days of the alleged discrimination. In any case where the alleged violation of the policy is also an alleged violation of another law, regulation or agreement, nothing in this process shall preclude an individual or an organization from filing a complaint or grievance under the provisions of such law, regulation or agreement. 
(2)  Filing assistance. Assistance in filing a complaint or grievance may be obtained by contacting the city administrator, 300 City Hall Drive, Ballwin, Missouri, 63011; telephone (314) 227-8580, or Relay Missouri at (800) 735-2466. 
(3)  Initial filing. Attempt to resolve the problem using the citizen complaint procedure outlined in the personnel rules and regulations manual of the city. 
(4)  Secondary filing. If unable to resolve the complaint at the initial filing level, a written complaint or grievance may be filed with the city administrator. An investigation will be conducted, and a written determination will be forwarded by certified mail to the grievant within five working days of the filing. This determination will contain a notice to the grievant of the right to request a hearing before the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(5)  Hearing request. If unable to resolve the problem at the secondary filing level, the grievant may request a hearing before the board of aldermen, by doing so in writing to the mayor, within four working days of the receipt of the written determination from the city administrator. The time and place of the hearing will be set by the mayor and the board of aldermen, and will be scheduled within 30 days of the receipt of hearing request. All parties to the grievance will be notified of the hearing at least five working days before its scheduled date. The hearing shall be conducted by the mayor and the board of aldermen. They will review all information and make a written determination. The determination shall be forwarded by certified mail to the grievant within 30 working days of the date of the hearing. The determination shall contain a notice of the grievant's right to file a request for review with the department of housing and urban development, fair housing and equal opportunity division, 1222 Spruce St., St. Louis, Missouri, 63103. 
(Ord. No. 2202, 8-26-91) 
Sec. 2-7. - Administrative policies. 
(a)  Checks. 
(1)  Personal checks will only be accepted from the Missouri St. Louis Metro area including St. Louis County, St. Charles County, Jefferson County, Franklin County, and the City of St. Louis. 
(2)  A check must bear a date within 30 days prior to receipt of such check. 
(3)  All checks received by the city will be deposited to the city's bank in the next deposit day. Exceptions to this rule would be the inability to identify the purpose of the check or a request that the check be held for a specific reason. 
(4)  All returned checks and account debits are subject to a service charge. 
(b)  Refunds. 
(1)  Refunds for recreational fees are subject to the guidelines stated on the contract when the fee is paid. 
(2)  Refunds for inspection fees received by the city will not be returned after 30 days from date of receipt. 
(3)  Refunds on business licenses will be made on a pro-rated basis when requested in writing on company letterhead, stating the date of business termination. 
(4)  Refunds are generated on all inspections, permits, licenses found not to be viable city venue items. 
(c)  Reimbursements. Reimbursements to qualifying property owners under the provisions of the sewer lateral repair program will be made only if funds are available in the sewer lateral repair fund and will only be made if work has been approved and carried out in accordance with program policies and procedures. The property owner must provide a paid receipt and lien waivers from all contractors involved. Under no circumstances will a reimbursement be authorized to anyone who was not the owner of the property at the time the repairs were done. Reimbursements are not transferable to subsequent property owners. 
(d)  Service charges. 
(1)  A service charge will be assessed on each return check/account debit. 
(2)  A service charge will be assessed for any check stop payment due to non-fault of the city. 
(3)  A service charge of five percent will be assessed for any payment due to the city deemed delinquent if not paid on the date due and payable. A service charge of five percent shall compound for each additional month thereafter, not to exceed 25 percent in the aggregate. 
(Ord. No. 00-62, § 1, 11-27-00; Ord. No. 13-23, § 1, 5-13-13) 
Sec. 2-8. - Notary service. 
Notary service\$2.00 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 7-14-08) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 08-23, § 1, adopted July 14, 2008, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as § 2-8 at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 2-9-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERSONNEL REGULATIONS AND BENEFITS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Local government employees' retirement system, RSMo 70.600 et seq.; authority for cities to elect to participate in plan, RSMo 70.610. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-31. - Election to participate in local government employees retirement system. 
    All present and future general employees shall be covered by benefit program L-3 of the Missouri local government employees' retirement system. 
    All present and future police department employees declared to be eligible, who have 1,500 or more hours of annual employment, shall be covered under benefit program L-3 (1.25%). 
(1)  Final average salary for each employee shall be determined on the basis of the highest consecutive 36 months from the employee's final 120 months of gross salary. 
(2)  No contributions to the Missouri Local Government Employees Retirement System shall be required from eligible employees. 
(3)  The period of employment from June 1, 1969 to the effective date of coverage is to be considered for vesting purposes only for all eligible police department employees. Service accrued after the effective date of coverage will be considered for vesting and the calculation of benefits for any eligible employee. 
(4)  Employee retirement benefits shall be based on the "minimum service retirement age", in accordance with the provisions of RSMo 70.600(16). 
(5)  The City of Ballwin is directed to remit the employer contributions required by RSMo 70.730. 
(6)  Remittances and other required reports and records shall be forwarded to the retirement system in accordance with administrative guidelines established by officials of the retirement system. 
(7)  Such election shall be effective on the first day of July, 2012. 
(Code 1973, § 2-19; Ord. No. 12-23, §§ 1-8, 4-23-12) 
Sec. 2-32. - Social security. 
(a)  The city on behalf of its employees shall participate in the federal social security program. 
(b)  Payment of sums by the city as required by the Federal Social Security Act, withholding of funds from compensation of employees as required by the Federal Social Security Act and payment on behalf of employees of sums to the Federal Social Security Administration as required by the Federal Social Security Act are hereby authorized. 
(Code 1973, § 2-21) 
State Law reference- Old age and survivors insurance for public officers and employees, RSMo 105.300 et seq. 
Sec. 2-33. - Personnel rules and regulations adopted. 
    The personnel rules and regulations adopted by the board of aldermen, are made a part hereof to be effective immediately and thereafter until amended or repealed. The rules adopted by this article are to be distributed to all employees and a copy is to be maintained in the personnel office of the city for inspection by employees of the city and public. All other personnel rules and regulations shall remain effective as written and adopted by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 2117, § 1, 8-13-90; Ord. No. 2170, § 1, 6-10-91; Ord. No. 2298, § 1, 3-8-93; Ord. No. 2377, § 1, 4-25-94; Ord. No. 2473, § 1, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 02-52, § 1, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 2-34. - Personnel salary ranges. 
(a)  The salary ranges for all full-time employees, as determined by the Ballwin Pay Plan, are updated annually and approved as part of the annual budget appropriation. The pay plan is kept on record in the office of the Ballwin Finance Officer and is available for public review during the regular business hours of the Ballwin Government Center, 14811 Manchester Rd., Ballwin, Missouri. 
(b)  The wage rate for all seasonal positions shall be updated annually and approved as part of the annual budget appropriation. A listing of these wage rates shall be kept on record in the office of the Ballwin Finance Officer and is available for public review during the regular business hours of the Ballwin Government Center, 14811 Manchester Rd., Ballwin, Missouri. 
(c)  Unless otherwise determined by the board of aldermen, the ranges shall be automatically adjusted to reflect the 70th percentile of the ten selected comparable cities in metropolitan St. Louis, on an annual basis, during the regular budget process and determined by the following formula: ((highest - lowest) × .70) + lowest. Adjustments to the range may be made in the event that the highest salary for any position is ten percent or more higher than the second highest salary. In that event, the highest salary will be replaced with the second highest salary to calculate the new minimum or maximum salary for a position. At the time of each full-time employee's annual review, or upon commencement of employment, an employee whose salary falls below the annually established range minimum shall be raised to the range minimum, subject to annual appropriation by the board of aldermen. 
(d)  The municipal judge, the prosecuting attorney, the public defender, and the city attorney's compensation may be adjusted annually at the average increase applied for other city employees. The compensation of the city administrator shall be reviewed annually and adjusted, if appropriate, by the board of aldermen. 
(e)  Unless otherwise determined by the board of aldermen, the ranges shall be automatically adjusted to fall within the 70th percentile of the ten selected comparable cities in the metropolitan St. Louis, on an annual basis, during the regular budget process utilized by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2488, § 1, 11-27-95; Ord. No. 2560, § 1, 12-16-96; Ord. No. 99-02, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 6-26-00; Ord. No. 06-52, § 1, 8-28-06; Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 1-13-14) 
Sec. 2-35. - Educational benefits. 
(a)  Any full-time employee with more than one year of service and successful completion of the required probationary period is eligible to receive educational benefits. 
(b)  The employee's department head must approve the course or certification selection in advance of the annual appropriations ordinance. A maximum of $2,500.00 per employee per year shall be paid by the city. 
(c)  Tuition and registration fees must be paid by the employee. Upon satisfactory completion of the course, all eligible tuition and registration fees shall be reimbursed. Paid receipts are required for all reimbursements. Employees who are testing for certifications must pay for their tests. Upon receipt of a passing grade, the city will reimburse the employee of the cost of the certification. Paid receipts are required for all reimbursements. 
(d)  The employee must reimburse the city if they terminate employment less than one year for the date of the certification or tuition reimbursement. 
(Ord. No. 2395, § 1, 7-25-94; Ord. No. 2653, § 1, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 06-52, § 1, 8-28-06) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2395, § 1, adopted July 25, 1994 amended provisions of Ord. No. 1531, which have been included herein at the discretion of the editor as § 2-35. 
Secs. 2-36-2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONFLICTS OF INTEREST 

Sec. 2-51. - Declaration of policy. 
    The proper operation of municipal government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of the government structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a procedure for disclosure by certain officials and employees of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city. 
(Ord. No. 2193, § 1, 8-12-91; Ord. No. 2461, § 1, 8-14-95; Ord. No. 00-40, §§ 1-5, 7-24-00; Ord. No. 01-52, §§ 1-5, 8-27-01; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 07-21, § 1, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 09-23, § 1, 7-27-09; Ord. No. 13-11, § 1, 4-8-13; Ord. No. 15-10, § 1, 2-9-15) 
Sec. 2-52. - Conflicts of interest to be disclosed. 
    The mayor or any member of the board of aldermen who has a substantial personal or private interest, as defined by state law, in any bill shall disclose on the records of the board of aldermen, the nature of his/her interest and shall disqualify himself/herself from voting on any matters relating to this interest. 
(Ord. No. 2193, § 2, 8-12-91; Ord. No. 2461, § 2, 8-14-95; Ord. No. 00-40, §§ 1-5, 7-24-00; Ord. No. 01-52, §§ 1-5, 8-27-01; Ord. No. 07-01, § 2, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 07-21, § 2, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 09-23, § 2, 7-27-09; Ord. No. 13-11, § 1, 4-8-13; Ord. No. 15-10, § 1, 2-9-15) 
Sec. 2-53. - Disclosure reports. 
    Each elected official, the chief administrative officer and the chief purchasing officer shall disclose the following information by May 1 if any such transactions were engaged in during the previous calendar year: 
(a)  For such person, and all persons within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity of such person, the date and identities of the parties to each transaction with a total value in excess of $250.00, if any, that such person had with the political subdivision other than compensation received as an employee or payment of any tax, fee or penalty due to the political subdivision, and other than transfers for no consideration to a political subdivision; and 
(b)  The date and the identities of the parties to each transaction known to the person with a total value in excess of $250.00, if any, that any business entity in which such person had a substantial interest, had with the political subdivision, other than payment of any tax, fee or penalty due to the political subdivision or transactions involving payment for providing utility service to the political subdivision, and other than transfers for no consideration to the political subdivision. 
(c)  The chief administrative officer and the chief purchasing officer also shall disclose by May 1 for the previous calendar year the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of each of the employers of such person from whom income of one thousand dollars or more was received during the year covered by the statement. 
(2)  The name and address of each sole proprietorship that he owned; the name, address and the general nature of the business conducted of each general partnership and joint venture in which he was a partner or participant; the name and address of each partner or co-participant for each partnership or joint venture unless such name and address are filed by the partnership or joint venture with the Secretary of State; the name, address and general nature of the business conducted of any closely held corporation or limited partnership in which the person owned ten percent or more of any class of the outstanding stock or limited partnership units; and the name of any publicly traded corporation or limited partnership that is listed on a regulated stock exchange or automated quotation system in which the person owned two percent or more of any class of outstanding stock, limited partnership units or other equity interests. 
(3)  The name and address of each corporation for which such person served in the capacity of a director, officer or receiver. 
(Ord. No. 2193, § 3, 8-12-91; Ord. No. 2461, § 3, 8-14-95; Ord. No. 00-40, §§ 1-5, 7-24-00; Ord. No. 01-52, §§ 1-5, 8-27-01; Ord. No. 07-01, § 3, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 09-23, § 3, 7-27-09; Ord. No. 13-11, § 1, 4-8-13; Ord. No. 15-10, § 1, 2-9-15) 
Sec. 2-54. - Filing of reports. 
    The reports in the attached format shall be filed with the city clerk and with the Missouri Ethics Commission. The reports shall be available for public inspection and copying during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2193, § 4, 8-12-91; Ord. No. 2461, § 4, 8-14-95; Ord. No. 00-40, §§ 1-5, 7-24-00; Ord. No. 01-52, §§ 1-5, 8-27-01; Ord. No. 07-01, § 4, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 07-21, § 4, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 09-23, § 4, 7-27-09; Ord. No. 13-11, § 1, 4-8-13; Ord. No. 15-10, § 1, 2-9-15) 
Sec. 2-55. - When to file reports. 
    The financial interest statements shall be filed at the following times, but no person is required to file more than one financial interest statement in any calendar year; 
(a)  Each person appointed to office shall file the statement within 30 days of such appointment or employment; 
(b)  Every other person required to file a financial interest statement shall file the statement annually not later than May 1, and the statement shall cover the calendar year ending the immediately preceding December 31; provided that any member of the board of aldermen may supplement the financial interest statement to report additional interest acquired after December 31 of the covered year until the date of filing of the financial interest statement. 
(Ord. No. 2193, § 5, 8-12-91; Ord. No. 2461, § 5, 8-14-95; Ord. No. 00-40, §§ 1-5, 7-24-00; Ord. No. 01-52, §§ 1-5, 8-27-01; Ord. No. 07-01, § 5, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 07-21, § 5, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 09-23, § 5, 7-27-09; Ord. No. 13-11, § 1, 4-8-13; Ord. No. 15-10, § 1, 2-9-15) 
Secs. 2-56-2-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS, OFFICIALS, AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Board of aldermen and mayor, RSMo 79.070 et seq.; other municipal officers, RSMo 79.230 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-76. - Elections. 
    All city elections shall be held pursuant to state law. 
(Code 1973, § 2-52) 
State Law reference- Election of officers, RSMo 79.030; elections generally, RSMo 115.001 et seq. 
Sec. 2-77. - Filing fees for candidates for elective offices. 
(a)  No declaration of candidacy or filing for designated elective offices of the city shall be accepted unless accompanied by a deposit in the following amounts: 
For the office of mayor\$50.00 
For the office of alderman\30.00 
(b)  Fees shall be paid to the city clerk, who shall issue a receipt therefor and deposit same into the general revenue fund of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-53; Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 1-22-07) 
Sec. 2-78. - Bonds provided to officials and employees. 
(a)  All officials and employees of the city shall be covered under a faithful performance and honesty blanket bond in an amount not less than $25,000.00, except that the treasurer of the city shall be covered under an appropriate public officials' faithful performance and fidelity bond in an amount not less than $25,000.00 for the protection of the city. 
(b)  All bonds provided shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of each official and employee of his duties, and upon his payment over to the city of all money belonging to the city which may come into his hands. 
(c)  All bonds required by this section may be furnished by a corporate surety, and all premiums therefor shall be paid from the funds of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-54) 
State Law reference- Officers may be required to give bonds, RSMo 79.260. 
Sec. 2-79. - Term of office of appointive officers. 
    All officers of the city appointed to their position by the mayor or board of aldermen shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and board; provided, however, that members of boards and commissions shall serve for such period of time as may be established in the ordinance establishing such board or commission. 
(Code 1973, § 2-55) 
Sec. 2-80. - Expenses for employees and officials. 
    All employees and officials shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the conduct of their official duties as approved and submitted on an official expense report form. 
(Code 1973, § 2-56) 
Sec. 2-81. - Compensation. 
    Officers and employees of the city shall be paid such compensation as the board may establish by ordinance. 
(Code 1973, § 2-57) 
State Law reference- Salaries of officers to be fixed by ordinance, RSMo 79.270. 
Secs. 2-82-2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MAYOR 

Sec. 2-101. - Election. 
    The mayor of the city shall be elected on the municipal election day every two years. 
(Ord. No. 00-45, § 1, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 07-04, § 1, 2-12-07) 
State Law reference- Election of officers, RSMo 79.030. 
Sec. 2-102. - Qualifications. 
    No person shall be mayor unless he is at least 25 years of age, a citizen of the United States, a resident of the city at the time of and for at least one year next preceding his election and a registered voter. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 79.080, 79.250. 
Sec. 2-103. - Member of board. 
    The mayor shall have a seat in and preside over the board of aldermen but shall not vote on any question except in case of a tie. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 79.120. 
Sec. 2-104. - Duties. 
(a)  The mayor shall exercise a general supervision over all the officers and affairs of the city and shall take care that the ordinances of the city, and the state laws relating to the city, are complied with. 
(b)  The mayor, with the board of aldermen, shall have the care, management and control of the city and its finances, and shall have power to enact and ordain ordinances, which are consistent with the laws and Constitution of the state. 
(c)  The mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the city for ceremonial purposes. 
(d)  The mayor shall approve all bills passed by the board of aldermen and presented to him or veto such bill as provided by statute of the state. 
(e)  The mayor shall perform all other duties prescribed for him by the statutes of the state and the ordinances of the city. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 79.110, 79.120, 79.140. 
Sec. 2-105. - Term of office. 
    The mayor shall be elected for a two-year term of office and shall serve until his successor is elected and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 04-27, § 1, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 07-04, § 2, 2-12-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 79.050. 
Secs. 2-106-2-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF ALDERMEN 

Sec. 2-121. - Election. 
    The members of the board of aldermen shall be elected on the municipal election day every two years. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 79.030. 
Sec. 2-122. - Qualifications. 
    No person shall be an alderman unless he or she is at least 18 years of age, a citizen of the United States, and an inhabitant and resident of the city for one year next preceding his or her election, and a resident, at the time he or she files and during the time he or she serves, of the ward from which he or she is elected. 
(Ord. No. 13-48, § 1, 12-9-13) 
Sec. 2-123. - Duties. 
(a)  The board of aldermen, with the mayor, shall have the care, management and control of the city and its finances and shall have the power to enact and ordain ordinances of the city, which are consistent with the laws and Constitution of the state. 
(b)  The board of aldermen shall perform all other duties and exercise all other powers prescribed by the statutes of the state and the ordinances of the city. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 79.110. 
Sec. 2-124. - Term of office. 
    The board of aldermen shall be elected for a two-year term of office and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 79.060. 
Sec. 2-125. - Standing committees. 
(a)  In order that the business of the board of aldermen may be expeditiously transacted, the following standing committees are established for the board of aldermen: 
(1)  Financial and administration; 
(2)  Parks and recreation; 
(3)  Public health and safety; and 
(4)  Public works. 
(b)  The mayor, without any concurrence or approval of the board of aldermen, shall appoint one alderman from each ward to serve on each aldermanic committee; provided, however, that no alderman shall serve on more than two committees at the same time. The mayor shall also appoint a chairman for each aldermanic committee, who shall be chosen from among the members of that committee. 
(c)  Each alderman, and his successor, appointed to serve as chairman or as a member of an aldermanic committee shall serve on such committee at the discretion of the mayor. 
(Code 1973, § 2-225) 
Sec. 2-126. - Acting president. 
(a)  Following the installation of reelected or newly elected aldermen at the first meeting of the board of aldermen which follows the annual election of aldermen, the board of aldermen, by a majority of all the members of the board, shall elect one of their own number as acting president of the board of aldermen. The acting president of the board of aldermen shall serve in that capacity for a period of one year or until his successor as acting president is elected or until his term of office as an alderman has terminated. 
(b)  The acting president of the board of aldermen shall perform the duties of the mayor, with all the rights, privileges, powers and jurisdiction of the mayor, in the event of any vacancy in the office of mayor, or in the event of the incapacitation, disqualification or temporary absence of the mayor. 
(c)  In the event both the mayor and acting president determined in accordance with this section are absent from any regularly scheduled or special meeting of the board of aldermen, the members of the board of aldermen present and constituting a quorum shall select the next senior aldermen present to conduct that meeting of the board. Seniority shall be determined by consecutive terms served as alderman, or by the highest total votes cast for the senior alderman at the last election for alderman if seniority cannot be determined merely by consecutive terms. Meetings of the board of aldermen shall be conducted in accordance with the then current edition of Robert's Rules of Order (Newly Revised). 
(Code 1973, § 2-227; Ord. No. 2714, § 1, 12-14-98) 
Secs. 2-127-2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- City administrator, RSMo 77.042 et seq. 

Sec. 2-141. - Office created. 
    The office of city administrator for the city is hereby created. 
(Code 1973, § 2-260) 
Sec. 2-142. - Appointment and term. 
    The administrator shall be appointed by the board of aldermen, with the approval of the mayor, for an indefinite term. 
(Code 1973, § 2-261) 
Sec. 2-143. - Qualifications. 
    The administrator shall be at least 21 years of age and shall be chosen solely on the basis of education, experience and executive and administrative qualifications. He shall hold, as a minimum, a bachelor's degree in public administration or a related field from an accredited university, or have at least five years' practical experience in the field of public administration. 
(Code 1973, § 2-262) 
Sec. 2-144. - Oath of office. 
    The administrator shall take and subscribe to an oath of office, before some person authorized to administer oaths, that he possesses all the qualifications prescribed for his office by law; that he will support the Constitutions of the United States and of the state, the provisions of all laws of the state and the ordinances of the city; and that he will faithfully demean himself while in office. 
(Code 1973, § 2-263) 
Sec. 2-145. - Compensation. 
    The administrator shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by ordinance. The administrator shall be entitled to all fringe benefits which are provided to other officers and employees of the city and to such other fringe benefits as may be provided by ordinance. 
(Code 1973, § 2-265) 
Sec. 2-146. - Removal from office. 
    The administrator may be removed from office at will by the mayor with the consent of a majority of the members elected to the board of aldermen or by a two-thirds vote of all members elected to the board of aldermen independently of the mayor's approval or recommendation. 
(Code 1973, § 2-266) 
Sec. 2-147. - Fulltime position. 
    The administrator shall devote full time to the performance of the duties of his office, and he shall not be otherwise employed. 
(Code 1973, § 2-267) 
Sec. 2-148. - Duties and authority. 
(a)  General. The administrator shall be responsible for the administration and management of the business and employees of the city subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor and board of aldermen. To that end, he shall have the duties and powers provided in this section. 
(b)  Administrative. 
(1)  Carry out all lawful policies established by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(2)  Establish short- and long-range goals for the city with the approval of the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(3)  Develop a plan of organization to establish areas of responsibility, lines of authority and formal channels of communication for approval by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(4)  Provide for the maintenance of the physical property and equipment of the city; meet operating conditions in compliance with applicable federal, state and local legal requirements. 
(5)  Provide for periodic reports to the mayor and board of aldermen on all aspects of the city's activities. 
(6)  Provide for meaningful relationships and communications between the city and its residents. 
(7)  Provide for an economic, efficient and safe delivery of supplies and services necessary in rendering efficient services to the city and its residents. 
(8)  Provide for a sound, stable and realistically economical insurance and bonding program for all aspects of city liability and risk. 
(9)  Supervise the operational activities of all city departments, agencies and offices. 
(10)  Coordinate the activities of all departments, agencies and offices. 
(11)  Supervise the preparation of all bid specifications for services and equipment. 
(12)  Prescribe such rules and regulations as are necessary for the conduct of the city's departments, agencies and offices; and revoke, suspend or amend any rule or regulation of any city department, agency or office. 
(13)  Be accountable to the mayor and board of aldermen for any actions taken when requested to do so, and at all times be subject to the supervision, direction and control of the mayor subject to review by the board of aldermen. 
(14)  Prepare and submit to the mayor and board of aldermen an annual statement of objectives which will specify goals and timetables consistent with objectives set forth by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(15)  Perform related duties as required by the mayor and board of aldermen not inconsistent with the statutes of the state and the ordinances of the city. 
(16)  Maintain a policy book of all lawful policies established by the mayor and the board of aldermen. The policy book shall be available to the public during normal business hours. 
(16-I)  All policies incorporated in this book must be approved by the majority of the board of aldermen. 
(16-II)  Any changes to these policies must be approved by a two-third ( 2/3 ) majority of the board of aldermen. 
(c)  Budgetary. Plan for the fiscal solvency and security of the city, including the submission of a realistic annual budget which provides for a program of sound fiscal management. 
(d)  Committee liaison. 
(1)  Attend all meetings of the board of aldermen and, as requested, meetings of all aldermanic committees. 
(2)  Serve as liaison between the mayor and board of aldermen and the various committees, boards and commissions of the city and their members. 
(e)  Personnel. 
(1)  Recommend the establishment and maintenance of personnel programs employing sound personnel policies and practices which are internally consistent and externally competitive. 
(2)  Promote the organization and continuing development of a competent city staff. 
(3)  Design, prepare and submit for review and adoption by the board of aldermen personnel procedures, position classifications and compensation schedules for employees covered in the city's personnel program. 
(4)  Prescribe the functions and duties of officers and employees of the city not otherwise prescribed by any ordinance of the city. 
(5)  Appoint, promote or remove from service all officers who are not elected to office and employees of the city, except as otherwise provided by law or city ordinance; however, any person so removed from service may appeal his dismissal to the mayor and board of aldermen by giving notice in writing within ten days following notification of dismissal. All such actions by the administrator shall be based upon merit, qualifications or disqualifications of the officers or employees concerned without regard to his political beliefs or affiliations. 
(6)  Establish such administrative rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law or established city policy, as may be necessary or proper for the efficient and economical conduct of the business of the city. 
(7)  Supervise the work of the city attorney and city prosecutor in accordance with the applicable ordinances of the city. 
(f)  Financial. 
(1)  Supervise the collection and deposit of all taxes and revenues such as, but not limited to, sales, personal property, real estate, gasoline, cigarette and intangible taxes and road and bridge fund revenues, license and permit fees, federal revenue sharing funds and court fines. 
(2)  Supervise in the manner prescribed by ordinance the purchase of all materials, supplies and equipment for which funds are provided in the budget or appropriated by the board of aldermen. 
(3)  Keep the mayor and board of aldermen advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city, including the anticipated financial impact of proposed ordinances and make such recommendations as he may deem appropriate. 
(4)  Supervise the preparation of a monthly status report covering all departmental operations and city financial conditions. 
(5)  Supervise and coordinate efforts on behalf of the city to obtain financial grants from any sources. 
(6)  Keep fully advised of the financial condition and future financial needs of the city. 
(g)  Press releases. Be responsible for keeping the public informed of the purposes and methods of the city government through all available news media. 
(h)  Other duties. Perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him by the mayor and board of aldermen or by a contract of employment with the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-268; Ord. No. 2281, § I, 11-23-92; Ord. No. 07-15, § 1, 6-11-07) 
Sec. 2-149. - Responsibility for city property. 
    The administrator shall have responsibility for all real and personal property owned or maintained by the city. He shall have responsibility for all inventories of such property and for the upkeep of all such property. Personal property owned by the city may be sold by the administrator only with approval of the mayor and board of aldermen. Real property may be sold only when such sale is authorized by ordinance. 
(Code 1973, § 2-269) 
Sec. 2-150. - Coordinating work activities. 
    The administrator shall coordinate the work of all the departments, agencies and offices of the city and shall have authority to assign the employees of the city to any department where they are needed for the most effective discharge of the functions of city government. 
(Code 1973, § 2-270) 
Sec. 2-151. - Investigative responsibility. 
    The administrator shall have the authority to investigate, examine or inquire into the affairs or operation of any department of the city under his jurisdiction and shall report on any condition or fact concerning the city government requested by the mayor or board of aldermen. 
(Code 1973, § 2-271) 
Sec. 2-152. - Addressing board of aldermen. 
    The administrator shall have the authority to appear before and address the board of aldermen at any meeting. 
(Code 1973, § 2-272) 
Sec. 2-153. - Limitation on duties and authority. 
    At no time shall the duties or authority of the administrator supersede the actions of the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Code 1973, § 2-273) 
Sec. 2-154. - Interference by alderman prohibited; exceptions. 
    No member of the board of aldermen shall directly interfere with the conduct of any department, agency or office or with the duties of employees subordinate to the administrator except at the express direction of the board of aldermen or with the approval of the mayor or administrator. 
(Code 1973, § 2-274) 
Sec. 2-155. - Municipal political activity prohibited. 
    The city administrator shall not use official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering with any election. While retaining the right to vote as he pleases, he shall take no active part in any political campaign or lend support to or oppose the candidacy of any person seeking elective office in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-275) 
Sec. 2-156. - Administrator pro tem. 
(a)  In the event of a vacancy in the position of city administrator or if the administrator is absent due to illness, disability, vacation or for personal reasons, the assistant city administrator shall serve as acting city administrator. 
(b)  He shall have and perform all of the powers, rights and duties of the administrator during such absence. 
(c)  The administrator at his discretion may designate any employee to serve in this capacity. 
(Code 1973, § 2-276) 
Sec. 2-157. - Employment contract. 
    The city may, acting through the mayor with the consent of a majority of the members elected to the board of aldermen or by a two-thirds vote of all the members elected to the board of aldermen independently of the mayor's approval or recommendation, enter into an employment contract with a person meeting the qualifications set forth in this division. Such contract may more fully set forth the terms and conditions of employment but may not conflict with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1973, § 2-277) 
Secs. 2-158-2-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CITY CLERK 

Sec. 2-171. - Appointment. 
    The board of aldermen shall select a clerk for the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-64) 
State Law reference- Board of aldermen to select clerk, RSMo 79.320. 
Sec. 2-172. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to: 
(1)  Keep a journal of the proceedings of the board of aldermen. 
(2)  Safely and properly keep all the records and papers belonging to the city entrusted to his care. 
(3)  Perform such other duties and responsibilities as are provided for by law and ordinance. 
(4)  Perform such other duties as may be directed by the mayor or the board of aldermen. 
(Code 1973, § 2-65) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 79.320. 
Sec. 2-173. - Office hours. 
    The office of the city clerk shall be open for the transaction of business during such periods as the board deems necessary. 
(Code 1973, § 2-66; Ord. No. 08-29, § 1, 7-28-08) 
Secs. 2-174, 2-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CITY TREASURER 

Sec. 2-176. - Appointment. 
    The city treasurer shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent and approval of the majority of the members of the board of aldermen. 
(Code 1973, § 2-250) 
Sec. 2-177. - Duties. 
    The city treasurer shall assist in the preparation of the city budget by the city administrator and shall perform all duties that may be prescribed by any statute or ordinance, or that may be ordered done by the board of aldermen or the mayor. 
(Code 1973, § 2-251) 
Secs. 2-178-2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-181. - Office created. 
    There is hereby created the office of city attorney for the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-101) 
Sec. 2-182. - Appointment. 
    The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the board of aldermen. 
(Code 1973, § 2-102) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to appoint city attorney, RSMo 79.230. 
Sec. 2-183. - Duties generally. 
    It shall be the duty of the city attorney to: 
(1)  Advise the mayor, board of aldermen and the various officers of the city; 
(2)  Attend meetings of the board of aldermen and of the city's planning and zoning commission, as required; 
(3)  Prepare and draft proposed ordinances and contracts for the city; and 
(4)  Provide the necessary legal services required by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-103) 
Sec. 2-184. - Represents city. 
    The city attorney shall represent the city in all matters before any court, board, administrative body or other tribunal, except the municipal court of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-104) 
Sec. 2-185. - Additional legal duties. 
    The board of aldermen may require the city attorney to perform such extra legal services as the board may, in its discretion, deem necessary and in the best interests of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-105) 
Sec. 2-186. - Additional compensation. 
    Whenever the city attorney is required to represent the city as required by section 2-184 or to perform extra legal duties as required by section 2-185, he shall be paid at an hourly rate to be established by the board in addition to his monthly compensation. 
(Code 1973, § 2-106) 
Secs. 2-187-2-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-191-2-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 2-221. - Department of administration. 
    The department of administration shall be headed by the assistant city administrator, who may also serve as the building commissioner and city planner. This department shall provide administrative support services for all other departments and operations within the city under the direction of the city administrator. These services shall include but not be limited to personnel, finance, data processing, risk management, public relations, code enforcement, planning and zoning, permits and licenses and clerical supervision. 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, ch. 14; planning and development, ch. 19; zoning, app. A. 
Sec. 2-222. - Stop-work orders-Zoning development and building codes. 
    The city planner and/or the building commissioner shall have the power to order all work to be stopped on any building or structure or land within the city where such work is being done in violation of any provision of the city's zoning ordinance and any building, plumbing or electrical installation or national code adopted by the city by reference. Such stop-work orders may be given orally and may be enforced when so given provided, however, that any oral stop-work order shall be followed up by written notice within two hours. All work that is stopped under this section shall not be resumed except upon permission of the city planner and/or building commissioner. Written stop-work orders may be served by any police officer or by any city employee and may be served by personal service, mail electronic transmission or by posting on the premises affected. 
(Ord. No. 01-64, § 1, 10-22-01) 
Secs. 2-223-2-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARKS AND RECREATION 

Sec. 2-236. - Department of parks and recreation. 
    The department of parks and recreation shall be headed by a director of parks and recreation. The director shall supervise and be responsible for the efficient operation of the parks and recreation system of the city, including all public lands, facilities, improvements and programs, subject to the direction and review of the city administrator. 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 18. 
Secs. 2-237-2-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - POLICE 

Sec. 2-251. - Police department. 
    The police department shall be headed by the chief of police and shall be composed of such other officers and personnel as the board of aldermen may from time to time authorize, under the direction of the city administrator. 
Cross reference- Police, ch. 20. 
Secs. 2-252-2-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PUBLIC WORKS 

Sec. 2-271. - Department of public works. 
    The department of public works shall be headed by a director, who shall also be the city engineer. The director shall be a professional engineer registered in the state. The primary duties of this department are: 
(1)  The maintenance of all public streets, storm drainage facilities, sidewalks, traffic control devices and municipal buildings. 
(2)  The clearing and sweeping of all public thoroughfares of debris, ice and snow. 
(3)  Design and inspection of all capital improvement projects. 
(4)  Review and inspection of all residential and commercial developments for drainage and related public works issues. 
Cross reference- Traffic control devices, § 15-341 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, ch. 24. 
Sec. 2-272. - Stop-work orders-Construction codes. 
    The city engineer shall have the power to order all grading, construction, alteration or repair work to be stopped on any land in the city when such work is being done in violation of any provision of any city ordinance, approved site or grading plans, excavation permits or other construction policies and practices adopted by the city by custom or reference. Such stop-work orders may be given orally and may be enforced when so given provided, however, that any oral stop order will be followed by a written order within two hours. All work that is stopped under this section shall not be resumed except upon the permission of the city engineer. Written stop-work orders may be served by any police officer or by any city employee and may be served by personal service, mail, electronic transmission, or by posting on the premises affected. 
(Ord. No. 01-64, § 1, 10-22-01) 
Sec. 2-273. - Application for appeal. 
    Any person shall have a right to appeal the issuance of a stop-work order to the board of adjustment of the city. Appeals to the board of adjustment do not stay a stop-work order. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of the code or the rules legally adopted there under has been incorrectly interpreted and/or the provisions of the code do not fully apply. All hearings with respect to stop-work orders before the board of adjustment shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the city official issuing the stop-work order, and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The board of adjustment shall uphold, reverse or modify the stop-work order by a majority vote of those present and voting. Appeals from the board of adjustment decision with respect to stop-work orders shall be governed by section 6-96 of this Code, entitled "Court appeal." 
(Ord. No. 01-64, § 1, 10-22-01) 
Sec. 2-274. - Inspections conducted outside of working hours as may be established by the city. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the following construction related activities require inspections by city inspectors: 
(1)  Laying pipe including underdrains; 
(2)  Subgrade compaction and grade finalization; 
(3)  Earth filling (including replacement of unsuitable soil); 
(4)  Construction of manholes and inlets; 
(5)  Forms prior to pouring concrete; 
(6)  Back filling of all types (includes underdrain, sewer and utility trenches); 
(7)  Laying and compacting crush rock base; 
(8)  Pouring and finishing concrete; 
(9)  Laying and compacting asphalt. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, inspection of any matter set forth in subsection (a) above outside normal working hours for inspectors as may be established by the city, and those conducted on weekends or city holidays shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  The project owner or contractor shall provide at least 48 hours advanced notice to the city, along with a description of the specific work to be performed, along with the name of a contact person responsible for the work and that contact person's phone number. 
(2)  In the event an inspector in not available on the specified date, the parties shall establish a date when an inspector is available. 
(3)  The project owner must agree, in writing, to reimburse the city for premium pay and associated benefits paid to the inspector by the city based on the actual hours worked by the inspector. Reimbursement of the city's additional cost shall be received within 14 calendar days of the work date set forth in the notice and/or the mutually agreed upon dated as determined by the parties. The written agreement shall include the owner's acknowledgement that should payment not be received by the city within the specified time period, that the city will issue a stop work order on the entire project. 
Any work performed on projects set forth in subsection (a) without proper inspection as solely determined by the city shall result in the removal of the uninspected work, at no cost to the city, the issuance of a stop work order by the city, or such other remedy as may be determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-14, § 1, 5-14-07) 
Secs. 2-275-2-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC MEETINGS, RECORDS AND VOTES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 610.010-610.028. 

Sec. 2-291. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the public policy of this city that meetings, records, votes, actions, and deliberations of public governmental bodies shall be open to the public unless otherwise provided by law. This article shall be liberally construed and its exceptions strictly construed to promote this public policy. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by law, all public meetings of public governmental bodies shall be open to the public as set forth in this article, all public records of public governmental bodies shall be open to the public for inspection and copying as set forth in this article, and all public votes of public governmental bodies shall be recorded as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 2-411) 
Sec. 2-292. - Votes recorded. 
    Except as provided in section 2-294, and except as otherwise provided by law, all public votes shall be recorded, and if a roll call is taken, as to attribute each "yea" and "nay" vote, or abstinence if not voting, to the name of the individual member of the public governmental body. All public meetings shall be open to the public and public votes and public records shall be open to the public for inspection and duplication. 
(Code 1973, § 2-415) 
Sec. 2-293. - Notice of meeting. 
(a)  Notice of the time, date, and place of each meeting of public governmental bodies, and its tentative agenda, shall be given in a manner reasonably calculated to apprise the public of that information. Reasonable notice shall include making available copies of the notice to any representative of the news media who requests notice of a particular meeting and posting the notice on a bulletin board or other prominent place which is easily accessible to the public and clearly designated for that purpose at the principal office of the body holding the meeting, or if no such office exists, at the building in which the meeting is to be held. 
(b)  Notice conforming with all of the requirements of subsection (a) shall be given at least 24 hours prior to the commencement of any meeting of a governmental body unless for good cause such notice is impossible or impractical, in which case as much notice as is reasonably possible shall be given. Each meeting shall be held at a place reasonably accessible to the public and at a time reasonably convenient to the public, unless for good cause such a place or time is impossible or impractical. Every reasonable effort shall be made to grant special access to the meeting to handicapped or disabled individuals. 
(c)  When it is necessary to hold a meeting on less than 24 hours' notice, or at a place that is not reasonably accessible to the public, or at a time that is not reasonably convenient to the public, the nature of the good cause justifying that departure from the normal requirements shall be stated in the minutes. 
(d)  A formally constituted subunit of a parent governmental body may conduct a meeting without notice as required by this section during a lawful meeting of the parent governmental body, a recess in that meeting, or immediately following that meeting, if the meeting of the subunit is publicly announced at the parent meeting and the subject of the meeting reasonably coincides with the subjects discussed or acted upon by the parent governmental body. 
(e)  If another provision of law requires a manner of giving specific notice of a meeting, hearing or an intent to take action by a governmental body, compliance with that section shall constitute compliance with the notice requirements of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 2-420) 
Sec. 2-294. - Closed meetings; exemptions. 
(a)  All meetings, records and votes are open to the public, except the governmental body may close any meeting, record or vote relating to the following: 
(1)  Legal actions, causes of action or litigation involving a public governmental body and any confidential or privileged communications between a public governmental body or its representatives and its attorneys. However, any vote relating to litigation involving a public governmental body shall be made public upon final disposition of the matter voted upon; provided, however, in matters involving the exercise of the power of eminent domain, the vote shall be announced or become public immediately following the action on the motion to authorize institution of such a legal action. Legal work product shall be considered a closed record. 
(2)  Lease, purchase or sale of real estate by a public governmental body where public knowledge of the transaction might adversely affect the legal consideration therefor. However, any vote or public record approving a contract relating to the lease, purchase or sale of real estate by a public governmental body shall be made public upon execution of the lease, purchase or sale of the real estate. 
(3)  Hiring, firing, disciplining or promoting an employee of a public governmental body. However, any vote on a final decision, when taken by a public governmental body, to hire, fire, promote or discipline an employee of a public governmental body must be made available to the public with a record of how each member voted within 72 hours of the close of the meeting where such action occurs; provided, however, that any employee so affected shall be entitled to prompt notice before such decision is made available to the public. 
(4)  Non-judicial mental or physical health proceedings involving identifiable persons, including medical, psychiatric, psychological or alcoholism or drug dependency diagnosis or treatment. 
(5)  Testing and examination materials, before the test or examination is given or if it is to be given again before so given again. 
(6)  Welfare cases if identifiable individuals. 
(7)  Preparation, including any discussions or work product, on behalf of a public governmental body or its representatives for negotiations with employee groups. 
(8)  Software codes for electronic data processing and documentation thereof. 
(9)  Specifications for competitive bidding, until either the specifications are officially approved by the public governmental body or the specifications are published for bid. 
(10)  Scaled bids and related documents, until the earlier of either when the bids are opened, or all bids arc accepted, or all bids are rejected. 
(11)  Individually identifiable personnel records, performance ratings or records pertaining to employees or applicants for employment, except that this exemption shall not apply to the names, positions, salaries and lengths of service of officers and employees of public agencies once they are employed as such. 
(12)  Records that are protected from disclosure by law. 
(13)  Meetings and public records relating to scientific and technological innovations in which the owner has a proprietary interest. 
(14)  Confidential or privileged communications between a public governmental body and its auditor including all auditor work product. 
(15)  Operational guidelines and policies developed, adopted, or maintained by any public agency responsible for law enforcement, public safety, first response, or public health for use in responding to or preventing any critical incident which is or appears to be terrorist in nature and which has the potential to endanger individual or public safety or health. Nothing in this exception shall be deemed to close information regarding expenditures, purchases, or contracts made by an agency in implementing these guidelines or policies, When seeking to close information pursuant to this exception, the agency shall affirmatively state in writing that disclosure would impair its ability to protect the safety or health of persons, and shall in the same writing state that the public interest in nondisclosure outweighs the public interest in disclosure of the records. This exception shall sunset on December 31, 2008. 
(16)  Existing or proposed security systems and structural plans of real property owned or leased by a public governmental body, and information that is voluntarily submitted by a non-public entity owning or operating an infrastructure to any public governmental body for use by that body to devise plans for protection of that infrastructure, the public disclosure of which would threaten public safety. Records related to the procurement of or expenditures relating to security systems purchased with public funds shall be open. When seeking to close information pursuant to this exception, the public governmental body shall affirmatively state in writing that disclosure would impair the public governmental body's ability to protect the security or safety of persons or real property, and shall in the same writing state that the public interest in nondisclosure outweighs the public interest in disclosure of the records. Records that are voluntarily submitted by a nonpublic entity shall be reviewed within 90 days of submission to determine if retention of the document is necessary in furtherance of a security interest. If retention is not necessary, the documents shall be returned to the nonpublic governmental body or destroyed. 
(17)  Records that identify the configuration of components or the operation of a computer, computer system, computer network, or telecommunications network, and would allow unauthorized access to or unlawful disruption of a computer, computer system, computer network or telecommunication network of a public governmental body. This exception shall not be used to limit or deny access to otherwise public records in a file, document, data file or database containing public records. Records related to the procurement of or expenditures relating to such computer, computer system, computer network, or telecommunications network, including the amount of moneys paid by, or on behalf of, a public governmental body for such computer, computer system, computer network, or telecommunications network shall be open. 
(18)  Credit card numbers, personal identification numbers, digital certificates, physical and virtual keys, access codes or authorization codes that are used to protect the security of electronic transactions between a public governmental body and a person or entity doing business with a public governmental body. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to close the record of a person or entity using a credit card held in the name of a public governmental body or any record of a transaction made by a person using a credit card or other method of payment for which reimbursement is made by a public governmental body. 
(b)  All records that may be closed hereby are deemed closed records unless the governmental body votes to make them public. Before closing a meeting to the public, a majority of a quorum of the governmental body must vote to do so in a public vote. The vote of each member of the governmental body on the question of closing the meeting or vote and the reason for closing the meeting by reference to a specific exception shall be announced at a public meeting and entered into the minutes. 
(c)  The governmental body shall give notice of the time, date and place of a closed meeting and the reason for holding it by reference to a specific exception. The notice shall be the same as in subsection (d) below. No other business may be discussed in a closed meeting that does not directly relate to the specific reason announced to close the meeting to the public. Public governmental bodies holding a closed meeting must close only an existing portion of the meeting facility necessary to house the members of the public governmental body in the closed session, allowing members of the public to remain to attend any subsequent open session held by the public governmental body following the closed session. 
(d)  The governmental body shall give notice of the time, date, place and tentative agenda of each meeting. The notice shall be placed on the appropriate bulletin board at city hall at least 24 hours, exclusive of weekends and holidays, prior to the meeting. If an emergency makes it impossible to give 24 hours' notice, the reason must be reflected in the minutes. Notice also shall be given to any representative of the news media who requests notice of a particular meeting. 
(e)  Each meeting shall be held at a place reasonably accessible to the public, and at a time reasonably convenient to the public, unless for good cause such a place or time is impossible or impractical. When it is necessary to hold a meeting on less than 24 hours' notice, or at a place that is not reasonably accessible to the public, or at a time that is not reasonably convenient to the public, the nature of the good cause justifying that departure from the normal requirements shall be stated in the minutes. 
(f)  A formally constituted subunit of a parent governmental body may conduct a meeting without notice during a lawful meeting of the parent governmental body, a recess in that meeting, or immediately following that meeting, if the meeting of the subunit is publicly announced at the parent meeting and the subject of the meeting reasonably coincides with the subjects discussed or aced upon by the parent governmental body. 
(g)  A public body shall allow for the recording by audiotape, videotape, or other electronic means of any open meeting. A public body may establish guidelines regarding the manner in which such recording is conducted so as to minimize disruption to the meeting. No audio recording of any meeting, record, or vote closed pursuant to the provisions of RSMo 610.021 shall be permitted without permission of the public body; any person who violates this provision shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor. 
(h)  Any member of a public governmental body who transmits any message relating to public business by electronic means shall also concurrently transmit that message to either the member's public office computer or the custodian of records in the same format. The provisions of this section shall only apply to messages sent to two or more members of that body so that, when counting the sender, a majority of the body's members are copied. Any such message received by the custodian or at the member's office computer shall be a public record subject to the exceptions above. 
(i)  The city administrator or his/her designee shall be the custodian of records and will be responsible for maintenance and control of all records. The custodian shall provide public access to all public records as soon as possible but no later than the third business day following the date the custodian receives the request. If additional delay is necessary, the custodian shall give an explanation for the delay and the date the record will be available for inspection. If a request for access is denied, the custodian shall provide, upon request, a written statement of the grounds for such denial. Such statement shall cite the specific provision of law under which access is denied and shall be furnished to the requester no later than the end of the third business day following the date the request for the statement is received. The custodian shall charge ten cents per page, and the average hourly rate for clerical staff for the time required for copying, and the actual cost of research time. The custodian shall receive payment prior to duplicating copies. Fees for providing access to public records maintained on computer facilities, recording, tapes or disks, videotapes or films, pictures, maps, slides, graphics, illustrations or similar audio or visual items or devices, and for paper copies larger than nine by 14 inches shall include only the cost of copies, staff time, which shall not exceed the average hourly rate of pay for staff of the public governmental body required for making copies and programming, if necessary, and the cost of the disk, tape, or other medium used for the duplication. Fees for maps, blueprints, or plats that require special expertise to duplicate may include the actual rate of compensation for the trained personnel required to duplicate such maps, blueprints, or plats. If programming is required beyond the customary and usual level to comply with a request for records or information, the fees for compliance may include the actual costs of such programming. The custodian may designate deputy custodians in the following departments: 
Parks and recreation 
Public works 
Police department 
Records check\$6.00 
(Code 1973, § 2-421; Ord. No. 04-35, § 1, 9-13-04; Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 7-14-08) 
Sec. 2-295. - Closed meeting or vote procedure. 
(a)  Except as set forth in subsection (b) of this section, no meeting or vote may be closed without an affirmative public vote of the majority of a quorum of the board of aldermen or public governmental body. The vote of each member of the board of aldermen or public governmental body on the question of closing a public meeting or vote and the specific reason for closing that public meeting or vote by reference to a specific section of this article shall be announced publicly at an open meeting of the governmental body and entered into the minutes. 
(b)  The board of aldermen or a public governmental body proposing to hold a closed meeting or vote shall give notice of the time, date and place of such closed meeting or vote and the reason for holding it by reference to the specific exception allowed under the provisions of section 2-294. Such notice shall comply with the procedures set forth in section 2-293 for notice of a public meeting. 
(c)  Any meeting or vote closed pursuant to section 2-294 shall be closed only to the extent necessary for the specific reason announced to justify the closed meeting or vote. The board of aldermen or public governmental bodies shall not discuss any business in a closed meeting, record or vote which does not directly relate to the specific reason announced to justify the closed meeting or vote. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as to require the board of aldermen or a public governmental body to hold a closed meeting, record or vote to discuss or act upon any matter. 
(e)  Public records shall be presumed to be open unless otherwise exempt under the provisions of section 2-294 or law. 
(Code 1973, § 2-422) 
Sec. 2-296. - Record custodian. 
(a)  Abigail Johnson is appointed city clerk effective September 1, 2016. The city administrator is appointed as assistant city clerk. The city clerk and assistant city clerk shall be the custodians of and shall be responsible for the maintenance of the city's records. The identity and location of a custodian is to be made available upon request. 
(b)  The board of aldermen and each public governmental body shall make available for inspection and copying by the public of that body's public records. No person shall remove original public records from the office of the city or its custodian without written permission of the designated custodian. 
(c)  Each request for access to a public record shall be acted upon as soon as possible, but in no event later than the end of the third business day following the date the request is received by the custodian of records. If access to the public record is not granted immediately, the custodian shall give a detailed explanation of the cause for further delay and the place and earliest time and date that the record will be available for inspection. This period for document production may exceed three days for reasonable cause. 
(d)  If a request for access is denied, the custodian shall provide, upon request, a written statement of the grounds for such denial. Such statement shall cite the specific provision of law under which access is denied and shall be furnished to the requestor no later than the end of the third business day following the date that the request for the statement was received. 
(e)  Any member of a public governmental body who transmits any message relating to public business by electronic means shall also concurrently transmit that message to either the member's public office computer or the custodian of records in the same format. The provisions of this section shall only apply to messages sent to two or more members of that body so that, when counting the sender, a majority of the body's members are copied. Any such message received by the custodian or at the member's office computer shall be a public record subject to the exceptions of RSMo 610.021. The custodian of records shall retain all such electronic messages for one year on the city's Microsoft Exchange server, then such messages shall be transferred to the city's secure backup archive. The custodian of records shall retain all such electronic messages for an additional two years on the city's secure backup archive, then such electronic messages shall be deleted. 
(Code 1973, § 2-423; Ord. No. 2571, § 1, 2-10-97; Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 1-26-09; Ord. No. 14-22, § 1, 7-21-14; Ord. No. 14-27, § 1, 9-8-14; Ord. No. 16-23, § 1, 8-22-16) 
Sec. 2-297. - Fees for copying public records and payment of court costs by credit card. 
    The custodian of records shall charge a fee for researching and copying public records as follows: 
(1)  Fees for copying public records shall be determined as set forth in section 2-294. Documents may be furnished without charge or at a reduced charge when the city administrator determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public interest because it is likely to contribute to public understanding of the city's activities or operations or the requestor is not a commercial interest or is a resident of the city or is an organization engaged in civic, educational or charitable activities. 
(2)  The fee for accepting payments of court costs by means other than by cash or negotiable instrument shall be $4.00, in addition to the costs themselves. 
(3)  Payment for copying fees may be requested before the making of copies. 
(4)  Residents and nonresidents of the city who request fingerprints or fingerprinting shall incur a fee of $15.00 per fingerprint set. 
(5)  All moneys received from fees shall be deposited to the general governmental accounts of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-425; Ord. No. 2372, § I, 3-28-94; Ord. No. 2472, § 1, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 03-48, § 1, 9-8-03; Ord. No. 04-36, § 1, 9-13-04; Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 7-14-08) 
State Law reference- Fees for copying public records, RSMo 610.026. 
Sec. 2-298. - Court actions. 
(a)  Suit for enforcement of any violation of this article must be brought within six months from when the violation is ascertainable and in no event shall it be brought later than one year after the violation. This subsection shall not apply to an action taken regarding the issuance of bonds or other evidence of indebtedness of the city if a public hearing, election or public sale of the bonds or evidence of indebtedness has been held. 
(b)  The board of aldermen or other public governmental body of the city which is in doubt about the legality of closing a public meeting, record or vote may seek a formal opinion of the city attorney or the state attorney general. The city attorney may seek a court ruling from the circuit court for the county to ascertain the propriety of closing a particular meeting, record or vote. 
(c)  The city will provide at its expense for the legal defense of any member of the board of aldermen, mayor, city administrator or his deputies or member of any public governmental body of the city involved in any court action to enforce this article or RSMo 610.010 through 610.028. 
(Code 1973, § 2-427) 
Secs. 2-299-2-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14-39, § 1, adopted December 8, 2014, repealed §§ 2-311-2-314, which pertained to firearms in city buildings. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Secs. 2-311-2-314. - Reserved. 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; licenses and business regulations, ch. 14; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 15; alcoholic beverages in motor vehicles, § 15-112; driving while intoxicated or with excessive blood alcohol content, § 15-113 et seq.; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 17; alcoholic beverages in parks, § 18-34. 
State Law reference- Public intoxication, RSMo 67.305 et seq.; Liquor Control Law, RSMo 311.010 et seq.; local licensing of malt liquor sales, RSMo 311.200; nonintoxicating beer, RSMo 312.010 et seq.; drunkenness or drinking in certain places, RSMo 574.075. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Sale or consumption in public places. 
    No person shall sell or consume, either in a vehicle or otherwise, any intoxicating liquors, as defined in section 1-2, upon any public street, highway or thoroughfare, sidewalk or alley, or within 15 feet from either side thereof, or in any other public place within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 3-1; Ord. No. 12-25, § 2, 5-14-12) 
Sec. 3-2. - Furnishing intoxicating liquor to drunkards, intoxicated persons or under-aged persons. 
(a)  No person or his employee shall sell or supply intoxicating liquor or permit it to be sold or supplied to a habitual drunkard or to any person who is under or apparently under the influence of intoxicating liquor. 
(b)  Intoxicating liquor shall not be given, sold or otherwise supplied to any person under the age of 21 years, but this shall not apply to the supplying or administering of intoxicating liquor to a person under 21 years of age for medicinal purposes only by a physician, or by the parent or guardian of such person. 
(Code 1973, § 3-2; Ord. No. 12-25, § 2, 5-14-12) 
State Law reference- Authority for board of aldermen to prohibit sale to minors, habitual drunkards, RSMo 79.450; sale of intoxicating liquor to drunkards, etc., RSMo 311.310; sale of nonintoxicating beer to drunkards, etc., RSMo 312.400. 
Sec. 3-3. - Possession by minors. 
    No person under the age of 21 years, shall purchase or attempt to purchase, or have in his or her possession, any intoxicating liquor as defined in RSMo 311.020 or be visibly intoxicated as defined in RSMo 577.001, or have a detectable blood alcohol content of more than two-hundredths of one (2/100) percent or more by weight of alcohol in such person's blood. 
(Code 1973, § 3-3; Ord. No. 09-38, § 1, 10-26-09) 
Sec. 3-4. - Misrepresentation of age by under-aged person. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person of the age of 17 years and under the age of 21 years to represent that he has attained the age of 21 years for the purpose of purchasing, asking for or in any way receiving any intoxicating liquor, except in cases authorized by law. 
(b)  Any person under the age of 17 years who shall represent that he has attained the age of 21 years for the purpose of purchasing, asking for or in any way receiving any intoxicating liquor, except in cases authorized by law, may be considered a delinquent child and may be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of RSMo ch. 211. 
(Code 1973, § 3-4; Ord. No. 12-25, § 2, 5-14-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.320, 312.405. 
Sec. 3-5. - Assisting under-aged person in falsification of age. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to give, lend, sell or otherwise provide any person between the age of 17 years and 21 years any falsified identification, or the identification of another person for the purpose of establishing the age of the person as being 21 years of age or older. 
(Code 1973, § 3-5) 
Sec. 3-6. - Chapter not to affect professional activities of physicians and pharmacists. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of a duly licensed physician to prescribe intoxicating liquor in accordance with his professional judgment for any patient at any time, or prohibit a regularly licensed druggist from selling intoxicating liquor, lawfully acquired and lawfully in his possession, to any person on prescription from a regularly licensed physician; however, no part of such intoxicating liquor shall be consumed on the premises where sold. A license for the sale of intoxicating liquor is not required. 
(Code 1973, § 3-18) 
State Law reference- Druggists may sell and physicians prescribe liquor, RSMo 311.470. 
Secs. 3-7-3-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- The sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink was approved at a special election held February 21, 1959. 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Liquor Control Law, RSMo 311.010 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 3-26-3-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to charge for licenses, RSMo 311.220. 

Sec. 3-40. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or expose for sale any intoxicating liquor in any quantity, without securing the necessary license from the city. 
(b)  Each license shall apply to the class for which issued, and it shall be unlawful to sell or expose for sale any intoxicating liquor except in the manner authorized in the license held by the licensee as issued hereunder. 
(Code 1973, § 3-27; Ord. No. 12-25, § 3, 5-14-12) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq. 
Sec. 3-41. - Separate license for each place. 
    A separate license shall be required for each place of business. Every license issued under the provisions of this article shall particularly describe the premises at which intoxicating liquor may be sold thereunder, and each license shall not be deemed to authorize or permit the sale of intoxicating liquor at any place other than that described therein. 
(Code 1973, § 3-28) 
Sec. 3-42. - Applications. 
    An application for a license to sell intoxicating liquors as required by this article shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be on forms to be furnished by the city clerk and signed and sworn to by the applicant. 
(Code 1973, § 3-29) 
Sec. 3-43. - Persons ineligible generally. 
    No natural person shall be granted a liquor license unless such person is of good moral character and a qualified legal voter and taxpaying citizen of a county, town, city or village of the state; no corporation shall be granted a liquor license unless the managing officer of the corporation is of good moral character and a qualified legal voter and taxpaying citizen of a county, town, city or village of the state. No person shall be granted a liquor license whose license as a liquor dealer two or more times within 12 months before applying: 
(a)  Has been revoked; 
(b)  Has been convicted of a violation of the provisions of any law applicable to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquor; or 
(c)  Employs in his business, as a liquor dealer or licensee, any person whose license within two or more times within 12 months before applying has been revoked or who has been convicted of violating the provision of any such law. 
    However, nothing in this section contained shall prevent the issuance of licenses to nonresidents of Missouri or foreign corporations for the privilege of selling to duly licensed wholesalers and soliciting orders for the sale of intoxicating liquors to, by or through a duly licensed wholesaler, within this state. 
(Code 1973, § 3-30; Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 7-23-18) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.060(1). 
Sec. 3-44. - Locations ineligible. 
    No license shall be granted for the sale of intoxicating liquor within 300 feet of any school, church or other building regularly used as a place of religious worship, unless the applicant for the license shall first obtain the consent in writing of the board of directors of the school, or the consent in writing of the majority of the managing board of the church or place of worship; except that when a school, church or place of worship shall be established within 300 feet of any place of business licensed to sell intoxicating liquor, licenses may be renewed without respect to the location of a church, school or place of worship. 
(Code 1973, § 3-31; Ord. No. 2127, § 1, 2-13-95) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to impose distance requirements, RSMo 311.080. 
Sec. 3-45. - Approval of application; issuance. 
    Upon the filing of an application for a license required by this article, it shall be presented to the board of aldermen at its next meeting; and upon approval by a majority of the board and upon payment of the license tax herein provided for, the city clerk shall issue a license to the applicant to conduct business in the city until the expiration of such license. 
(Code 1973, § 3-32) 
Sec. 3-46. - Duration; fees payable in advance; proration. 
    The licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be dated July 1 and shall expire June 30 of the following year, and the fees for such licenses shall be paid annually in advance. Licenses may be issued for part of a year for businesses commenced after July 1 and proportionate fees charged based on the months or fraction of a month such license is to run to the next June 30 following. 
(Code 1973, § 3-33) 
Sec. 3-47. - Right of board of aldermen to refuse to issue or renew license. 
    The board of aldermen reserves the right to refuse to issue a license for the sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink when in its judgment the location for which the license is sought to be obtained is not in the best interests of the community, taking into consideration the proximity of homes, schools, churches, playgrounds or other activities and conditions or circumstances, or when in the judgment of the board of aldermen the person seeking the license is not a fit person to conduct such establishment. If, in the judgment of the board of aldermen, any person previously operating an establishment for the sale of intoxicating liquor has not conducted an orderly place or house, the board of aldermen may refuse to renew the license upon its expiration. 
(Code 1973, § 3-35) 
Sec. 3-48. - Transferability or assignability. 
    No license issued under this article shall be transferable or assignable. 
(Code 1973, § 3-36) 
Sec. 3-49. - To be kept posted. 
    All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be kept conspicuously posted in the place for which such license was issued. 
(Code 1973, § 3-37) 
Sec. 3-50. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  The board of aldermen may suspend or revoke any license issued under this Code for any one or more of the following violations by the licensee or his/her employee(s): 
(1)  Failure to prevent or suppress any violent quarrel, disorder, brawl, fight or other improper or unlawful conduct of any person who is upon the licensed premises; 
(2)  Failure to immediately report to the proper law enforcement authorities an illegal or violent act that has been committed on or about the licensed premises when the licensee or his/her employee knew or should have known that said act occurred upon the licensed premises; 
(3)  Failure to cooperate fully with law enforcement authorities during the course of an investigation into an illegal or violent act that was committed on or about the licensed premises; 
(4)  Permitting the performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sex acts which are prohibited by law; 
(5)  Permitting upon the licensed premises the display of any portion of the areola of a female breast or permitting a failure to cover the entire areola and entire front of a female breast with opaque clothing; 
(6)  Permitting upon the licensed premises the actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals of a person; 
(7)  Permitting upon the licensed premises the actual or simulated display of the anus, vulva, genital or pubic hair or permitting a failure to cover pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals with opaque clothing; 
(8)  Permitting any person to remain on the licensed premises after that person has exposed to public view any portion of his/her genitals or anus or has failed at any time to have and keep opaque clothing over all parts of his/her genitals and anus; 
(9)  Permitting upon the licensed premises the display of films, video programs or pictures depicting acts which are prohibited by this chapter or are offenses involving indecency and obscenity as set forth in this Code, as amended; 
(10)  Failure to continuously operate the licensed place of business during the term of such license; 
(11)  Failure to obtain a license from the state supervisor of liquor control; 
(12)  Making a false affidavit in an application for a license; or 
(13)  Any violation of the provisions of this Code, including those provisions of this Code relating to the issuance of licenses, or the State laws and regulations governing the sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink. 
(b)  No license shall be revoked or suspended until notice in writing is given and a hearing held by the Board of Aldermen to determine whether or not such license should be revoked. The hearing shall be held not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after such licensee is notified. 
(Ord. No. 16-19, § 1, 6-13-16) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-19, § 1, adopted June 13, 2016, repealed the former § 3-50 and enacted a new § 3-50 as set out herein. The former § 3-50 pertained to revocation and derived from Code 1973, § 3-38. 
Sec. 3-51. - Eligible persons to sell intoxicating liquor in the original package. 
    No license required by this article shall be issued for the retail sale of intoxicating liquor in the original package except to a person engaged in, and to be used in connection with the operation of, one or more of the following businesses: A drugstore, a cigar and tobacco store, a grocery store, a general merchandise store, a confectionery or delicatessen store; nor to any person who does not have and keep in his store a stock of goods having a value, according to invoices, of at least $1,000.00, exclusive of fixtures and intoxicating liquors. 
(Code 1973, § 3-39; Ord. No. 12-25, § 3, 5-14-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.200. 
Sec. 3-52. - Classes; annual fees. 
    A separate license shall be taken out, and an annual fee paid, for each of the following classes of sales of intoxicating liquors: 
(1)  To sell intoxicating liquor for consumption on premises where sold, including sale in the original package, with an annual fee of $450.00. 
(2)  To sell intoxicating liquor in the original package, not to be consumed on the premises where sold, with an annual fee of $150.00. 
(3)  To sell malt liquor and light wine or both malt liquor and light wine at retail, by the drink, for consumption on the premises where sold, with an annual fee of $50.00. 
(4)  To sell malt liquor in the original package but not for resale or consumption on the premises where sold, with an annual fee of $22.50. 
(5)  To sell light wine and malt liquor for consumption on the premises where sold for a church, school, civic, service, fraternal, veteran, political, or charitable club or organization at a picnic, bazaar, fair or similar gathering. Such permit shall be issued only for the day or days specified and shall not be for more than seven days per fiscal year, with a fee of $35.00. 
(6)  To sell intoxicating liquor, including the sale in original package on Sunday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, for operations meeting the definition of restaurant bar or amusement place as provided by state law with an annual fee of $300.00. 
(7)  To sell intoxicating liquor at wholesale, with an annual fee of $375.00 plus $1.00 per gallon sold. 
(8)  To manufacture, distill or brew intoxicating liquor with an annual fee of $350.00 plus any appropriate fee for gallons produced. 
(9)  To sell intoxicating liquor in the original package, not to be consumed on the premises where sold, on Sunday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight for establishments qualifying under state law with an annual fee of $300.00. 
(10)  To sell malt liquor at retail by drink for consumption on the premises where sold, with an annual fee of $50.00 per year. Notwithstanding the provisions of RSMo 311.290, any person licensed pursuant to this subsection may also sell malt liquor at retail by drink for consumption on the premises where sold between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and midnight on Sunday. 
(11)  For the privilege of manufacturing wine or brandy, which manufacturing shall be in accordance with all provisions of federal law applicable thereto except as may otherwise be specified by state law, in quantities provided by state law, not in excess of 18 percent of alcohol by weight for wine, or not in excess of 34 percent of alcohol by weight for brandy, from grapes, berries, other fruits, fruit products, honey, and vegetables produced or grown in the State of Missouri, exclusive of sugar, water and spirits, with an annual license fee of $5.00 for each 500 gallons or fraction thereof produced up to a maximum license fee of $300.00. 
(Code 1973, § 3-40; Ord. No. 2314, § 1, 5-24-93; Ord. No. 03-54, § 1, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 05-26, § 1, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 06-38, § 1, 6-12-06; Ord. No. 06-52, § 2, 8-28-06; Ord. No. 09-35, § 1, 9-28-09; Ord. No. 12-25, § 3, 5-14-12; Ord. No. 17-06, § 1, 2-27-17) 
State Law reference- State fees, RSMo 311.180-311.200; amount charged by city regulated, RSMo 311.220. 
Sec. 3-53. - Collection, disposition of fees. 
    All fees collected by the city clerk pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be accounted for and paid into the city treasury as other funds collected by the city clerk are accounted for and paid. 
(Code 1973, § 3-41) 
Sec. 3-54. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-26, § 1, adopted May 23, 2005, deleted § 3-54, which pertained to fees to be in lieu of merchant's tax, and derived from Code 1973, § 3-42. 
Sec. 3-55. - Restaurant bar; Sunday license. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any person who possesses the qualifications required by this article, and who now or hereafter meets the requirements of and complies with the provisions of this article, may apply for, and upon approval of the board of aldermen, the city clerk may issue a license to sell intoxicating liquor, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sunday by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises of any restaurant bar as described in the application. 
(b)  Persons holding a license under this section shall comply with all provisions of state law and with all other ordinances and regulations of the city relating to the sale of liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold; and, in addition to all other fees required by the ordinances of the city, a restaurant bar shall pay an additional fee of $300.00 a year, payable at the same time and in the same manner as are other license fees. 
(Code 1973, § 3-43; Ord. No. 09-31, § 1, 9-14-09) 
State Law reference- Restaurant bars authorized, defined; fees, RSMo 311.097; amount charged for licenses, RSMo 311.220(1). 
Sec. 3-56. - Amusement place; Sunday sale. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, any person who possesses the qualifications required by this section and who now or hereafter meets the requirements of and complies with the provisions of this section may apply for a license to sell intoxicating liquor between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sunday, by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises of any amusement place described in the application. 
(b)  Persons holding a license under this section shall pay the same fee as the fee charged for a restaurant bar license as set out in section 3-54 
(c)  Any new amusement place having been in operation less than 90 days may be issued a temporary license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sunday for a period not to exceed 90 days if the amusement place can show a projection of annual business from game participation of at least 50 percent of a total gross business of at least $300,000.00 for the first year of operation. The license fee shall be prorated for the period of the temporary license based on the cost of the annual license for the establishment. 
(d)  Except for those licensees possessing a license to sell intoxicating liquor, pursuant to section 3-52(1), nothing in this section shall be construed to permit a licensee to sell intoxicating liquor, malt liquor, or beer for off-premises consumption. 
(Code 1973, § 3-44; Ord. No. 2411, § 1, 10-10-94; Ord. No. 09-31, § 1, 9-14-09; Ord. No. 12-25, § 3, 5-14-12) 
Sec. 3-57. - Limited permit to sell light wine and malt liquor; picnic license. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, a permit for the sale of light wine and malt liquor for consumption on the premises where sold may be issued to any church, school, civic, service, fraternal, veteran, political or charitable club or organization for the sale of light wine or malt liquor at a picnic, bazaar, fair or similar gathering. Such permit shall be issued only for the day or days named therein and shall not authorize the sale of light wine and malt liquor for more than seven days by any such organization in any fiscal year. 
(b)  To secure the permit, the applicant shall complete a form provided by the city clerk; however, no applicant shall be required to furnish a personal photograph as part of the application. 
(c)  If the event will be held on a Sunday, the permit shall authorize the sale of light wine and malt liquor between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(d)  No provision of law or regulation shall prevent any wholesaler or distributor from providing customary storage, cooling or dispensing equipment for use by the holder of the license at such picnic, bazaar, fair or similar gathering. 
(Code 1973, § 3-46; Ord. No. 09-31, § 1, 9-14-09) 
State Law reference- Limited permit to sell malt liquor, RSMo 311.215. 
Sec. 3-58. - Wine tasting. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, any person possessing the qualifications and meeting the requirements of this chapter, who is licensed to sell intoxicating liquor in the original package at retail under section 3-52(2), may apply for a special permit to conduct wine tastings on the licensed premises. A license under this section shall bear an additional annual fee of ten dollars per year payable at the same time and manner as the other license fee. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the licensee to sell wine for on-premises consumption. 
(Ord. No. 2414, § 1, 11-14-94) 
Secs. 3-59-3-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPERATIONS 

Sec. 3-71. - Hours and days sales permitted; sales authorized when New Year's Eve on Sunday. 
(a)  No person shall sell, give away or otherwise dispose of or permit the sale or disposition on or about his premises of any intoxicating liquor in any quantity between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays, nor between the hours of 1:30 a.m. on Sundays and 6:00 a.m. on Mondays. 
(b)  When the last day of December falls on a Sunday, any person having a license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink may be open for business and sell intoxicating liquor by the drink under the provisions of his license on that day after 1:00 p.m. and until the time which would be lawful on another day of the week, notwithstanding any provision of this section or any other provision of law to the contrary. 
(Code 1973, §§ 3-51, 3-52) 
State Law reference- Sales prohibited between certain hours, RSMo 311.290; sales on New Year's Eve, RSMo 311.298. 
Sec. 3-72. - Keeping of intoxicating liquor other than that authorized by license. 
    The holder of a license issued pursuant to this article authorizing the sale of any liquor at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold shall not keep or secrete, or allow any other person to keep or secrete, in or upon the premises described in the license, any intoxicating liquor other than the kind of liquor expressly authorized to be sold by the licensee. 
(Code 1973, § 3-53) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 311.330. 
Sec. 3-73. - Licensees authorized to sell malt liquor and light wine for on premises consumption, not to sell other intoxicating liquor. 
    Licensees under this article authorized to sell malt liquor and light wine or both malt liquor and light wine, pursuant to sections 3-52(3) or 3-52(5) at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold shall not at the same place sell any intoxicating liquor other than malt liquor and light wine. 
(Code 1973, § 3-54; Ord. No. 12-25, § 4, 5-14-12) 
Sec. 3-74. - Original package purchases not to be consumed on premises where sold. 
    Intoxicating liquor purchased in the original package shall not be consumed or permitted to be consumed upon any premises where intoxicating liquor is authorized to be sold, nor shall such packages be opened on the premises where purchased. 
(Code 1973, § 3-55; Ord. No. 12-25, § 4, 5-14-12) 
Sec. 3-75. - Sales to be made on licensed premises only; obstruction of view of premises. 
    No person, agent or employee of any person in any capacity shall sell intoxicating liquor in any place other than that designated in a liquor license issued pursuant to this article or in the license of his employer, or at any other time or otherwise than is authorized by this article; nor in any building or room where there are blinds, screens, curtains or any other thing or object so placed in the building or room that it does obstruct or obscure from public view any portion of the interior of such room where intoxicating liquor is sold, delivered or drunk. 
(Code 1973, § 3-56) 
Sec. 3-76. - Unlawful to sell liquor or setups to under-aged persons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any merchant or keeper of any place of business in the city subject to regulation by the mayor and board of aldermen, or the employee of such merchant or keeper, to permit any under-aged person to drink or consume on the premises on which his business is conducted any whiskey, brandy, gin, wine, hooch, alcohol or intoxicating liquor, however acquired; or to sell, give away, lend, permit the use of or otherwise dispose of any soda water, ginger ale, water, ice, glass, spoon, container or receptacle to any person with the intent or knowledge that the same will be consumed or used in connection with the drinking or consuming by an under-aged person of any such intoxicating liquor on such premises. 
(Code 1973, § 3-57; Ord. No. 12-25, § 4, 5-14-12) 
Sec. 3-77. - Employment of under-aged persons. 
    No liquor license holder shall employ any person under the age of 21 years to sell or assist in the sale or dispensing of intoxicating liquor and no person under the age of 21 years shall sell or assist in the sale of intoxicating liquor except as follows: 
(1)  In any place licensed in accordance with section 3-52, where at least 50 percent of the gross sales made consists of goods, merchandise or commodities other than intoxicating liquor in the original package, persons at least 18 years of age may stock, arrange displays, accept payment for and sack for carryout intoxicating liquor. Delivery of intoxicating liquor away from the licensed business premises shall not be performed by anyone under the age of 21 years. 
(2)  In any distillery, warehouse, wholesale distributorship, or similar place of business which stores or distributes intoxicating liquor or but which does not sell intoxicating liquor at retail, persons at least 18 years of age may be employed and their duties may include the handling of intoxicating liquor for all purposes except consumption, sale at retail, or dispensing for consumption or sale at retail. 
(3)  In any place licensed in accordance with section 3-52 which sells food for consumption on the premises and at least 50 percent of all sales consist of food, persons 18 years of age or older may, when acting as a waiter or waitress, accept payment for or serve intoxicating liquor in such place; provided that nothing herein shall authorize persons under 21 years of age to mix or serve across the bar intoxicating beverages. 
(Code 1973, § 3-58; Ord. No. 12-25, § 4, 5-14-12) 
State Law reference- Persons 18 years of age may sell or handle liquor or beer, RSMo 311.300. 
Sec. 3-78. - Employment of entertainers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person licensed to sell intoxicating liquor at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises or employees thereof to allow any entertainment on such premises, except as otherwise allowed by this Code, without having first obtained a special use exception as provided in article XIV of the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 3-59; Ord. No. 03-01, § 3, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 12-25, § 4, 5-14-12) 
Sec. 3-79. - Sale by package less than 50 milliliters. 
    The sale of intoxicating liquor, except malt liquor, in the original package in any quantity less than 50 milliliters shall be deemed sale by the drink and may be made only by the holder of a retail liquor dealer's license, and, when so made, the container in every case shall be emptied and the contents served as other intoxicating liquors sold by the drink are served. 
(Code 1973, § 3-60; Ord. No. 06-52, § 2, 8-28-06) 
Secs. 3-80-3-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-25, § 5, adopted May 14, 2012, repealed §§ 3-101-3-110, which pertained to nonintoxicating beer and derived from § 3-85-3-88, 3-91, 3-93, 3-95, 3-96, 3-100, 3-101 of the 1973 Code. 

Secs. 3-101-3-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WHOLESALERS 

Sec. 3-196. - License-Required. 
    Every manufacturer, distiller, brewer or wholesaler of intoxicating liquor within the limits of the city shall apply for and be licensed as such by the board of aldermen, and any such person who fails to obtain such license, or pay the fee, or who fails to comply with any provisions of this article, or amendments thereof or with the provisions of other ordinances or laws of the state relating to intoxicating liquor shall, on conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties provided herein for the violation of this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 3-68) 
Sec. 3-197. - Same-Exemption. 
    A manufacturer, distiller or brewer within the city shall not be required to take out a wholesaler's license for the sale of his products at wholesale at the place of manufacture or in quantities of not less than one gallon. 
(Code 1973, § 3-69) 
Sec. 3-198. - Same-Procedure. 
    The qualifications of persons granted licenses, the application therefor, the officer to whom same shall be made, the disposition of and action thereon, the payment and collection of fees, the license therefor and proceedings for revocation thereof and other regulations thereunder, shall in all respects be those provided for in the case of retail liquor dealers. 
(Code 1973, § 3-70) 
Sec. 3-199. - Same-Fees. 
(a)  For a license as required by this division, there shall be paid to the city clerk annual charges as follows: 
For a manufacturer, distiller or brewer of intoxicating liquor\$ 350.00 
For a wholesaler or wholesale liquor dealing agent of intoxicating liquor\375.00 
(b)  In addition to the license fees provided in this section, the licensee shall pay gallonage charges as required, and similar to such requirements as those provided by law to be paid to the state, in an amount 11/2 times that required by the state for such gallonage tax. 
(Code 1973, § 3-71; Ord. No. 2229, § 1, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 3-200. - Sale to unlicensed dealers prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any manufacturer, distiller, brewer or wholesale dealer in intoxicating liquor, either directly or indirectly, to sell or deliver intoxicating liquor of any kind to any person in the city not licensed under the provisions of this chapter to sell intoxicating liquors at retail. 
(Code 1973, § 3-72) 
State Law reference- Licensed retail dealers not to purchase from other than licensed wholesaler, RSMo 311.280. 
Chapter 4 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; licenses and business regulations, ch. 14; parks and recreation, ch. 18; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference- Power of city to license, tax and regulate certain businesses and occupations, RSMo 94.270. 

Sec. 4-1. - County amusement code adopted. 
    The St. Louis County Amusement Code, section 1108.050, as amended, which was adopted by the county on October 15, 1988, is hereby adopted as the Amusement Code of the City of Ballwin, as if fully set out in this section. 
(Code 1973, § 4-1) 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 12; housing, ch. 13; vermin infestation of housing, § 13-53; licenses and business regulations, ch. 14; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 15; persons riding animals to obey traffic regulations, § 15-3; duty of driver approaching handicapped person with cane or dog, § 15-236; turkey shoots, § 17-56; domestic animals in parks, § 18-36; keeping animal life out of family swimming pools, § 26-126. 
State Law reference- Powers of city as to animals and fowl, RSMo 79.400; agriculture and animals generally, RSMo 261.010 et seq.; disposal of dead animals, RSMo 269.010 et seq.; dogs, RSMo 273.010 et seq.; local option dog tax, RSMo 273.040 et seq.; protection against rabies, RSMo 322.010 et seq.; neglected or abused animals, RSMo 578.005 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Keeping animals within city restricted. 
(a)  Except for dogs, cats and non-domestic animals which are otherwise provided for in this Code, and traditional household pets such as caged birds, similar caged animals and aquarium animals, no person shall keep, raise, harbor, water or offer for sale any cattle, cow, bull, hog, horse, mule, jennet pony, donkey, sheep, pig, goat, chicken, goose, duck, turkey, rabbit, skunk, raccoon or any other domestic or wild animal or fowl within the city, unless such animal or fowl are kept in an enclosed area on a tract of land of two or more acres in size. 
(b)  Large animals (over 50 pounds) shall be limited to two per acre over a total of two acres as required in subsection (a). 
(Code 1973, § 5-2; Ord. No. 2258, § I, 7-27-92) 
Sec. 5-2. - Animals and fowl running at large prohibited. 
    No person owning, keeping or having charge of or harboring any cattle, cow, bull, hog, horse, mule, jennet, pony, donkey, sheep, pig, goat, chicken, goose, duck, turkey, rabbit, skunk, raccoon or any other domestic or wild animal or fowl within the city shall allow such animal or fowl to run at large within the city; and each day any animal, beast, or fowl is permitted to run at large shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1973, § 5-3) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prohibit animals and fowl running at large, RSMo 79.400(2). 
Sec. 5-3. - Animal feces removed by owner-Possession of removal equipment. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person owning or in control of any animal to allow or permit such animal to defecate upon any public property, street right-of-way, alley, sidewalk, condominium or subdivision common area or private property of another, unless the person owning or in control of the animal immediately removes and properly disposes of all feces deposited by the animal. 
(b)  It is unlawful for a property owner to allow the accumulation of animal feces on their property, and removal and disposal of same should be done at least once every 48 hours. 
(c)  It is unlawful for the owner or handler of any animal to fail to have in their possession the equipment necessary to remove their animal's fecal matter when accompanied by said animal on public property, public easement or private property of another. 
(Code 1973, § 5-3.5; Ord. No. 2095, § 1, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 05-05, § 1, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 5-4. - Impoundment of animals violating chapter. 
    Any animal found running at large or in violation of any requirement of this chapter shall be impounded as provided in section 5-81 et seq. 
(Code 1973, § 5-4) 
Sec. 5-5. - Right of entry for collection of animals. 
    The health commissioner, or persons designated by him, or the board of aldermen shall have the right of entry onto any unenclosed lot or land for the purpose of collecting any animal whose presence on such lot or land constitutes a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 5-5) 
Sec. 5-6. - Nauseous odors emanating from animals or poultry. 
    No person owning or having charge of any horse, mule, jennet, bull, cow, sheep, hog, goat, chicken, goose or any domesticated or wild animal or fowl of any kind, even though the same may be kept penned and confined within the city, shall allow or permit the same to give forth or cause any ill-smelling, nauseous or obnoxious odors; provided that if such person owning or having charge of any such beast or fowl, so causing or creating any such odor, shall cure, remedy and entirely alleviate such odor within five days after the service of a notice to do so upon him by any member of the police department of the city, then no punishment shall be assessed or imposed against such person. Each day such odor exists after the expiration of five days from the service of such notice shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1973, § 5-6) 
Sec. 5-7. - Abandonment of animals. 
    No owner of any animal subject to rabies shall abandon such animal in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 5-8) 
Sec. 5-8. - Disposal of diseased animals. 
    Any animal which does not exhibit a valid vaccination-registration tag issued by the county or a license tag of the city and which reveals the symptoms of any disease or injury, clearly not those of rabies, as determined by the county health department or by any such person as may be designated by the board of aldermen, may be subjected to disposal as provided in section 5-84 at the earliest possible time. 
(Code 1973, § 5-9) 
Sec. 5-9. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  No person shall willfully and maliciously or cruelly kill, maim, frighten, wound, beat or torture any bird, fowl or dumb animal; nor cause or procure any bird, fowl or dumb animal to be killed, maimed, wounded, beaten or tortured. 
(b)  No person shall molest or injure the nest eggs or young of any songbird or insectivorous bird, or have in possession the nest eggs, young or body of such bird. 
(Code 1973, § 5-10) 
State Law reference- Animal abuse, RSMo 578.012. 
Sec. 5-10. - Penalties. 
(a)  The violation of, failure to comply with, or the committing of any act prohibited in, any provision of this chapter shall constitute an unlawful act and upon the conviction of such unlawful act, unless the penalty has been otherwise specified within this chapter, the person so convicted shall be fined as provided in section 1-6, and each day that such unlawful act is committed or continues to be committed shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person charged with the violation of section 5-7, 5-31, 5-32, 5-33, 5-34, or 5-62 may within five days after receipt of a notice pay a designated fine therefor or may enter a plea of not guilty and stand trial in the municipal court; provided, however, that any person accused of his third or additional violation of any combination of the above-listed sections within one consecutive 60-month period shall be proceeded against in the municipal court and upon conviction shall be fined $100.00. 
(c)  If paid within five days after receipt of notice, fines shall be as follows: 
First 
Offense Second Offense within Twenty-four Months Dogs $20.00 $50.00 Cats  10.00  25.00  
Nothing contained herein shall be construed so as to abrogate or to suspend any of the provisions of section 5-84. 
(d)  If the person charged fails to pay the designated fine or enter a plea of guilty within five days, the court clerk, after a complaint has been filed, shall send such person a letter directing him to appear in the municipal court, notifying him of the time and date the appearance is to be made as well as the address of the court, and advising that a warrant for the arrest of such person may be issued if he should fail to appear in court upon the date and time specified. 
(Code 1973, § 5-11) 
Sec. 5-11. - Nondomestic animals. 
(a)  License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into, send into, receive into, buy, sell or possess in the city a nondomestic animal without first applying for and obtaining a license from the city. No license shall be required for the uninterrupted transportation of nondomestic animals through the city. 
(b)  Notice of sale or gift. It shall be the duty of any resident of the city who sells, gives away or receives a nondomestic animal to notify the city of the sale or gift to the new owner, the address of the new owner and the date of the sale or gift. 
(c)  Requirements for license. 
(1)  The application for a license shall contain the following: 
a.  Name and address of the applicant. 
b.  If a corporation, the state under which incorporated, the date of incorporation, the address of the principal office, and the names and addresses of its officers. 
c.  If any other type of organization, the name thereof, the location of its office, and the names and addresses of the principal officers, directors, trustees, or managing officials or partners. 
d.  The place of origin of the animals or classes of animals. 
e.  A description of the animals, including species. 
f.  The address of the premises where the animals will be kept. 
g.  A description of the method, materials and square footage of facilities for confinement of the animals. 
h.  The application shall be in writing verified by the affidavit of the applicant. 
i.  Proof of applicant's ability to respond in damages for bodily injury to or death of any persons or for damage to property owned by any other person which may result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of such animal. Proof of ability to respond in damages may be given by filing with the city a certificate of insurance from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state stating that the applicant is, at the time of application, insured by a policy of $100,000.00 combined single-limit liability for bodily injury and property damage or by posting with the city a surety bond conditioned upon payment of such damages. Such certificate of insurance shall provide that no cancellation of the insurance or bond will be made unless ten days' written notice is first given to the city. 
(2)  Only one license shall be required for each location at which nondomestic animals are to be kept. Additional animals or classes of animals may be authorized by amended license, which shall be applied for and issued in the same manner as an original license. 
(d)  Investigation by chief of police. 
(1)  Each application for license or amendment shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall notify the chief of police. The chief of police or his designee shall inspect all locations for the keeping of any nondomestic animal for cleanliness and safe possession of the animal. 
(2)  Prior to the granting of a license or amendment, the applicant shall be required to present to the city, for inspection, a state wildlife breeder permit, wildlife collector's permit, wildlife rehabilitation permit, or a wildlife hobby permit, if the keeping of such animal in this state requires any such permit. 
(3)  Such license or amendment shall be issued by the city clerk after satisfactory evidence by the applicant and personal inspection by the chief of police that the applicant will confine any nondomestic animal in facilities that meet the 1975 cage size standards of the American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums and as specified in the Federal Animal Welfare Act of 1970. No license or amendment shall be issued when any outdoor enclosure designed for confinement of a nondomestic animal which is required to be a minimum of 80 square feet by the 1975 cage size standards of the American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums is located closer than 100 feet from any property line. If the total square footage of two or more enclosures total 80 square feet or more, all of such enclosures shall be located 100 feet from any property line. All other enclosures must conform to setback requirements as provided by city ordinance. 
(4)  Such license or amendment will not be issued by the city when the city finds one or more of the following: 
a.  Intentional misstatements or misleading statements of fact in the application. 
b.  An applicant who has previously had his nondomestic license revoked. 
c.  When, in the city's opinion, the animal cannot or will not be kept or maintained without menacing the safety of any person or property. 
(5)  Each applicant shall be notified by mail or by hand delivery of the issuance or nonissuance of a license or amendment by the city. 
(6)  If the city does not issue a license or amendment, the reasons for its not doing so shall be in writing and shall accompany the notice of nonissuance. 
(7)  An applicant may request a hearing before the city administrator by written request within ten days after receipt of notice of nonissuance of a license or amendment. The city administrator shall render a decision, including findings of fact based on the evidence presented at such hearing; and such decision shall constitute a final administrative decision. 
(e)  Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the keeping or sale of nondomestic animals in the following cases: 
(1)  The keeping of such animals in zoos, bona fide education or medical institutions, museums or any other place where they are kept as live specimens for the public view, or for the purpose of instruction or study. 
(2)  The keeping of such animals for exhibition to the public of such animals by a circus, carnival or other exhibit or show. 
(3)  The keeping and offering for sale of such animals by a bona fide commercial pet shop establishment. 
(f)  License revocation procedures. 
(1)  The city administrator may revoke a license issued under this section if he finds a violation of any section of this chapter. 
(2)  The city administrator will revoke a license issued under this section when he finds one or more of the following: 
a.  Intentional misstatements or misleading statements of fact in the application not discovered until after the issuance of the license; 
b.  Any nondomestic animal which has been found off the premises licensed for confinement of the animal without written permission of the city administrator unless the licensee demonstrates that the animal's enclosure was adequately secured by a padlock or other securing device approved by the city and that such event was not the result of the licensee's fault or negligence; 
c.  An animal which cannot or will not be kept and maintained without endangering the safety of any person or property. 
(3)  If the city administrator revokes the license, the licensee shall be entitled to a hearing before the board of aldermen by requesting same within ten days of receipt of notice of revocation. The decision of the board of aldermen after hearing the reasons therefor shall be sent by certified mail or hand delivered to the licensee and shall constitute a final administrative decision. 
(g)  Transfer of license. The license shall not be transferable with respect to persons and/or locations. 
(h)  Nondomestic animals at large prohibited. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any nondomestic animal to be off the premises licensed for confinement of the animal or off the premises where it is kept and maintained without written permission of the chief of police. It shall be the duty of the licensee or the person who keeps and/or maintains the animal to care for the animal at all times and maintain confinement as provided in the 1975 cage size standards of the American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums and as specified in the Federal Animal Welfare Act of 1970, except the penalties as provided in this chapter or both euthanasia and such penalties. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of any licensee or keeper of a nondomestic animal to promptly report to the chief of police when the animal is found to be missing. 
(3)  Any person who willfully, negligently or in violation of the provisions of this chapter keeps and/or maintains a nondomestic animal shall be liable for any expenses incurred in searching for, containing, returning or disposing of the animal when it is off the premises of the licensee and/or keeper. 
(i)  Action by prosecuting attorney. In addition to other penalties, the prosecuting attorney shall take such actions at law or in equity as may be appropriate to enforce this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 5-13) 
Sec. 5-12. - Kennels regulated. 
(a)  No kennel may be maintained within a residential building. 
(b)  The board of aldermen, upon application duly made, may by a majority vote issue a license for the maintenance of a kennel provided the application for such license is accompanied by a petition in writing assenting to the maintenance of such kennel at any location specified, signed by at least two-thirds of the resident property owners owning the property within 500 yards in all directions of the outer boundary of the property where the same is to be maintained. A license shall be issued for a period of one year. The annual fee for a noncommercial kennel shall be $25.00. Payment of such license fee shall be in addition to the license fee provided for annual dog licenses. For commercial kennels the annual fee shall be $150.00 but no individual dog licenses shall be required for the dogs maintained in such kennels. 
(c)  The number of dogs to be kept in any licensed kennel at any one time shall not exceed five. 
(Code 1973, § 5-55) 
Sec. 5-13. - Illegal hunting or taking of game. 
    No wildlife or game shall be pursued, taken, killed, possessed or disposed of except in the manner, to the extent and at the time or times permitted by such rules and regulations of the State of Missouri; and any pursuit, taking, killing, possession or disposition thereof, except as permitted by such rules and regulations, is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 05-37, § 1, 8-8-05) 
Sec. 5-14. - Feeding wildlife. 
(a)  The feeding of Canada geese, ducks, other migratory waterfowl and/or white-tailed deer within the city limits, which feeding results in the deposit of refuse, debris, fecal matter or other offensive substance or in the attraction of wildlife, creating the prejudice or annoyance of any person, unless otherwise permitted by law, is prohibited. 
(b)  No person shall deposit, place, distribute or leave any food, of any kind or nature, with the intent to feed Canada geese, ducks, other migratory waterfowl and/or white-tailed deer on public or private lands, within the city. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any resident or agent of the city authorized to implement a wildlife management program and who possesses the necessary permits from the Missouri Department of Conservation, nor shall it apply to any public officer or public employee in the performance of his or her duties. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the feeding of domestic animals. 
(d)  Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this section may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or confinement not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each act in which a person violates this section shall be considered a separate incident and may be punished as a separate occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 05-37, § 1, 8-8-05) 
Secs. 5-15-5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RABIES CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Protection against rabies, RSMo 322.010 et seq. 

Sec. 5-31. - Vaccination required; frequency. 
    Any person who owns any dog or cat, whether in a kennel or not, that is kept any time during the year within the city, or who permits a dog or cat to come upon or into the city or to remain in or about his home, place of business or other premises in the city, shall have such dog or cat vaccinated against rabies and registered as provided in the county rabies control code. Such dog or cat must be vaccinated at least once each year if a nerve tissue origin vaccine is used. If a chicken embryo or other three-year type of vaccine approved by the health commissioner is administered, the dog or cat shall be inoculated at least once every three years. If other vaccine approved by the health commissioner is administered, then the dog or cat shall be vaccinated at the frequency approved by the health commissioner. 
(Code 1973, § 5-24) 
Sec. 5-32. - Puppies to be confined. 
    All puppies shall be confined to their owner's premises at all times prior to their being vaccinated as required by this article. 
(Code 1973, § 5-25) 
Sec. 5-33. - Vaccination tags to be worn at all times. 
    Every animal which has been vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of the county rabies control code shall at all times wear the registration tag in the manner therein prescribed. 
(Code 1973, § 5-26) 
Sec. 5-34. - Unlawful to own unvaccinated dog or cat. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own any dog or cat unless such dog or cat has been vaccinated against rabies and wears a current, unexpired registration tag and the owner possesses a certificate issued in accordance with the provisions of the county rabies control code. 
(Code 1973, § 5-27) 
Sec. 5-35. - Suspected rabies to be reported. 
    Any person within the city having information or knowledge of any animal within the city that: 
(1)  Exhibits clinical symptoms suggestive of rabies; 
(2)  Has been exposed to rabies; or 
(3)  Is suspected of having rabies; 
shall report such knowledge or information to the county health department and the city police department. 
(Code 1973, § 5-28) 
Sec. 5-36. - Person bitten by animal to report to health department. 
    It shall be the duty of any person bitten by any animal or the parent or guardian of any minor bitten by any animal to report the same to the county health department and the city police department immediately. Such report shall contain the name and address of the owner of the animal, the day and time bitten, the location where bitten and a general description of the animal. 
(Code 1973, § 5-29) 
Sec. 5-37. - Physicians to report animal bite cases. 
    It shall be the duty of every physician to report immediately to the county health department and the city police department the full name, age and address of any person under his care or observation who has been bitten by any animal irrespective of whether infected with rabies or suspected of being infected with rabies or not so infected or suspected. Every veterinarian treating or having under observation any animal infected with rabies shall report to the county health department and the city police department the owner's name and address, the animal's county vaccination-registration number and the city license tag number. 
(Code 1973, § 5-30) 
Sec. 5-38. - Procedures to be followed when animal bites person. 
(a)  The owner of any animal which bites any person, regardless of the circumstances or irrespective of whether such animal is vaccinated and licensed, shall be required to place such animal in the custody of the county health department or the city police department for confinement in a manner satisfactory to the county health commissioner or the city chief of police and in a manner that will prevent contact with people and other animals for a period of ten days, following the evening of the day of the bite, for the purpose of clinical observation. All expenses shall be borne by the owner of the animal. 
(b)  All other conditions of this chapter must be fulfilled prior to the release of any animal under clinical observation as the result of biting a person. 
(c)  If, at the time of the biting, the animal has not been vaccinated and licensed, then it shall be vaccinated and licensed as provided in this chapter prior to its release. 
(Code 1973, § 5-31) 
Sec. 5-39. - Impoundment of animals showing signs of or having been exposed to rabies. 
(a)  Any animal which exhibits objective symptoms suggestive of rabies may, after written certification to the owner by the health commissioner or such other person designated by the board of aldermen for the enforcement of this article, be impounded on or off the property of the owner. Such animal shall be held for ten days at the impounding facilities designated by the board of aldermen for clinical observation and, if alive at the termination of this period, shall be returned to the owner after payment of the shelter service fee provided for in this chapter. As an alternative procedure the owner, at his own expense, may designate any veterinary hospital in the county wherein such animal is to be impounded and observed for a similar ten-day period. If such animal shall die during the observation period, regardless of location, the head shall be removed and submitted to a qualified laboratory for examination. 
(b)  Any animal which has been exposed to rabies shall be immediately destroyed unless the owner, at his own expense, elects one of the following alternative methods: 
(1)  Strict isolation in a kennel or animal hospital for six months. 
(2)  If no previous vaccination has been given to an animal within a period of three years with a chicken embryo (flury strain) vaccine, or within one year using vaccine of nerve tissue origin or if other vaccine approved by the health commissioner was used and if the effective protection limit of the last such vaccination has passed, then the animal shall be placed on a schedule of immunization approved by the health commissioner. 
(3)  If an animal has been vaccinated previously with another vaccine approved by the health commissioner within the duration of the vaccine's effective protection as approved by the health commissioner, the animal shall be revaccinated and restrained by a leash or confined at home for 30 days. 
(c)  Prior to the release of any animal under clinical observation for rabies, all conditions of this article shall be fulfilled. 
(Code 1973, § 5-32) 
Sec. 5-40. - Authority for mayor to order quarantine. 
(a)  Whenever rabies becomes prevalent in the city, the mayor, according to the necessity of the case, shall issue a quarantine order requiring every owner or person in charge of any animal, whether vaccinated and licensed or not, within the limits of the city to either kill his animal or confine it in the home or some other secure building. Whenever, during a quarantine, it is necessary that an animal leave the confines of a home or other secure building, such animal shall be placed on a leash no more than six feet in length and under the direct physical control of a competent person, not less than 15 years of age. 
(b)  The order of the mayor shall be published once in a paper publishing the business of the city, or shall be posted in at least 20 conspicuous places about the city. 
(c)  The mayor may by proclamation terminate any such quarantine whenever in his judgment the necessity for it no longer exists. 
(d)  Whenever any quarantine order is issued as provided in subsection (a), it shall be the duty of all members of the police department of the city and such other persons as may be designated by the board of aldermen to capture or kill any animal specified by the quarantine order as may be found running at large. 
(Code 1973, § 5-33) 
State Law reference- Quarantine order, RSMo 322.040. 
Sec. 5-41. - Right of entry to examine animals. 
    The health commissioner, his duly appointed representative or any other person who may be designated by the board of aldermen shall have the right of entry to any property or premises during the period of any quarantine for the purpose of examining or obtaining any animal suspected of having rabies, having been exposed to rabies or having bitten a person or other animal. 
(Code 1973, § 5-34) 
Sec. 5-42. - Disposal of rabid animals-Generally. 
    The health commissioner or person designated by him or the board of aldermen shall dispose of any animal infected with rabies and such person so designated shall have the power to examine and impound any animal bitten by or exposed to any other animal infected with rabies. He shall have the power to require the owners of such animals to take such necessary measures to prevent the further spread of rabies and to dispose of any exposed animal if the necessary measures are not taken by the owners. 
(Code 1973, § 5-35) 
Sec. 5-43. - Same-Report of destruction. 
    Any person destroying an animal infected with rabies or suspected of being infected with rabies shall immediately notify the county health department and the city police department and shall surrender the carcass of such animal upon demand. The owner or custodian of any such destroyed animal shall immediately provide the health department and the police department with the full particulars thereof, including the time, date and location of destruction and the name and address of the owner or person having custody of any animal exposed to the animal destroyed. 
(Code 1973, § 5-36) 
Sec. 5-44. - Interfering with officers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal an animal or interfere in any other manner with the health commissioner or persons designated by him or the board of aldermen in the performance of their legal duties. 
(Code 1973, § 5-37) 
Sec. 5-45. - Refusal to deliver animals prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall refuse to deliver to the health commissioner or any person designated by the board of aldermen any animal which has had any substantial exposure to rabies which such person owns, when requested to do so under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any person who violates this section shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00, and such person shall be liable for all damages that may result from the actions of any such exposed animal. 
(Code 1973, § 5-38; Ord. No. 03-07, § 2, 1-27-03) 
Secs. 5-46-5-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Barking dog, § 17-34. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-61. - Running at large prohibited; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dog, whether vaccinated or not, to run at large and to go off the premises of its owner, unless such dog is under restraint as defined in section 1-2. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to bloodhounds or other dogs used for tracking in conjunction with police activities or to dogs of the canine corps of a police force of any municipality located in the county, of the county police department, of the St. Louis metropolitan police department, of the state highway patrol, of any federal law enforcement agency, or of any branch of the armed forces of the United States, while being used to conduct official business or while being used for official purposes. 
(Code 1973, § 5-51) 
Sec. 5-62. - Female dogs in heat. 
    All female dogs shall be kept securely confined in an enclosed place while in heat. 
(Code 1973, § 5-52) 
Sec. 5-63. - Vicious dogs to be confined; destruction; penalty imposed against owners. 
(a)  When any fierce or dangerous dog or any dog that has previously attacked or bitten any person or domestic animal; or possesses a propensity to attack or bite any person or domestic animal; or to cause annoyance to persons using the public roads, streets or sidewalks; or to chase, worry or molest persons, livestock or other dogs; or to cause any damage or injury; which propensity is known or ought reasonably to be known by the owner of such dog, it shall be the duty of such owner to confine the dog to a yard completely enclosed by a fence of such height, strength and construction so as to prevent the dog confined therein from jumping over or crawling through or under such fence, and secured in such a manner as to prevent the inadvertent release of such dog and to post a notice on the premises, conspicuously visible to the public, noting in letters not less than two inches high "bad dog here" or "beware bad dog" or "beware of dog." 
(b)  Any dog of vicious propensities found off the premises of its owner may be seized by any person authorized by the health commissioner or any other person as may be designated by the board of aldermen and the dog owner may be brought to trial. Upon establishment by a preponderance of the evidence of the vicious propensities of such dog and that it was off the premises of its owner by testimony, under oath, the court may order the dog to be destroyed by euthanasia and the owner may be subjected by the court to the penalties provided for in section 1-6 of this Code. 
(c)  In a prosecution charging a violation of this section, proof that the dog was running loose in violation of this section, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time described in the complaint the person who owned such dog, shall constitute a prima facie presumption sufficient for conviction that the owner was the person who permitted such dog to run at large. 
(Code 1973, § 5-53) 
Sec. 5-64. - Imported dogs to comply with vaccination requirements. 
    All dogs brought into the city shall comply with the rabies vaccination requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 5-54) 
Secs. 5-65-5-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 5-81. - Conditions. 
(a)  The health commissioner or other persons designated by him or the board of aldermen shall have the power to catch, confine and impound dogs as follows: 
(1)  All female dogs not securely confined in an enclosed place while in heat. 
(2)  All dogs which are at large. 
(3)  All dogs exposed, infected or suspected of being infected with rabies and including all dogs whether at large, on leash or confined to its owner's premises. 
(4)  All dogs with vicious propensities that are not confined in an enclosed place or leashed with the owner present. 
(5)  All dogs not vaccinated for rabies with a vaccine approved by the county health commissioner within the time period established for such vaccine to be effective. 
(6)  All dogs not confined while in a quarantined area. 
(7)  All dogs which have bitten a person or another animal until it is determined that the dog doing the biting is not infected with rabies. 
(b)  All dogs are subject to the foregoing even if the owner provides evidence of the animal's vaccination. 
(Code 1973, § 5-77) 
Sec. 5-82. - Location. 
    Any dog impounded in accordance with this division shall be held at the county rabies shelter or such other facility within the county designated by the city administrator. 
(Code 1973, § 5-78) 
Sec. 5-83. - Vaccinations required prior to release. 
    All dogs shall be vaccinated before being released to the owner. A fee covering the cost of vaccination and shelter service shall be collected for each dog before its release. No dog shall be released until the health commissioner or police chief of the city has determined, in his opinion, that the dog will not impair the safety or health of the public. Any dog impounded that is found to be diseased or injured, and whose owner is unknown or whose owner consents in writing or in the health commissioner's opinion it is necessary to prevent suffering of the dog or for the public safety or health, shall be destroyed by euthanasia. 
(Code 1973, § 5-79) 
Sec. 5-84. - Redemption of impounded dogs; fees; disposition of unclaimed dogs. 
    Any dog captured or impounded under the provisions of this division determined not to be infected with rabies by the health commissioner may be redeemed by the owner or other person having the right of possession of such animal upon the presentation of the proper vaccination certificate and a city license, and upon payment of a shelter service fee of $2.00 for the first day or fraction thereof and $1.00 for each additional day or fraction thereof. If the dog is not claimed in the manner provided herein within five days after its capture, such dog shall be disposed of by euthanasia or sale. Before release by any such sale, the buyer shall have the dog vaccinated and pay the shelter service fee provided herein, and if such buyer shall be a resident of the city, he shall purchase a license tag for any dog purchased. 
(Code 1973, § 5-80) 
Chapter 6 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; administration, ch. 2; board of adjustment, app. A, art. XIX. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BALLWIN DAYS COMMITTEE 

Sec. 6-26. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a committee for the preparation and management of city-sponsored community events. The committee shall be known as the Ballwin Days Committee. 
(Ord. No. 2116, § 1, 8-13-90) 
Sec. 6-27. - Organization. 
    The Ballwin Days Committee leadership shall normally consist of two co-chairman, with the option of a third co-chairman for transition purposes at the discretion of the mayor. The co-chairman shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the members of the board of aldermen. The initial co-chairman of the committee shall be appointed for staggered terms of one member for two years and the second member for three years. After the initial term each co-chairman shall be appointed for a term of three years. Each term shall commence on January 1 and expire on December 31. The mayor, with the consent of a majority of the members of the board of aldermen, may remove any member at any time for any reason. 
(Ord. No. 2116, § 1, 8-13-90; Ord. No. 12-07, § 1, 1-23-12) 
Sec. 6-28. - Duties. 
    The Ballwin Days Committee shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Make plans for the preparation and management of community events sponsored, with the approval of a majority of the members of the board of aldermen, by the city. 
(2)  Negotiate and recommend contracts for the purchase or sale of goods or services related to the community event, for approval by the board of aldermen. 
(3)  Appoint, in writing, persons to act as voluntary workers to assist in the preparation and management of community events. 
(4)  Prepare and recommend a budget for each community event to be sponsored by the city. 
(5)  Collect, account for and deposit with the city all money collected in conjunction with community events sponsored by the city. 
(6)  Prepare and submit to the city administrator a report on each community event sponsored by the city with recommendations as to the preparation and management of future events. The report shall be submitted within 90 days after the community event. 
(7)  Perform such other duties as may be requested by the mayor and approved by a majority of the members of the board of aldermen. 
(8)  Select from among its members a moderator to serve for a term of one year and adopt rules of procedure for its operation that are not inconsistent with city ordinances or state law. 
(9)  Select an amusement ride contractor, which selection may permit the contractor to operate amusement rides and other booths, including booths for food and/or refreshment sales, at a profit as are recommended by the committee and approved by the board of aldermen. 
(10)  The sale of food, beverages, merchandise and other items at Ballwin Days can be provided by a mix of not-for-profit agencies and for profit businesses, as long as these sales do not violate any approved agreements with the contracted ride vendor, per subsection (9) above and at the discretion of the Ballwin Days Committee Co-chairmen. 
(Ord. No. 2116, § 1, 8-13-90; Ord. No. 01-47, § 1, 7-23-01; Ord. No. 01-47, § 1, 7-23-01; Ord. No. 12-07, § 2, 1-23-12) 
Sec. 6-29. - Members to serve without compensation. 
    No member of the committee or voluntary worker shall receive compensation for services performed on behalf of a city-sponsored community event. 
(Ord. No. 2116, § 1, 8-13-90) 
Secs. 6-30-6-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BALLWIN HISTORICAL COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-04, § 1, adopted Jan. 10, 2005, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 6-46-6-49, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2149, §§ 1(A)-(C), adopted Jan. 28, 1991; Ord. No. 2536, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 12, 1996; Ord. No. 01-12, § 1, adopted Feb. 26, 2001. 

Sec. 6-46. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a commission for the preservation and enhancement of Ballwin's history and heritage. The commission shall be known as the Ballwin Historical Commission. Members of the commission preferably shall be residents of the city, but no residency restriction shall apply to appointments to the commission. Any person interested in the history of the city and/or historic preservation in the city may serve. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 6-47. - Organization. 
    The Ballwin Historical Commission steering committee shall be comprised of nine members, one or more of whom shall be designated chairperson, or co-chairperson. The members and chairperson(s) shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the board of aldermen. The initial members of the committee shall be appointed for a staggered term of three members for one year, three members for two years and three members for three years. After the initial term, each member shall be appointed for a term of three years. Each term shall commence on January 1 and expire on December 31. The mayor, with the consent of a majority of the members of the board of aldermen, may remove any member at any time for any reason. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 6-48. - Duties. 
    The Ballwin Historical Commission steering committee shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Make plans for the preservation and enhancement of community history and heritage. 
(2)  Appoint additional persons to act as voluntary members to assist in the preparation and management of committee activities. 
(3)  Prepare and submit to the city an annual report on the activities of the committee during the previous year. 
(4)  Perform such other duties as may be requested by the mayor and approved by a majority of the members of the board of aldermen. 
(5)  Adopt rules of procedure for its operation that are not inconsistent with city ordinances or state law. 
(6)  No member of the committee or voluntary member shall receive compensation for services performed on behalf of the committee and/or the city. 
(7)  Prepare and submit to the city an annual financial plan of proposed activities 90 days prior to the start of the city's fiscal year. 
(8)  No member of the committee or voluntary member shall financially obligate or commit the Ballwin Historical Commission or the city without securing the approval of the board of aldermen. 
(9)  Identify, archive and preserve all municipally owned property which relates to the city's history and cultural development, except those items for which preservation has been specifically provided by state or federal law. 
(10)  Promote awareness and appreciation of the city's history and the contributions of its citizens through a variety of programs and publications, and by assisting municipal officials in the observance of city anniversaries as well as local, state and national holidays. 
(11)  The commission may, with the approval of a property owner, identify, preserve and register with the appropriate authority any structure, site or monument related to the city's history and cultural development. 
(12)  To receive and solicit funds from federal, state and private sources for deposit in a separate account of the city to be referred to as the preservation fund, which funds shall only be loaned or expended by the commission with the approval of the board of aldermen for such purposes as are appropriate under this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 6-49. - Tax status. 
    The commission is authorized to take those actions reasonably necessary so that the historical commission's status shall be such that private contributions made to it are tax deductible under state and federal law and shall be received and expended by such commission of the city in accordance with this article. 
    The city may from time to time, in its discretion and without obligation to do so, appropriate funds to promote the work of the historical commission. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1, 1-10-05) 
Secs. 6-50-6-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 99-37, § 1, adopted August 23, 1999 repealed in their entirety the provisions of §§ 6-66-6-75, and replaced them with the similar provisions of §§ 6-66-66-79 as currently set out herein. Ord. No. 99-37 also altered the title of this article IV from the former "Zoning Commission" to the current, "Planning and Zoning Commission." For a detailed history of the provisions of former §§ 6-66-6-75 please refer to the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference- Study of community unit plan by zoning commission, app. A, art. XVII, § 2; amendments to zoning ordinances, app. A, art. XXIII. 
State Law reference- Zoning commission, RSMo 89.070. 

Sec. 6-66. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a planning and zoning commission for the city, which may also be known as the zoning commission or the commission. 
(Ord. No. 99-37, § 1, 8-23-99) 
Sec. 6-67. - Composition. 
    The commission shall consist of 10 members, including: 
(1)  The mayor; and 
(2)  A member of the board of aldermen recommended by the mayor and approved by the board of aldermen; and 
(3)  Eight citizen members appointed by the mayor and approved by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 99-37, § 1, 8-23-99; Ord. No. 07-30, § 3, 10-8-07; Ord. No. 17-26, § 3, 10-9-17) 
Sec. 6-68. - Equal ward representation. 
    No less than two of the appointed citizen members of the commission shall be appointed from each of the four wards of the city. The mayor and the board of aldermen member shall be apportioned without regard for ward. 
(Ord. No. 99-37, § 1, 8-23-99) 
Sec. 6-69. - Requirements for appointed citizen members. 
    The citizen members of the commission shall be residents of the city, be at least 21 years of age, and, with the exception of the mayor and board of aldermen member, shall hold no other elected or appointed office of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-37, § 1, 8-23-99) 
Sec. 6-70. - Voting, quorum. 
    All members of the commission shall be entitled to vote on any matter before the commission, and shall be counted for the purpose of determining a quorum. A favorable recommendation must receive a positive vote from a majority of the members present. A tie vote constitutes a recommendation for denial. 
(Ord. No. 99-37, § 1, 8-23-99; Ord. No. 17-26, § 1, 10-9-17) 
Sec. 6-71. - Chairman and secretary of the commission. 
(a)  The commission shall elect a chairman and a secretary from among the citizen members by a majority vote of those members constituting a quorum. The term of chairman and secretary shall be for one year, commencing on the June meeting of each year, with eligibility for re-election. The chairman shall conduct meetings of the commission in accordance with Roberts Rules of Order, and shall forward recommendations of the commission to the board of aldermen. 
(b)  The secretary shall be the acting chairman in the absence of the duly elected chairman, and shall perform all duties of the chairman for any meeting at which the secretary presides in the absence of the chairman. In the event neither the chairman nor secretary is present, the next senior member of the commission in terms of time as a member of the commission shall chair the meeting. 
(c)  In the event the city authorizes a monthly stipend for performing the duties of chairman, such amount shall be paid to the party chairing the particular monthly meeting for which such amount is paid. No amount shall be paid in months in which no commission meeting is held. 
(Ord. No. 99-37, § 1, 8-23-99; Ord. No. 07-17, § 1, 6-11-07) 
Sec. 6-72. - Terms. 
    All citizen members of the commission shall be appointed and serve for four-year terms, except that the terms of the citizen members first appointed shall be for varying periods so that succeeding terms will be staggered. Any vacancy in a membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment as aforesaid. The board of aldermen may remove any citizen member for cause stated in writing and after public hearing. 
    The mayor shall serve on the commission for the entire term as mayor. The aldermanic member of the commission shall be appointed annually in conjunction with the appointment of aldermanic committees. 
(Ord. No. 99-37, § 1, 8-23-99) 
Sec. 6-73. - Meeting dates and times. 
    The commission shall meet on the first Monday of each month. Meetings shall begin at 7:00 p.m. unless otherwise scheduled. 
(Ord. No. 99-37, § 1, 8-23-99; Ord. No. 17-26, § 2, 10-9-17) 
Sec. 6-74. - Jurisdiction and duties generally. 
    The commission shall have such jurisdiction and all of the powers and duties as may be provided by ordinance or state law. 
(Ord. No. 99-37, § 1, 8-23-99) 
Sec. 6-75. - Commission to make studies and recommendations. 
(a)  The commission is authorized and directed to make studies and recommendations to the board of aldermen regarding the various original districts and appropriate regulations to be enforced therein, including regulations and restrictions as to the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of lot that may be occupied; the size of yards, courts and other open spaces; the density of population; the preservation of features of historical significance; and the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes. 
(b)  Recommendations made by the commission shall be made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to preserve features of historical significance; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. 
(c)  Recommendations shall be made with reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the values of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-37, § 1, 8-23-99) 
Sec. 6-76. - Commission to review and report on applications for rezoning, special use permits, and plat approval. 
    All applications for rezoning, for issuance of special permits, or for plat approval shall be referred by the board of aldermen or the board of aldermen's designee to the commission for investigation and study by the commission. Such designee shall submit a written report to the commission. The commission shall, within 60 days from the date on which such application is referred in complete form and in accordance with all applicable provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Ballwin, render a full report to the board of aldermen regarding its finding and recommendations thereon. If the commission has not made a finding and submitted same to the board of aldermen within said 60 days, the plat shall be deemed approved by the commission. Notwithstanding this time limitation, the commission, with the consent of the applicant seeking approval, may extend the time for an additional 60 days. The date of referral shall be the date of the board of aldermen meeting at which such referral takes place or the date of the report prepared by the aldermanic designee. 
(Ord. No. 99-37, § 1, 8-23-99) 
Sec. 6-77. - Reason for commission action. 
    The commission shall hold public hearings on matters pending before it, before submitting its report to the board of aldermen. At least 15 days notice of a public hearings before the commission shall be made by publication in an official paper or a paper of general circulation in the city of the time and place of such hearing. A second public hearing may be held before the board of aldermen. Such hearing shall have at least 15 days notice made by publication in an official paper or a paper of general circulation in the city of the time and place of such hearing. 
(Ord. No. 99-37, § 1, 8-23-99) 
Sec. 6-78. - Commission approval of plats-Effects. 
    The approval of a plat by the commission or the board of aldermen does not constitute or effect an acceptance by the City of Ballwin or of the public of the dedication to public use of any street or other ground shown upon the plat. 
(Ord. No. 99-37, § 1, 8-23-99) 
Sec. 6-79. - Super majority. 
    The commission shall submit its report to the board of aldermen for actions taken under sections 6-75 and 6-76 above. If the commission has made an adverse finding by a majority vote of its entire membership, the board of aldermen may only approve the action by the affirmative vote of not less than two-thirds of the entire membership of the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 99-37, § 1, 8-23-99) 
Secs. 6-80-6-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-91. - Establishment and organization. 
(a)  A board of adjustment is hereby established. Regular members of the board of adjustment shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by a majority of the board of alderman. The board of adjustment shall consist of five regular members, all of whom shall be residents of the city at least 21 years of age who hold no other office of the city. The term of office of regular members shall be five years, except the membership of the first board shall be one for one year; one for two years; one for three years; one for four years; and one for five years. Thereafter, members shall serve terms of five years each. Vacancies shall be filed for the unexpired term only. Up to three alternate members, having the same qualifications as a regular member, shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the board of alderman to serve in the absence of or the disqualification of a regular member. Alternate members shall serve a term of five years. Regular and alternate members shall be removable for cause by majority vote of the mayor, who shall be entitled to vote on such removal, and the board of alderman, upon filing of written charges and after public hearing. The board of adjustment as now existing under any previous ordinances shall continue as the board of adjustment under this article according to their previous terms of appointment. 
(Code 1973, app. A, art. XIX, § 1; Ord. No. 2468, § 2, 8-28-95; Ord. No. 06-24, § 1, 4-10-06) 
Sec. 6-92. - Meetings. 
    Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. Such chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact; and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. All testimony, objections thereto and rulings thereon shall be taken down by a reporter employed by the board for the purpose. 
(Code 1973, app. A, art. XIX, § 2) 
Sec. 6-93. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any decision or ruling of the building commissioner or city engineer made under the zoning ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as shall be prescribed by the board by general rule, by filing with the building commissioner or city engineer and with the board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The building commissioner or city engineer shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken. 
(b)  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the building commissioner or city engineer certifies to the board after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on application or notice to the building commissioner or city engineer. 
(c)  (1) 
The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give not less than 15 days' public notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. 
(2)  The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official; or to decide in favor of the applicant upon any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such ordinance; or to effect any variation in such ordinance. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(d)  A fee of $500.00 shall be paid to the city at the time the notice of appeal is filed and shall be credited to the general revenue fund of the city. 
(Code 1973, app. A, art. XIX, § 3; Ord. No. 2238, § 2, 2-24-92; Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 12-8-97) 
Sec. 6-94. - Powers and duties. 
    The board of adjustment shall have the following powers and it shall be its duty: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error of law in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building commissioner or city engineer in the enforcement of this article. 
(2)  To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a district divides a lot held in a single ownership at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived [July 11, 1966]. 
(3)  To interpret the provisions of this article in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown upon the map fixing the several districts accompanying and made a part of this article where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map aforesaid. 
(4)  To permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming building which has been damaged by explosion, fire, act of God, or public such enemy, to the extent of less than 60 percent of its fair market value, where the board finds some compelling necessity requiring a continuance of the nonconforming use and the primary purpose of continuing the nonconforming use is not to continue a monopoly. 
(5)  To permit a variation in the yard requirements of any district where there are unusual practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the carrying out of these provisions due to irregular shape of the lot, topographical or other conditions, provided such variation will not seriously affect any adjoining property or the general welfare. 
(6)  To authorize upon appeal, whenever a property owner can show that a strict application of the terms of this article relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures or the use of the land will impose upon him unusual practical difficulties or particular hardship, such variations of the strict application of the terms of this article as are in harmony with its general purpose and intent but only when the board is satisfied that a granting of such variation will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant but will alleviate some demonstrable and unusual hardship or difficulty so great as to warrant a variation from the comprehensive plan as established by the city, and at the same time the surrounding property will be properly protected. 
(7)  To vary the parking regulations of the zoning ordinance whenever the character or use of a building is such as to make unnecessary the full provision for parking facilities or where such regulations would impose an unreasonable hardship upon the use of the lot, as contrasted with merely granting an advantage or a convenience. 
(Code 1973, app. A, art. XIX, § 4) 
Sec. 6-95. - Reversal of decisions. 
(a)  In exercising the above powers, the board may reverse or affirm wholly or partly; or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
(b)  Every variation granted or denied by the board shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact, based on sworn testimony and evidence and specifying the reason for granting or denying the variation. 
(Code 1973, app. A, art. XIX, § 5) 
Sec. 6-96. - Court appeal. 
(a)  Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality, may present to the circuit court having jurisdiction in St. Louis County a petition duly verified setting forth that such decision is illegal in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality and asking for relief therefrom. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board. Upon the presentation of such petition and thereafter, the proceedings in and the decision of the circuit court shall be in accordance with the law of the State of Missouri relating to appeals from boards of adjustment. 
(b)  Upon the presentation of such petition, the court may allow a writ of certiorari directed to the board for review of the data and records acted upon, or it may appoint a referee to take additional evidence in the case. The court may reverse or affirm or may modify the decision brought up for review. 
(c)  Costs shall not be allowed against the board unless it shall appear to the court that it acted with gross negligence or in bad faith or with malice in making the decision appealed from. 
(Code 1973, app. A, art. XIX, § 6) 
Appeals from board of adjustment, RSMo 89.110. 
Secs. 6-97-6-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOUSING CODE ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 6-111. - Jurisdiction. 
    The board of adjustment shall have jurisdiction under chapter 13 to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by any aggrieved person that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination relating to the condemning and placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation made by the building commissioner or any other person charged with the enforcement of chapter 13. 
(Code 1973, § 12-17) 
Sec. 6-112. - Procedure for filing appeals. 
(a)  Any appeal under this division shall be taken within 30 days after the decision is rendered by filing with the building commissioner a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds therefor, and by depositing with the building commissioner the sum of $30.00 as a docket fee. 
(b)  The building commissioner shall forthwith submit to the board of adjustment a copy of the notice of appeal together with all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken. 
(Code 1973, § 12-18) 
Sec. 6-113. - Appeal to stay proceedings of action appealed from; exception. 
    An appeal pursuant to section 6-112 shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building commissioner or health commissioner shall certify to the board of adjustment, subsequent to the filing of any notice of appeal, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by the order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1973, § 12-19) 
Sec. 6-114. - Information to be furnished to board of adjustment. 
    It shall be the duty of the building commissioner and the health commissioner to furnish the board of adjustment, upon request, with copies of reports of any or all inspections made by such officers in the matter on appeal and to furnish such other information as may be available to them and requested by the board. 
(Code 1973, § 12-20) 
Sec. 6-115. - Notice and hearing. 
    The board of adjustment shall hold a hearing at its next regularly scheduled meeting following the receipt of a notice of appeal, providing that a 15-day period of advertisement has been met. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be sent by mail to the appellant a minimum of ten days prior to the hearing. 
(Code 1973, § 12-21) 
Sec. 6-116. - Action and decision of board of adjustment generally. 
(a)  In exercising the powers enumerated in this division, the board of adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall not reverse or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from except by a majority vote, and a quorum shall consist of at least five members. The action of the board shall not become effective until after the resolution of the board setting forth the reason for its decision and the vote of each member participating therein has been stated in the minutes. Such resolutions, immediately following the board's final decision, shall be filed in the office of the board and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Code 1973, § 12-22) 
Sec. 6-117. - Review of decisions of board of adjustment. 
(a)  Any decision of the board of adjustment under this division shall be subject to review by a writ of certiorari from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  The appellant shall be liable for any expenses or costs for surveys, investigations or hearings of the board. 
(Code 1973, § 12-23) 
Secs. 6-118-6-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BALLWIN YOUTH COMMISSION 

Sec. 6-200. - Commission established; mission. 
    There is hereby established the Ballwin Youth Commission. The mission of the youth commission shall be to: 
(1)  Establish opportunities for the youth of the City of Ballwin to develop leadership skills and to become educated concerning the functions of municipal government. 
(2)  Serve in an advisory capacity to the mayor and board of aldermen in matters relating to youth in the community. 
(3)  Actively participate in matters concerning youth in the community. 
(4)  Identify issues and concerns of the community's youth and make recommendations for projects and programs to improve these matters in the community. 
(Ord. No. 05-27, § 1, 5-23-05) 
Sec. 6-201. - Duties. 
    The duties of the youth commission shall include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Function as an interface with the community. 
(2)  Establish and maintain a good working relationship with governmental entities, residents and civic organizations in our community which are, or which would like to be, active in youth programs and activities. 
(3)  Foster and support youth organizations and clubs providing leadership and organizational structure for youth programs in our community. 
(4)  Promote public awareness of youth programs by means not limited to city publications, news media and speaking to civic groups. 
(5)  Act as an interface with the community's youth concerning major project initiatives of the board of aldermen, and provide reports to the board of aldermen concerning youth related ideas and activities. 
(Ord. No. 05-27, § 1, 5-23-05) 
Sec. 6-202. - Youth commission members. 
(a)  The youth commission shall consist of nine voting members. The mayor shall appoint all members from the community who are residents of the City and over the age 15 years but are under the age of 21. All appointments are subject to approval of the board of aldermen. 
(b)  The mayor shall appoint a board representative to the youth commission and the city administrator shall designate one staff member to the youth commission, both being ex-officio members. Only the nine voting youth commission members shall cast votes. Ex-officio members shall not vote. A quorum is defined as a majority of the voting members. 
(c)  The members of the youth commission shall hold office for terms of one year, and until their successors are appointed and qualified. Appointments shall be made by August 1st. Any vacancies shall be filled by the mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term. Members may serve for more than one term. 
(d)  The anniversary date for appointment or re-appointment of expiring youth commission members term shall be September 1st of the appropriate year. An annual meeting of the youth commission shall be held in the month of September, and the officers of the youth commission shall be elected at that meeting from the voting members. 
(e)  The failure to support the youth commission through active participation at its meetings may be cause for removal. (Active participation is defined as attending all scheduled meetings with an allowance of three meetings missed per year.) Members are encouraged to participate in special events. Those missing three scheduled meetings will be contacted by the chairman. At the next meeting, the chairman will report to the commission and the commission may recommend to the mayor removal from the commission of such a member. 
(f)  When a vacancy occurs (other than an expired term), the youth commission shall notify the mayor and ex-officio aldermanic member. In case of a vacancy due to death, resignation or disqualification of one or more of the members, the unexpired term shall be filled by an appointment by the mayor with consent of the board of aldermen. At no time will persons representing special interests or specific issues be considered for membership. 
(g)  Each youth commission member shall attend one board of aldermen meeting during the first four months of his/her term. 
(Ord. No. 05-27, § 1, 5-23-05) 
Sec. 6-203. - Officers. 
(a)  The youth commission shall elect its own officers in accordance with the following guidelines: 
(1)  Officers shall be elected by a majority vote of the members at a meeting of the commission at which a quorum is present. 
(2)  The election of the officers shall take place in September of each year. 
(b)  Officers elected shall include: 
(1)  Chairman: He or she shall submit to the city a written report reviewing the commission's activities of the past year and recommending future activities. 
In case a vacancy occurs in the office of the chairman, the vice-chairman shall become chairman and a new vice-chairman shall be elected. 
The chairman shall preside at all meetings, except in the absence of the chairman, the vice-chairman shall preside. 
(2)  Vice-chairman: The vice-chairman shall fulfill the duties of the chairman when the latter, for any reason, is unable to act in his capacity as chairman. 
(3)  Secretary: The secretary shall prepare the records of all scheduled youth commission meetings. The secretary shall record attendance, service hours, voting and election results. The secretary will be assisted in this task by city personnel as designated by the city administrator. 
(c)  The youth commission may form sub-committees of the youth commission for designated periods of time to work on specific projects. Such sub-committees will report their findings and recommendations to the youth commission, which shall make any final written report and recommendation to the board of aldermen. Each said sub-committee shall be dissolved when work on the assigned project is determined to be completed by the youth commission. 
(Ord. No. 05-27, § 1, 5-23-05) 
Sec. 6-204. - Meetings. 
    The regular meetings of the youth commission shall be held the ____________ of each month at ____________ p.m. Or special meetings on the call of the chairman. The regular meeting place shall be at ____________ . A notice and tentative agenda of all meetings must be posted on the public notice bulletin board at government center and at the meeting site when the meeting is held elsewhere. All meetings are open to the public at all times. 
(Ord. No. 05-27, § 1, 5-23-05) 
Secs. 6-205-6-209. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BALLWIN ARTS COMMISSION 

Sec. 6-210. - Commission established. 
    There is hereby established the Ballwin Fine Arts Commission for the purpose of improving the quality of life of Ballwin residents by providing visual and performing arts improvements and activities. The commission may receive donations, gifts, and legacies, which shall become the property of the City of Ballwin and shall be subject to all applicable auditing and purchasing procedures. 
(Ord. No. 99-33, § 1, 7-26-99; Ord. No. 02-47, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 05-03, § 1, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 6-211. - Function. 
    The function of the arts commission is as follows: 
(1)  To make recommendations to the parks director or designee regarding the acquisition, maintenance, and display of works of art at sites within the City of Ballwin; 
(2)  To recommend which works of art are suitable for such acquisition and display by utilizing recognized criteria and standards; 
(3)  To recommend appropriate sites for the display of such art, taking into consideration such factors as availability of the site, visibility of the site, impact on property and persons in the near vicinity of the site, requisite approval by appropriate government agencies and other similar factors; 
(4)  To promote the acquisition, maintenance, and upkeep of works of art on sites within the city through contributions of specific art or funds to acquire and maintain the same; 
(5)  Encourage community input and patronage by establishment of support/booster groups such as, but not limited to, a "friends of the arts" organization. 
(Ord. No. 99-33, § 1, 7-26-99; Ord. No. 02-47, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 05-03, § 1, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 6-212. - Tax status. 
    The commission is authorized to take those actions reasonably necessary so that the arts commission's status shall be such that contributions made are tax deductible under state and federal law and shall be received and expended by such commission of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-33, § 1, 7-26-99; Ord. No. 02-47, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 05-03, § 1, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 6-213. - Title. 
    Title to the works of art shall be vested in the city or leased to the city for reasonable periods of time as recommended by the arts commission. Any ownership by the city shall follow established purchasing procedures. The city, in its discretion, may allow works of art to be displayed on sites owned or controlled by the city. The art commission may by easement lease, or other written agreement recommend display sites on privately owned property for such works of art. 
(Ord. No. 99-33, § 1, 7-26-99; Ord. No. 02-47, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 05-03, § 1, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 6-214. - Insurance. 
    The city shall be responsible for obtaining adequate property and liability insurance for such works of art. 
(Ord. No. 99-33, § 1, 7-26-99; Ord. No. 02-47, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 05-03, § 1, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 6-215. - Organization. 
    The mayor shall appoint all members of the commission and the appointments shall be subject to approval of the board of aldermen. The commission shall establish by-laws and procedures which shall be consistent with all terms and conditions of section 6-210. The commission will consists of three members who are not elected city officials nor paid city staff, with knowledge and appreciation of the fine arts, and particular expertise in the areas of promotion, fund raising, and community support. 
(Ord. No. 99-33, § 1, 7-26-99; Ord. No. 02-47, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 05-03, § 1, 1-10-05; Ord. No. 05-47, § 1, 10-24-05) 
Sec. 6-216. - Friends organization. 
    The arts commissions also is directed to establish a "friends" of the Ballwin Arts Foundation or Commission. The board of directors shall determine the annual dues, membership categories, rights and privileges of all such "friends" members. 
(Ord. No. 99-33, § 1, 7-26-99) 
Sec. 6-217. - Terms. 
    The initial commission shall serve respectively: 
(1)  One member for one year; 
(2)  One member for two years; and 
(3)  One member for three years. 
    The mayor shall specify their term at the time of their appointment. Thereafter, the members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor, with approval of the board of aldermen for four-year terms which shall be set under such conditions as established by the commission. An aldermanic representative and one staff member, as designated by the city administrator, shall serve as non-voting members of the commission. No residency restrictions shall apply to appointments to the commission. 
(Ord. No. 99-33, § 1, 7-26-99; ; Ord. No. 02-47, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 05-03, § 1, 1-10-05; Ord. No. 05-47, § 2, 10-24-05) 
Sec. 6-218. - Funding. 
    The city may from time to time, in its discretion and without obligation to do so, appropriate funds to promote fine arts within the community. 
(Ord. No. 99-33, § 1, 7-26-99; Ord. No. 02-47, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 05-03, § 1, 1-10-05) 
Chapter 7 - BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; explosives, ch. 9; flood hazard areas, ch. 10; grading, mining, filling and clearing, ch. 11; housing, ch. 13; basement dwelling unit in housing, § 13-57; dual egress for dwelling units occupying third or higher story, § 13-65; electrical service in housing, § 13-77; licenses and business regulations, ch. 14; planning and development, ch. 19; sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 21; signs, ch. 22; construction signs, § 22-49; streets and sidewalks, ch. 24; swimming pools, ch. 26; issuance of permit for construction of family swimming pool, § 26-98; taxation, ch. 27; trailers and recreational vehicles, ch. 28; keeping or occupying trailers or recreational vehicles, § 28-1; zoning, app. A; occupancy permit required, app. A, art. XVIII, § 1; plat required, app. A, art. XX, § 1. 
State Law reference- Power of city to regulate the construction of buildings, RSMo 79.450(3); Underground Facility Safety and Damage Prevention Act, RSMo 319.010 et seq.; inadequate and deficient housing, RSMo 441.500 et seq.; construction materials standards, RSMo 701.010 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Structure construction material. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or erect any building or structure having the exterior walls constructed of any material other than brick or stone masonry or other material approved by the BOCA Code enforced in the city. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply in the erection or construction of the following: 
(1)  Temporary one-story frame building for use by a builder, contractor or developer. 
(2)  Standard fences. 
(3)  Children's playhouses which shall not exceed 150 square feet in area nor eight feet in height. 
(4)  Any one-story frame accessory structure or building, such as unattached garages or storage buildings, which shall not exceed 800 square feet in area. 
(Code 1973, § 6-1; Ord. No. 2431, § 1, 2-27-95) 
Sec. 7-2. - Exterior walls to be constructed of brick or masonry. 
(a)  No person shall erect any building or any addition to any building heretofore erected in any of the commercial, service and industrial districts of the city, as these districts are presently established by the city's zoning ordinance or may in the future be established by any amendment thereto, having exterior walls constructed of any material other than brick or stone masonry or other material acceptable to the building commissioner. 
(b)  All cooling towers and mechanical equipment installed in conjunction with any building or installed upon any building in any commercial, service or industrial district shall be enclosed on all sides by walls extending to the height of the highest projection of such equipment and constructed of brick or stone masonry or other material acceptable to the building commissioner. 
(Code 1973, § 6-2) 
Cross reference- Zoning, app. A. 
Secs. 7-3-7-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING COMMISSIONER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; housing, ch. 13; zoning, app. A. 

Sec. 7-21. - Office established. 
    The office of building commissioner is hereby established for the city. 
(Code 1973, § 6-16) 
Sec. 7-22. - Powers and duties. 
    The building commissioner shall: 
(1)  Issue building permits for all construction within the city limits. 
(2)  Enforce the building code, zoning ordinance and housing code of the city and any regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(3)  Enforce the ordinances of the city pertaining to the erection, construction, use and location of buildings and structures of all types. 
(4)  Perform all inspections for the enforcement of the building code, housing code, zoning ordinance or other ordinances of the city relating to the erection, construction, maintenance or use of buildings, structures and premises. 
(5)  Perform such other duties as directed by the mayor or board of aldermen. 
(Code 1973, § 6-18) 
Sec. 7-23. - Right to enter buildings in emergencies. 
    In emergency situations involving immediate danger to health or safety, the building commissioner shall have the right of entry for the purpose of inspecting any and all buildings and premises as to their compliance with the terms and provisions of the building code, housing code, zoning ordinance or any other ordinance of the city relating to the erection, construction, maintenance or use of buildings, structures or premises. The building commissioner shall carry the proper credentials of his office at all times and shall exhibit these to any persons requesting the same whenever any inspections are being made; and prior to the right of asking entry to any building or onto any premises, such credentials shall be exhibited and the building commissioner shall state to any such persons there that the purpose of any such inspection is to determine their compliance with the building code, housing code, zoning ordinance or any other ordinance of the city relating to the erection, use or maintenance of structures, buildings or premises. 
(Code 1973, § 6-19) 
Sec. 7-24. - Unlawful to deny entry. 
    No person shall deny the building commissioner the right of entry to a building, structure or premises under the provisions of section 7-23 for the purpose of performing an inspection in connection with the enforcement of the building code, housing code, zoning ordinance and any other ordinance of the city concerned with the erection, use or maintenance of buildings, structures or premises in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 6-20) 
Sec. 7-25. - Interfering with prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the building commissioner in the performance of his official duties. 
(Code 1973, § 6-21) 
Secs. 7-26-7-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADOPTION OF CODES 

Sec. 7-41. - Building code. 
(a)  Adopted. That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office of the City Clerk of the City of Ballwin, being marked and designated as the 2006 Edition International Building Code, including Appendix Chapters E, F, I and J, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Building code of the City of Ballwin, in the State of Missouri; for the control of building and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Additions, insertions, and changes. The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Ballwin. 
Section 1612.3. Insert: City of Ballwin. 
Section 1612.3. Insert: August 2, 1995. 
(Ord. No. 02-16, §§ 1, 2, 3-11-02; Ord. No. 06-28, §§ 1, 2, 5-8-06; Ord. No. 11-56, §§ 1, 2, 11-28-11; Ord. No. 12-17, §§ 1, 2, 4-9-12) 
Sec. 7-42. - County codes adopted. 
(1)  The following codes are adopted as amended by the County of St. Louis through the date of the last amendatory ordinance. The Building Code Ordinances 18580, 18857, and 19298 (as they pertain to elevators and conveying equipment only), the last amendatory ordinance adopted January 14, 1999, the Mechanical Code Ordinance 16914 (as it pertains to elevators, conveying equipment and amusements only), the last amendatory ordinance adopted March 17, 1994, the Explosives Code Ordinances 2703 through 18693, the last amendatory ordinance adopted November 6, 1997, as the Building (as it pertains to elevators and conveying equipment only), Mechanical (as it pertains to elevators, conveying equipment and amusements only), Electrical and Explosives Codes, the 1998 International Mechanical Code, Ordinance 22,313, as it pertains to elevators and amusements only, adopted May 18, 2005, is hereby adopted as the Mechanical (as it pertains to elevators and amusements only) Code of the City of Ballwin, Missouri, as is fully set out herein. 
(2)  Sections 1103.P-148 "License, Registration or Certification - Required" and 1103.P-150 "Bond and Insurance-Required" of the Plumbing Code of St. Louis County and sub-sections 101A through 101B-5 of Section 1108.100 of the St. Louis County Mechanical Code, all through the date of the last amendatory ordinance, are hereby adopted as the Plumbing and Mechanical Licensing Codes of the City of Ballwin, Missouri as if fully set out herein. Three copies of the same on file in the Office of the City Clerk of the City of Ballwin for examination and review. 
(Ord. No. 99-16, § 2, 3-8-99; Ord. No. 00-43, §§ 1, 2, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 01-19, § 2, 3-12-01; Ord. No. 03-64, § 2, 11-10-03; Ord. No. 06-10, § 2, 2-13-06; Ord. No. 06-17, § 2, 3-13-06; Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 2-23-09; Ord. No. 15-17, 3-23-15) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 99-16, § 2, adopted March 8, 1999, consolidated the adoption of several county codes into one section and therefore necessitated the deletion of §§ 7-43 and 7-44. Former § 7-42 pertained to the saving of the plumbing ordinance from repeal and derived from the Code of 1973, § 18-1 and Ord. No. 1042, § 3, adopted May 14, 1973. Ord. No. 2540, § 1, adopted Aug. 26, 1997, (represented in this Code as § 7-41) effectively repealed the provisions of former § 7-42. 
Cross reference- County explosives code adopted, § 9-1. 
Sec. 7-43. - Mechanical code. 
(a)  Adoption. That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office of the City Clerk of the City of Ballwin, being marked and designated as the 2006 Edition International Mechanical Code, including Appendix Chapter A, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the City of Ballwin, in the State of Missouri; for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems in the City of Ballwin, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of said Mechanical Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this ordinance with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Additions, insertions, and changes. The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Ballwin. 
Section 106.5.2. Insert: Fee Schedule-As established in Ordinance No. 03-11 are made the fees herein. 
Section 106.5.3. Insert: in subsection 2-50%; in subsection 3 - 100%. 
Section 108.4. Insert: Misdemeanor, $1,000, 90 days. 
Section 108.5. Insert: $100 and $500. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, §§ 1, 2, 3-11-02; Ord. No. 03-11, § 5(3), 2-10-03; Ord. No. 06-30, § 2, 5-8-06; Ord. No. 11-58, §§ 1, 2, 11-28-11; Ord. No. 12-19, §§ 1, 2, 4-9-12) 
Sec. 7-44. - Plumbing code. 
(a)  Adoption. That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office of the City Clerk of the City of Ballwin, being marked and designated as the 2006 Edition International Plumbing Code, including Appendix Chapters B, C, D, E, F, and G, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the City of Ballwin, in the State of Missouri; for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems in the City of Ballwin, and providing for the issuance of permits and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and fully set out in this ordinance with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Additions, insertions, and changes. The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Ballwin. 
Section 106.6.2. Insert: Fee Schedule-As established in Ordinance No. 03-11 are made the fees herein. 
Section 106.6.3. Insert: in subsection 2-50%; in subsection 3 - 100%. 
Section 108.4. Insert: Misdemeanor, $1,000, 90 days. 
Section 108.5. Insert: $100 and $500. 
Section 305.6.1. Insert: 30? in both locations. 
Section 904.1. Insert: 10?. 
(Ord. No. 02-17, §§ 1, 2, 3-11-02; Ord. No. 03-11, § 5(1), 5(2), 2-10-03; Ord. No. 06-29, §§ 1, 2, 5-8-06; Ord. No. 11-57, §§ 1, 2, 11-28-11; Ord. No. 12-18, §§ 1, 2, 4-9-12) 
State Law reference- Plumbers and plumbing, RSMo ch. 341. 
Sec. 7-45. - Garage doors. 
    All structures having garage door opening provisions are required to provide at least one duplex outlet for each such opening. 
(Ord. No. 2506, § 1, 3-11-96) 
Sec. 7-46. - Residential code. 
(a)  Adoption. That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office of the City Clerk of the City of Ballwin, being marked and designated as the 2006 Edition Residential Code, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the City of Ballwin, in the State of Missouri; for the control of building and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Residential Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 2 of this ordinance. 
_____
(b)  Additions, insertions, and changes. The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Ballwin. 
Table R301.2(1) Insert: Insert the following table: 
TABLE R301.2(1) 
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA 
GROUND 
SNOW 
LOAD WIND 
SPEED d 
(mph) SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY f SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM WINTER 
DESIGN 
TEMP e ICE 
BARRIER UNDERLAYMENT REQUIRED h FLOOD HAZARDS g AIR 
FREEZING 
INDEX;sup \sup; MEAN 
ANNUAL 
TEMP j Weathering a Frost line depth;sup\sup; Termite c 20 90 C Severe 30" Moderate to Severe 2° F Yes 8/2/95 1,000 Days 54°F  
Section P2603.6.1. Insert: 30? & 30? 
(Ord. No. 06-27, §§ 1, 2, 5-8-06; Ord. No. 11-55, §§ 1, 2, 11-28-11; Ord. No. 12-16, §§ 1, 2, 4-9-12) 
_____
Sec. 7-47. - Fuel gas code. 
(a)  Adoption. That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office of the City Clerk of the City of Ballwin, being marked and designated as the 2006 Edition International Fuel Gas Code, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Ballwin, in the State of Missouri; for the control of building and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fuel Gas Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 2 of this ordinance. 
(b)  Additions, insertions, and changes. The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Ballwin. 
Section 106.5.3. Insert: in subsection 2-50%; in subsection 3-100%. 
Section 108.4. Insert: Misdemeanor, $1,000, 90 days. 
Section 108.5. Insert: $100 and $500. 
(Ord. No. 06-31, §§ 1, 2, 5-8-06; Ord. No. 11-60, §§ 1, 2, 11-28-11; Ord. No. 12-21, §§ 1, 2, 4-9-12) 
Sec. 7-48. - Electrical code. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted a certain document, copies of which are on file in the Office of the City Clerk of the City of Ballwin, being marked and designated as the 2008 National Electrical Code, published by the National Fire Protection Association and the same is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the City of Ballwin, in the State of Missouri, for the control of electrical systems and components as therein provided and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said electrical code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section as though fully restated. 
(b)  The following fee schedule shall apply to all electrical permits issued under this section: 
Permit processing fee-$22.00. 
Permit processing fee-$22.00 + appropriate fee from table in subsection (c) below. 
Minimum fee, no plan review & 1 inspection-$63.00. 
Extra inspection fee-$41.00. 
Permit fee including permit processing, plan review & 1 inspection-$86.00. 
Minimum fee, no plan review & 2 inspections-$104.00. 
Minimum fee, plan review & 2 inspections-$127.00. 
_____
(c)  Electrical Permit Unit Pricing Schedule. 
Item First Unit Each Additional Unit Electrical outlets as defined in note A $7.00 $0.60 Elevators, per floor 6.00 0.60 Elevators, per car 6.00 6.00 Service equipment as defined in note B Services up to and including 200 amperes 11.00 11.00 Over 200 and up to and including 400 amperes 17.00 17.00 Over 400 and up to and including 600 amperes 39.00 39.00 Over 600 amperes 50.00 50.00 Switch boards and panel boards as defined in note C. Same pricing fees as service equipment Motors: Less than 5 h.p. 6.00 0.60 Motors: More than 5 h.p. 6.00 5.00 Transformers as defined in note D 8.00 4.00 X-ray as defined in note E 8.00 8.00 Residential new construction Integrated permit Residential rewire as defined in note F Service installed 34.00 34.00 Service not installed 34.00 34.00 Reinspections: Utility Co. 34.00 34.00 Disconnected service as defined in note G 34.00 34.00 Old installations as defined in note H 34.00 34.00 Communication systems: Amplifiers 8.00 0.80 Communication systems: Telephones 8.00 0.80 Communication systems: Television antenna 8.00 0.80 Communication systems: Burglar alarm 8.00 0.80 Cable television: head-end station, per street mile 4.00 Cable television: Power booster 29.00 29.00 Electric heat, per 10 KW 6.00 6.00  
Note A. Electrical outlets. Each and every point on the electrical system where power or light is derived for any purpose whatsoever. In computing outlets for flourescent fixtures, each fixture shall be counted as an electrical outlet. 
Note B. Service equipment. Each and every point on the electrical system where power is derived from the public utility systems or a private generating plant. 
Note C. Switch boards and panel boards. Each and every point on the electrical system where switches or protective devices are mounted in an individual panel or single framework. 
Note D. Transformers. Each and every point on the electrical system where the primary voltage is either increased or decreased. 
Note E. X-rays. Every point on the electrical system where an individual x-ray device or machine is served. 
Note F. Residential rewire. Inspection of rewiring, rehabilitation, additions and alterations to existing electrical wiring and equipment installation to residential occupancies of the R-2 and R-3 use groups. 
Note G. Reinspections-disconnected service. Reinspection of buildings on which service wires have been removed, or in commercial installations when a change in tenancy has taken place or installations of the "R" use group which may not have been in use for a period of six months or more. This does not apply to cases of discontinuance of service pending payment of delinquent bills. 
Note H. Reinspections-Old installations. Inspections of old installations of electrical work, made upon request of the owner, and issuance of certificates thereon. 
(Ord. No. 09-07, § 2, 2-23-09; Ord. No. 11-41, § 1, 9-26-11; Ord. No. 11-59, § 2, 11-28-11; Ord. No. 12-20, § 1, 4-9-12) 
_____
Secs. 7-49-7-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDING ORDINANCE 

Sec. 7-61. - Saved from repeal. 
    Nothing contained in this Code or in the ordinance enacting this Code shall be construed to repeal or affect the building ordinance of the city, being Ordinance No. 1942, or any amendments thereto. 
(Code 1973, § 6-33) 
Sec. 7-61.5. - Offer installation of fire sprinkler system. 
    A builder of single-family dwellings or residences or multi-unit dwellings of four or fewer units in the City of Ballwin shall offer to any purchaser on or before the time of entering into the purchase contract the option, at the purchaser's cost, to install or equip fire sprinklers in the dwelling, residence, or unit. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no purchaser of such a single-family dwelling, residence, or multi-unit dwelling shall be denied the right to choose or decline to install a fire sprinkler system in such dwelling or residence being purchased by any code, ordinance, rule, regulation, order, or resolution by any county or other political subdivision. The provisions of this section shall expire on December 31, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 10-13, § 1, 5-10-10) 
Sec. 7-62. - Violation. 
    Any person who shall violate a provision of the building ordinance or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof; or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the building commissioner or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the building ordinance shall upon conviction be punished as provided by section 1-6. 
(Code 1973, § 6-34) 
Secs. 7-63-7-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PERMITS, FEES AND DEPOSITS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-81. - When permits required. 
    No person shall construct, erect or alter any building or structure in the city, except fences and signs otherwise provided for, when the cost of such construction, erection or alteration exceeds $100.00 or where the effect of such construction, erection or alteration is to enlarge the capacity or affect the bearing walls of any building or the roof thereof, without first having secured a permit therefor and paid the required fee. 
(Code 1973, § 6-46) 
Sec. 7-82. - To whom application made; contents. 
    An application for the permit required by this article shall be made to the building commissioner and shall be accompanied by plans and specifications, in duplicate, showing the work to be done. Such plans shall be verified by the signature of either the owner of the premises or the architect or contractor in charge of the operations. 
(Code 1973, § 6-47) 
Sec. 7-83. - Building commissioner to examine applications and plans. 
    The building commissioner shall examine applications, with plans, to determine whether the proposed construction, erection or alteration will comply with the provisions of the city ordinances relative thereto. Upon approval of the application, one set of plans shall be returned to the applicant with a permit, and the other set of plans shall be retained by the building commissioner. No permit shall be issued until after approval of the plans and specifications by the building commissioner. 
(Code 1973, § 6-48) 
Sec. 7-84. - Variances from plans prohibited unless prior approval received. 
    No person shall materially vary from the approved plans and specifications in the alteration, erection or construction of any building or structure unless such variations are submitted in an amended plan to the building commissioner and approved by him. 
(Code 1973, § 6-49) 
Sec. 7-85. - Inspections. 
(a)  The building commissioner shall make or cause to be made such inspections as are required by city ordinances or as are necessary to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this article, and shall make any tests or examination of materials or methods to be used for the purpose of seeing that they comply with the provisions of city ordinances. 
(b)  A $25.00 inspection fee shall be paid to the city for any inspection scheduled by the owner, builder, subcontractor or agent thereof, which is canceled with less than 24 hours notice or cannot be made at the time and place scheduled through no fault of the city. 
(c)  A $50.00 fee shall be paid to the city for the replacement of lost authorization cards. No additional inspections shall be approved and occupancy is prohibited until this fee has been paid. 
(Code 1973, § 6-50; Ord. No. 2656, § 1, 12-8-97; Ord. No. 06-39, § 1, 6-26-06) 
Sec. 7-86. - Fees. 
(a)  Fees for constructing, erecting, altering or demolishing buildings and structures and site improvements shall be as follows: 
(1)  For construction or erection of new buildings and structures and alterations, demolitions, remodeling and additions: $4.00 for each $1,000.00 and part thereof for costs of work with a minimum fee of $50.00. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (1) above, the minimum fee for a demolition permit of any type shall be $100.00. 
(3)  For the purposes of this section, fees required shall be computed on the basis of the per square foot or similar unit cost of construction for equivalent types of construction as is published in the R. S. Means Co. or an equivalent replacement publication of regional construction cost data as approved by the board of aldermen. 
(b)  The fee for occupancy permits required under the provisions of the zoning ordinance shall be as follows: 
(1)  For commercial buildings, $15.00 per store or unit. 
(2)  For apartments, $5.00 per dwelling unit. 
(3)  For single family units, $5.00 per dwelling unit. 
(c)  In the discretion of the building commissioner, where the submission of an application and accompanying plans requires review that is beyond the expertise of the existing staff or when in the discretion of the building commissioner, there is a backlog of applications with plans for review, such plan review may be contracted to a private party and the fees charged by such private party shall be paid by the applicant. The fees to be paid to such private contractor in accordance with this subsection (c) shall be charged at the rate which the City of Ballwin is charged by the contractor. 
(Code 1973, § 6-51; Ord. No. 01-08, § 1, 1-22-01; Ord. No. 03-11, § 4, 2-10-03; Ord. No. 09-07, § 2, 2-23-09; Ord. No. 09-09, § 1, 3-9-09) 
Cross reference- Zoning, app. A. 
Sec. 7-87. - Denial of permit for certain reasons. 
    The permit application for building, plumbing, mechanical, fence, sign or swimming pool may be denied at the option of the building official for the following reasons: 
(1)  The applicant has a permit that has not received final approval and the permit is expired. 
(2)  The applicant has one or more permits that have unresolved - disapproved inspections. 
(3)  The contractor has not obtained a contractors license. 
(4)  The contractor has unpaid fees as authorized by section 7-85. 
(Ord. No. 06-39, § 2, 6-26-06) 
Editor's note- Prior to the adoption of Ord. No. 06-39, Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, adopted Jan. 27, 2003, repealed § 7-87, which pertained to landscape sprinkler and irrigation systems and derived from Ord. No. 2361, § 1, adopted Feb. 14, 1994. 
Sec. 7-88. - Reserved. 
Sec. 7-89. - Time limits. 
    Any permit required under this article V shall expire six months from the date of issuance, unless construction materials are delivered to the site and physical construction activities have begun within such six-month period. If work has not passed a final inspection after 12 months from the date of the permit, the permit shall expire regardless of the status or level of completion of the construction project. The building commissioner may extend the period of validity of a building permit for up to an additional six months. Such extension shall only be granted upon the submission of a written request from the permittee outlining the reason for the extension and detailing the specific time frame for the completion of the work remaining incomplete from the original permit. 
    If work remains incomplete upon the expiration of any permit or extension thereof granted per the provisions of this article V, all work under such permit shall stop, all deposits held per sections 7-104 and/or 7-105 shall be forfeited, and the building commissioner shall post a stop work order on the site. Any work done by any individual or allowed to be done by the permittee or property owner subsequent to a stop work posting shall be deemed a violation of this section and punishable per the provisions of sections 1-6, general penalty; continuing violations, of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Ballwin. Work may only resume upon the issuance of a replacement building permit for such work. Such replacement permit must be obtained in accordance with the provisions of this article and shall include a plan review subject to the building code in effect at the time the replacement building permit is issued. Replacement building permits issued per the requirements of this provision shall be subject to the regular building permit fees and deposit requirements of said article V but shall be computed at a rate of 125 percent of the regular rate of such permits and deposits to cover administrative, plan review and inspection expenses associated with replacement building permit issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2392, § 1, 7-11-94; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 1-26-98) 
Secs. 7-90-7-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEPOSITS 

Sec. 7-101. - Purpose. 
    The deposits required by this division shall serve as security for the completion of the project and for the repair of any damage to or cleanup of any litter upon the public streets in the city caused by the depositor's employees, agents, contractors, subcontractors or materialmen, either directly or indirectly, in connection with the depositor's project, or in connection with the construction of depositor's street, driveway or other improvements. 
(Code 1973, § 6-59) 
Sec. 7-102. - Division not applicable to city projects. 
    The provisions of this division shall not be applicable to any construction, improvement, project, endeavor or enterprise under the direction of city officials by employees of the city or by any contractor of the city performing work for and in behalf of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 6-60) 
Sec. 7-103. - Division supplemental to other regulations. 
    This division is not intended to nor shall it supplant any existing ordinance or other regulation of the city but shall be complementary to such ordinances and regulations. 
(Code 1973, § 6-61) 
Sec. 7-104. - Required when project may damage or litter streets. 
    Every person engaged in any project which may reasonably be calculated to cause damage to, or cause any earth, mud, ice, rocks, gravel, sand, cement, concrete, mortar, plaster or any other construction material or debris to be deposited upon, any public street in the city shall prior to beginning such project deposit cash with the city in such amount as may be established by the board of aldermen after the board has been advised of the nature and details of the project. 
(Code 1973, § 6-62) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 24. 
Sec. 7-105. - Required of persons constructing homes or other buildings and structures. 
    Every person using public or private streets in the city in connection with the improvement of real or personal property, including the erection and construction of buildings or structures shall, in addition to any permit fees or other deposits, deposit cash with the city to assure timely completion of the construction, to secure against damage to city streets, and to assure the removal, in a manner satisfactory to the city, of any earth, mud, ice, snow, rocks, gravel, sand, cement, concrete, mortar, asphalt, plaster, trash, debris or any other material that block or otherwise limits use of said streets, or endangers those using said streets, in the following amounts: 
(1)  Two thousand dollars for each new single-family residence. 
(2)  Two percent of the estimated cost of construction in excess of $5,000.00 for other types of buildings, structures, improvements or streets, not including fences or minor signs. Under no circumstances shall a deposit provided per this section be less than $500.00. 
(3)  When the cash deposit required per this section is in excess of $5,000.00, the person making the improvements and the property owner if different from the person making the improvements may, in lieu of the cash deposit set forth in this section file with the city clerk a surety bond, on forms suitable to the city, to secure against damage and assure the removal of all debris and materials as outlined in this section. Such bond shall run to the benefit of the city, shall provide for the guarantee of performance of the depositor's obligations under this section, and shall have such sureties as are satisfactory to the city. 
(4)  Ten percent of the cost of construction for new construction with an estimated cost of less than $5,000.00. Under no circumstances shall a deposit provided per this section be less than $250.00. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, whether or not an escrow is required shall be determined according to the following table: 
Keep Escrows Eliminate Escrows Commercial Remodel Fire Sprinkler Construction Trailer Flagpole All Demolitions Pergola Garage Addition Above Ground Pools Garage Detached Spa or Hot tub Moving Structure Porch Multi Family Structure Residential Remodel Kitchen/ Bath New Commercial Building Retaining Wall In Ground Pools Shed Residential Remodel-Full Structural Repairs Room Addition Gazebo Single Family Residence Temporary Sign Permits Basement Finish Deck  
(6)  If a contractor fails to obtain a final inspection and approval within one year of the issuance of the permit, the same shall be an infraction under this Code, punishable as stated in section 1-6 of the Code. Each day beyond the one year deadline shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1973, § 6-63; Ord. No. 2661, § 2, 1-26-98; Ord. No. 17-11, § 1, 4-24-17) 
Sec. 7-106. - When to be made. 
    Any deposit required under the provisions of this division shall be made at the time of application for any permit which may be required for such improvement, construction or project; or, if no permit is required, at least 24 hours prior to the time such improvement, construction or project is begun. 
(Code 1973, § 6-64) 
Sec. 7-107. - Building permits not valid unless deposit made. 
    No building permit shall be valid unless the cash deposit required under the provisions of this division has been made and a receipt therefor attached to or noted upon such building permit. 
(Code 1973, § 6-65) 
Sec. 7-108. - To be turned over to treasurer. 
    All cash deposits required to be made under the provisions of this division shall be turned over to the city treasurer, who shall deposit them in a separate account established to receive only such deposits. 
(Code 1973, § 6-66) 
Sec. 7-109. - Damages to be repaired by depositor; when work done by city. 
(a)  All damage done to city streets during the progress of depositor's project shall be repaired by depositor. Materials and standards for such repair shall conform with the requirements of any applicable city code, ordinance or specification. 
(b)  If the depositor, after being requested by the city engineer or building commissioner, fails within 72 hours to furnish the necessary labor and materials for such repair, the city engineer or building commissioner is empowered to cause the necessary labor and materials to be furnished by the city and the cost thereof shall be charged against and paid for out of the deposit required and established under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1973, § 6-67) 
Sec. 7-110. - Streets to be cleaned as work progresses. 
(a)  As any improvement, construction or project progresses, all streets shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, ice, earth, mud, rocks, gravel, sand, cement, concrete, mortar, plaster or any other construction materials or debris resulting from such work. All cleanup operations shall be done by and at the expense of the contractor or the person by whom or for whose benefit the improvement, construction or project has been undertaken. 
(b)  All cleanup operations shall be completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer or the building commissioner. Cleanup operations shall be done from time to time as may be ordered by the city engineer or the building commissioner and in any event shall be done daily. 
(c)  Upon a failure to so clean up after a reasonable period of notification to the project supervisor on duty or the contractor's representative to do so has been given by the city engineer or the building commissioner, such cleanup work may be done by city employees and the cost thereof shall be charged against and paid out of the deposit required under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1973, § 6-68) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 24. 
Sec. 7-111. - Deposit or residue to be returned. 
    Any deposit, or the residue thereof in the event of deduction for damage to or cleanup of public streets, shall be returned to the depositor upon order of the building commissioner or the city engineer. 
(Code 1973, § 6-69) 
Secs. 7-112-7-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-03, § 1, adopted March 26, 2018, repealed the former Art. VI, §§ 7-126-7-135, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1973, §§ 6-82-6-91; Ord. No. 2612, § 1, adopted June 23, 1997; and Ord. No. 2661, § 3, adopted January 26, 1998; 
State Law reference- Inadequate and deficient housing, RSMo 441.500 et seq. 

Sec. 7-126. - Building and structure, defined. 
    For the purpose of this article, a "building" or "structure" is declared to be that which is built or constructed, including without limitation because of enumeration, buildings for any occupancy or use whatsoever, fences, signs, billboards, fire escapes, chute escapes, railings, water tanks, towers, open grade steps, sidewalks, or stairways, tents or anything erected and framed of component parts which is fastened, anchored or rests on a permanent foundation or on the ground. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 1, 3-26-18) 
Sec. 7-127. - Nuisance declared. 
    Pursuant to RSMo sections 67.400 through 67.450, the buildings or structures which are determined to be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the City of Ballwin, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 1, 3-26-18) 
Sec. 7-128. - Conditions detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
    Buildings and structures as hereinafter described are declared to be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of city residents: 
(1)  Those buildings or structures which have been damaged by fire, wind, or any other cause whatsoever, thus rendering them dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare of any occupant or any other person. 
(2)  Those buildings or structures which have parts thereof which are attached or have deteriorated in such a way that they constitute a threat of falling upon public ways or upon the property of others or which may constitute a threat of injury to members of the public or the occupants thereof. 
(3)  Those buildings or structures which have become so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, or unsanitary so that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease to the occupants thereof or to any other person. 
(4)  Those buildings or structures which, because of their condition, become harboring places for rats, stray animals, vermin or other disease bearing creatures, and which are unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of any person. 
(5)  Those occupied buildings or structures having light, air, or sanitary facilities that are inadequate to protect the health, safety or general welfare of any person who may live or work therein. 
(6)  Those buildings or structures, whether occupied or unoccupied, having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire, or other catastrophe, or those buildings with structures having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes to allow adequate egress therefrom. 
(7)  Those buildings or structures which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or welfare of any person. 
(8)  Those buildings or structures whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passed through the center of gravity of such wall or vertical structural member falls outside of the middle third of its base. 
(9)  Those buildings or structures, which, exclusive of the foundation show 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members or 50 percent of damage or deterioration of the non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
(10)  Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the floors or roofs are overloaded, or those having floors or roofs of insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose for which they are being used or intended to be used. 
(11)  Partially-constructed buildings upon which no substantial work shall have been performed for 90 days. 
(12)  Those in the process of demolition upon which no substantial work shall have been performed for a period of 14 days. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 1, 3-26-18) 
Sec. 7-129. - Open buildings declared a nuisance. 
    Those buildings or structures which are uninhabited, but which remain open or unlocked or have openings in any door, window, wall or roof, so that the same may be entered by animals, children or unauthorized persons. Such buildings or structures shall be required to be secured. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 1, 3-26-18) 
Sec. 7-130. - Standards for repair, vacation or demolition. 
    The following standards shall be followed in substance by the building inspector or other designee of the city engineer in ordering repair, vacation, or demolition: 
(1)  If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article it shall be ordered repaired. 
(2)  If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of its occupants it shall be ordered vacated. 
(3)  In any case where a dangerous building is 50 percent damaged or decayed, or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be demolished, and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article it shall be demolished. In all cases where a dangerous building is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of this article or any ordinance of the city or statute of the state, it shall be demolished. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 1, 3-26-18) 
Sec. 7-131. - Duties of building inspector. 
    The building inspector shall: 
(1)  Inspect any building, wall or structure that may be existing in violation of this article. 
(2)  Notify in writing the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest in the building as shown by the land records of the recorder of deeds of the county, or any building found by him to be a dangerous building within the standards set forth in this article, that: 
a.  The owner must vacate, repair, or demolish the building in accordance with the terms of the notice and this article; 
b.  The occupant or lessee must vacate the building or may have it repaired in accordance with the notice and remain in possession; 
c.  The mortgagee, agent or other persons having an interest in the building as shown by the land records of the recorder of deeds for the county may at his own risk repair, vacate, or demolish the building or have such work or act done; 
provided, that any person notified under this subsection to repair, vacate, or demolish any building shall be given such reasonable time as may be necessary to commence the work or act as required by the notice provided for herein. 
(3)  Set forth in the notice provided for in subsection (2) hereof, a description of the building, or structure deemed unsafe, a statement of the particulars which make the building or structure a dangerous building and an order requiring the same to be put in such condition as to comply with the terms of this article within such length of time as is reasonable. 
(4)  Set forth in the notice provided for in subsection (2) hereof, the date, time and place for a hearing to be held before the city administrator or his designee which shall be not less than ten days following service of the notice. 
(5)  Such notice shall be serviced either by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, but if service cannot be had by either of these modes of service, then service shall be had by publication. 
(6)  Report to the city administrator any noncompliance with the notice provided for in subsections (2) and (3) hereof. 
(7)  Appear at all hearings conducted by the city administrator, or his designee, and testify as to the condition of dangerous buildings. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 1, 3-26-18) 
Sec. 7-132. - Duties of the city administrator. 
    The City Administrator or his designee shall: 
(1)  Hold a hearing and hear such testimony and receive such evidence as the building inspector or the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, or any other person having an interest in the building as shown by the land records of the recorder of deeds for the county shall offer relative to the dangerous building. At such hearing, any party may be represented by counsel and all parties shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Consider the evidence offered and make written findings of fact, based on competent and substantial evidence, as to whether the building or structure is a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the resident of the City. 
(3)  Issue an order based upon findings of fact made pursuant to subsection (2) above commanding the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having an interest in the building, as shown by the land records of the recorder of deeds for the county, to repair, vacate, or demolish any building found to be a dangerous building within the terms of this Code. If the evidence does not support a finding that the building or structure is a nuisance or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the city, no order shall be issued. 
(4)  If the owner, occupant, mortgagee, or lessee fails to comply with the order provided for in subsection (3) above within the time prescribed in the original notice or in the order, the city administrator shall cause such building or structure to be repaired, vacated, or demolished as the facts may warrant, under the standards provided for in section 7-130. 
(5)  Certify the cost of any repair, vacation or demolition to the finance officer. The costs and expenses incurred by the city shall include the actual costs billed by third parties performing the abatement and paid by the city, costs billed by the city attorney related to the abatement and paid by the city; and costs related to time spent by city personnel in performing tasks related to the abatement and in preparation of the tax bill, lien, or other paperwork (these costs shall be based on the time spent in quarter of an hour increments multiplied by the hourly rate of pay for the employee). All city departments shall provide invoices and other necessary documentation to the city administrator in order to determine the costs and expenses related to the abatement of a dangerous building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 1, 3-26-18) 
Sec. 7-133. - Appeal of city administrator's order. 
    Any interested party may appeal the decision and order of the city administrator or his designee rendered under this article. If a proper record as defined in RSMo Section 536.130 is maintained of the hearing, then such appeal shall be made to the St. Louis County Circuit Court pursuant to RSMo Sections 536.100 to 536.140. If such a record is not maintained, the appeal shall be made to the St. Louis County Circuit Court within 30 days of the date of the decision and order pursuant to RSMo Section 536.150. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 1, 3-26-18) 
Sec. 7-134. - Special tax bills and lien against property. 
(a)  The finance officer shall prepare a special tax bill or assessment for the costs related to the demolition, repair or vacation of property. The tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be deemed a personal debt of the property owner and shall also be a lien on the property until paid. 
(b)  If the building or structure is demolished or repaired by a contractor pursuant to an order issued by the city and such contractor files a mechanic's lien against the property, the contractor may enforce this lien as provided in RSMo Sections 429.101 to 429.360. 
(c)  At the request of the property owner, the tax bill may be paid in annual equal installments over a period of not more than ten years. Installments with interest thereon to date on the unpaid balance shall be due annually on the anniversary of the date of issuance of the bill or such other date as determined in writing by the finance officer. Interest shall be at the statutory rate on the unpaid balance of the tax bill computed from the date of issuance. If any annual payment of principal or interest shall not be paid within 30 days of its due date, the entire remaining balance of the tax bill shall immediately become due and payable. If request for installment is not made to the city, the tax bill shall be due and payable in 30 days from its date of issuance with interest thereon at the statutory rate until paid. 
(d)  The tax bill may be collected in any manner provided by law. Tax bills issued under this section shall be prima facie evidence of the validity of the bill, the doing of the work and the liability of the property and property owner for the charges stated in the bill. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 1, 3-26-18) 
Sec. 7-135. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  The owner of any dangerous building who shall maintain a dangerous building or fail to comply with any notice or order to repair, vacate, or demolish such building given pursuant to this article or who fails to proceed continuously without unnecessary delay shall be guilty of a violation and subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or, if the owner of the property is not also a resident of the property, then a fine not exceeding $2,000.00, and/or imprisonment in accordance with the general penalty provisions for ordinance violations as set forth in this Code. 
(b)  The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with any notice to vacate and who fails to repair the building in accordance with any notice given as provided for in this article shall be guilty and subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment in accordance with the general penalty provisions for ordinance violations as set forth in this Code. 
(c)  Any person removing any placard or notice prohibiting entry or occupancy of the dangerous building shall be guilty of a violation and subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment in accordance with the general penalty provisions for ordinance violations as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 1, 3-26-18) 
Sec. 7-136. - Emergency cases. 
    In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the life, safety or health of any person unless a dangerous building as defined herein is immediately vacated, and/or made secure against unauthorized entry, and/or repaired, and/or demolished, the building inspector shall report such facts to the city administrator or his designee. The city administrator shall immediately cause the dangerous building to be vacated, and/or be made secure against unauthorized entry, and/or repaired, and/or demolished as the circumstances warrant. The cost to the city to cause the emergency repair, vacation, securing, or demolition of such dangerous building shall be collected in the same manner as provided in section 7-134. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 1, 3-26-18) 
Sec. 7-137. - Administrative liability. 
    No officer, agent, or employee of the city shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article. Any suit brought against any officer, agent, or employee of the city as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article shall be defended by the City until the final determination of the proceedings therein. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 1, 3-26-18) 
Sec. 7-138. - Insurance proceeds. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, if there are proceeds of any insurance policy based upon a covered claim payment made for damage or loss to a building or other structure caused by or arising out of any fire, explosion or other casualty loss, the payment of 25 percent of the insurance proceeds shall be paid to the city. This section shall apply only to a covered claim payment which is in excess of 50 percent of the face value of the policy covering a building or other structure. 
(b)  The insurer shall withhold from the covered claim payment 25 percent of the covered claim payment and shall pay such monies to the city to deposit into an interest-bearing account. Any named mortgagee on the insurance policy shall maintain priority over any obligation under the ordinance. 
(c)  The city shall release the proceeds and any interest thereon received under subdivision (A) of this section to the insured or as the terms of the policy and endorsements thereto provide within 30 days after receipt of such insurance monies, unless the city has instituted legal proceedings under the provisions of this article. If the city proceeded under the provisions of this article, all monies in excess of that necessary to comply with the provisions of this article for the removal, securing, repair and cleanup of the building or structure and the lot on which it is located, less salvage value, shall be paid to the insured. 
(d)  This section shall apply to fire, explosion or other casualty loss claims arising on all buildings and structures. 
(e)  This section does not make the city a party to any insurance contract, and the insurer is not liable to any party for any amount in excess of the proceeds otherwise payable under its insurance policy. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 1, 3-26-18) 
Secs. 7-139-7-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MOVING BUILDINGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-151. - Designation of streets over which buildings may be moved. 
    The building commissioner shall procure from the city engineer a list of designated streets over which a building may be moved. The building commissioner shall have the list approved by the chief of police and shall reproduce the list upon the permit in writing. In making their determination, the city engineer and the chief of police shall act to assure maximum safety to persons and property in the city and to minimize congestion and traffic hazards on public streets. 
(Code 1973, § 6-106) 
Sec. 7-152. - Duties of permittee. 
(a)  Every person holding a permit to move a building as required by this article shall: 
(1)  Move a building only over streets designated for such use in the written permit. 
(2)  Notify the building commissioner in writing of a desired change in the moving date and the hours as proposed in the application. 
(3)  Notify the building commissioner in writing of any and all damage done to property belonging to the city within 24 hours after the damage or injury has occurred. 
(4)  Cause red lights to be displayed during the nighttime on every side of the building, while standing on a street, in such manner as to warn the public of the obstruction, and shall at all times erect and maintain barricades, which shall be lighted between the hours of sundown and sunrise, across the streets in such manner as to protect the public from damage or injury by reason of the removal of the building. 
(5)  Comply with the building code, the zoning ordinance and all other applicable ordinances and laws, including the ordinances and regulations of the Ballwin fire protection district, upon relocating the building in the city. 
(6)  Reimburse the city for the expense of traffic officers ordered by the chief of police to accompany the movement of the building to protect the public from injury and all other expenses incurred by the city. 
(7)  Remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to existing grade at the original building site within five days of the date of removal of any house, so that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(8)  See that the sewer line is plugged with a concrete stopper. 
(9)  Notify the gas, electric, telephone and water service companies to remove their services. 
(b)  Buildings may be moved along city streets only between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. or other times as approved by the building commissioner and the chief of police. Under no circumstances shall a building be unattended or abandoned while in a roadway or on public property. 
(Code 1973, § 6-107) 
Cross reference- Zoning, app. A. 
Sec. 7-153. - Permittee liable for expense above deposit. 
    In the event of any damage to property, the permittee shall be liable for any expense, damage or cost in excess of the amount of deposits or securities deposited with the city; and the city attorney, upon the direction of the board of aldermen, shall prosecute an action against the permittee in a court of competent jurisdiction for the recovery of expenses to the city. 
(Code 1973, § 6-108) 
Sec. 7-154. - Expenses for city returning original premises to safe condition. 
    The city shall proceed to do the work necessary to place the original premises in a safe and sanitary condition, when the permittee does not comply with the requirements of this article, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the general deposit. 
(Code 1973, § 6-109) 
Sec. 7-155. - Enforcement. 
    The building commissioner, police department and city engineer shall enforce and carry out the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 6-110) 
Secs. 7-156-7-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 7-171. - Required. 
    No person shall move any building over, along or across any highway, street or alley in the city without first obtaining a permit from the building commissioner. 
(Code 1973, § 6-117) 
Sec. 7-172. - Application to be filed with building commissioner. 
    Every person seeking issuance of a permit required by this article shall file an application for such permit with the building commissioner. 
(Code 1973, § 6-118) 
Sec. 7-173. - Form of application. 
    Each application for a permit required by this article shall be made in writing, upon forms provided by the building commissioner, and shall be filed in the office of the building commissioner. 
(Code 1973, § 6-119) 
Sec. 7-174. - Contents of application. 
    Each application for a permit required by this article shall set forth: 
(1)  A description of the building proposed to be moved, giving the street number, construction materials, dimensions, number of rooms and condition of exterior and interior. 
(2)  A legal description of the lot from which such building is to be moved, giving the lot, block and tract number, if located in the city. 
(3)  A legal description of the lot to which it is proposed such building be moved, giving lot, block and tract number, if located in the city. 
(4)  The portion of the lot to be occupied by the building when moved. 
(5)  The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the building is proposed to be moved. 
(6)  The proposed moving date and hours. 
(7)  Any additional information which the building commissioner shall find necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should issue. 
(Code 1973, § 6-120) 
Sec. 7-175. - Accompanying papers. 
(a)  Tax certificate. The owner of the building to be moved shall file with the application sufficient evidence that the building and lot from which it is to be removed are free of any entanglements and that all taxes and any city charges against the same are paid in full. 
(b)  Certificate of ownership or entitlement. The applicant, if other than the owner, shall file with the application a written statement or bill of sale signed by the owner, or other sufficient evidence, that he is entitled to move the building. 
(c)  Photographs. The applicant shall file with the application eight-inch by ten-inch glossy print photographs of the front, rear and sides of the building proposed to be moved. 
(d)  Acknowledgments or permit of moving. The applicant shall file with the application a copy of any permit which may be required from the state highways and transportation department and copies of acknowledgments from the gas, electric, telephone and water service companies of the applicant's notice of the proposed moving. 
(Code 1973, § 6-121) 
Sec. 7-176. - Inspection of building and equipment. 
    The building commissioner shall inspect the building to be moved and the applicant's equipment to determine whether the standards for the issuance of a permit are met. 
(Code 1973, § 6-122) 
Sec. 7-177. - Standards for issuance. 
    The building commissioner shall refuse to issue a permit if he finds that: 
(1)  Any application requirement or any fee or deposit requirement has not been complied with; 
(2)  The building is too large to move without endangering persons or property in the city; 
(3)  The building is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair or is otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without endangering persons and property in the city; 
(4)  The building is structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose for which moved, if the location to which the building is to be removed is in the city; 
(5)  The applicant's equipment is unsafe and that persons and property would be endangered by its use; 
(6)  Zoning or other ordinances would be violated by the building in its new location; or 
(7)  For any other reason persons or property in the city would be endangered by the moving of the building. 
(Code 1973, § 6-123) 
Cross reference- Zoning, app. A. 
Secs. 7-178-7-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FEES AND DEPOSITS 

Sec. 7-196. - Permit fees. 
    Each application for a permit required by this article shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount of $21.00. If the building to be moved is located outside the limits of the city, such fee shall be augmented by a charge of $0.08 per mile for each mile beyond the limits of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 6-131) 
Sec. 7-197. - Amount of deposit required for expenses. 
    Upon the receipt of an application for a permit required by this article, it shall be the duty of the building commissioner to procure from the city engineer an estimate of the expense that will be incurred in removing and replacing any electric wires, streetlamps, pole lines or any other property belonging to the city, the removal and replacement of which will be required by reason of moving the building through the city, together with the cost of materials necessary to be used in making such removals and replacements. Prior to the issuance of the permit the building commissioner shall require the applicant to deposit a sum equal to twice the amount of the estimated expense. 
(Code 1973, § 6-132) 
Sec. 7-198. - General deposit. 
    Each application for a permit required by this article shall be accompanied by a cash deposit in the sum of $2,500.00 as an indemnity for any damage which the city may sustain by reason of damage or injury to any highway, street or alley, sidewalk or other property of the city, which may be caused by or be incidental to the removal of any building, over, along or across any street in the city and to indemnify the city against any claim of damage to persons or private property, and to satisfy any claims by private individuals out of, caused by or incidental to the moving of any building over, along or across any street in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 6-133) 
Sec. 7-199. - Bond in lieu of cash deposit. 
    Any person filing an application for a permit required by this article may, in lieu of the general cash deposit required, file with the building commissioner a bond approved as to form by the city attorney executed by a bonding or surety company authorized to do business in the state in the amount of $2,500.00, conditioned upon the assurance that this article and other applicable ordinances and laws will be complied with. Such bond shall run to the city for the use and benefit of any person intended to be protected thereby and shall be conditioned on the payment of any damage to public or private property and the payment for any damages or losses resulting from any malfeasance, misfeasance, nonfeasance or negligence in connection with any of the activities or conditions upon which the permit applied for is granted. 
(Code 1973, § 6-134) 
Sec. 7-200. - Insurance policy in lieu of cash deposit. 
    Any person filing an application for a permit required by this article may, in lieu of the general cash deposit required, file with the building commissioner a liability insurance policy, issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state and approved as to form by the city attorney, in the same amount and providing the same protection as would be required for a bond hereunder. 
(Code 1973, § 6-135) 
Sec. 7-201. - Fees and deposits to be put in city treasury. 
    The building commissioner shall deposit all fees and deposits and all bonds or insurance policies with the city treasurer. 
(Code 1973, § 6-136) 
Sec. 7-202. - Return of excess expense deposit. 
    After a building has been removed, the building commissioner shall furnish the board of aldermen with a written statement of all expenses incurred in removing and replacing all property belonging to the city and of all material used in the making of the removal and replacement together with a statement of all damage caused to or inflicted upon property belonging to the city. The board of aldermen shall authorize the building commissioner to return to the applicant the deposit required under this article after the city treasurer deducts the sum sufficient to pay for all of the costs and expenses and for all damage done to property of the city by reasons of the removal of the building. Permit fees deposited with the application shall not be returned. 
(Code 1973, § 6-137) 
Sec. 7-203. - Return of deposits upon nonissuance. 
    Upon his refusal to issue a permit, the building commissioner shall return to the applicant all deposits, bonds and insurance policies. Permit fees filed with the application shall not be returned. 
(Code 1973, § 6-138) 
Secs. 7-204-7-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FENCES 

Sec. 7-221. - Permitting fences to be used for advertising purposes prohibited. 
    No person shall permit any fence erected or maintained on premises owned, occupied or leased by him to be used for advertising purposes. 
(Code 1973, § 6-152) 
Sec. 7-222. - Permit required for erection or alteration. 
    No person shall erect or alter any fence, screen, wall or other exterior partition in the city without first filing an application with and receiving a permit from the building commissioner for the erection of such fence, screen or wall. Such application shall be filed upon forms provided by the building commissioner and shall clearly show the type of fence, screen or wall proposed to be erected, the material of which it is to be constructed and the location where it is to be erected. 
(Code 1973, § 6-153) 
Sec. 7-223. - Permit fee. 
    An application for a permit under the provisions of this article shall be accompanied by a fee of $35.00 to cover the cost of the permit and inspection of the fence, screen, wall or exterior partition proposed to be erected. 
(Code 1973, § 6-154; Ord. No. 03-11, § 1, 2-10-03) 
Sec. 7-224. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Location for intersections. No fence, wall, structure or planting higher than 2.5 feet above the grade of the street may be erected, planted or maintained within 15 feet of the right-of-way lines of any intersecting alleys, streets, roads or highways. 
(b)  Front yard location prohibited. No fence, wall or structure may be erected, constructed or maintained within the front yard area between the street right-of-way line and the building line, including corner and double-frontage lots, except with the permission of the board of aldermen for the following: 
(1)  As required by article XVI, section 9, of the zoning ordinance for corner and double-frontage lots in a dwelling district; or 
(2)  On lots located in a commercial C-1, C-2, C-3, P.A., MXD or S-1 zoned district. 
(c)  Construction materials prohibited. No fence, wall or structure may be constructed in whole or in part as follows: 
(1)  Cloth, canvass or other flexible material. 
(2)  Barbed wire or other single wire strung between posts or supports except public utilities for gas, electric, cable, telephone, telegraph, sewer and water; or any government may use barbed wire and single wire at the top of fences, provided that the wire is at least six feet above grade. 
(3)  No wall, structure, fence, chain, chainlink or wire on a fence shall have electrical current passing through it except if the wire is properly insulated and installed in accordance with the electrical code. 
(d)  Maintenance of fences. All fences, screens, structures and walls are to be maintained and kept in good condition and repair, including paint and stain. Any fence, screen, structure or wall not kept in good condition and repair can be declared by the city to be a dangerous building or structure and can be repaired or removed as a dangerous building or structure pursuant to section 7-127. 
(Code 1973, § 6-155) 
Cross reference- Zoning, app. A. 
Sec. 7-225. - Height restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall erect or maintain any fence, wall, screen or exterior partition, no matter how built, or of what material constructed, which exceeds eight feet in height except that a fence that is ten feet in height may be constructed in an area where a residential zoning district immediately adjoins a parcel of four acres or more in a neighborhood commercial overlay district. A fence that is ten feet in height and meets the foregoing requirement must be constructed on the parcel that is zoned NCD. 
(b)  No person shall erect or maintain any solid fence or screen which exceeds six feet in height except as follows: 
(1)  A fence or screen of wood or metal not exceeding eight feet in height may be erected if such fence or screen is penetrated with openings at regular intervals, or latticed so that the combined area of openings shall be at least 50 percent of the actual surface of such fence or screen 
(2)  A solid fence ten feet in height may be constructed if it complies with subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 6-156; Ord. No. 12-26, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 7-226. - Nonconforming fences. 
    Any fence, structure, screen, wall or planting that does not conform to the provisions of this article shall, within one year of passage and approval of this section, be dismantled, taken down or altered so as to bring it into compliance with the requirements of this article, provided that a permit and, when necessary, board of aldermen approval as required by the city's ordinances, is first obtained; except that any fence that has electricity passing through it must have the electrical current turned off within 30 days of passage and approval of this section. Any fence, structure or wall or planting that was erected before November 1, 1989, in a commercial C-1, C-2, C-3, PA, MXD, or S-1 zoned district that does not conform to the provisions hereof may continue as a nonconforming use; but if the fence, structure, screen, wall or planting is removed or damaged to the extent of more than 60 percent of its assessed value, it shall be removed and not repaired or restored unless the board of adjustment determines in accordance with article XIX of the zoning ordinance that some compelling necessity requires the continuance of the nonconforming use. This section shall apply to any area of the city that is annexed or consolidated into the city, and the time limits shall begin on the effective date for such annexation or consolidation. This section will apply to any subsequent amendment to this article from the date of passage and approval of such amendment. 
(Code 1973, § 6-157) 
Sec. 7-227. - Penalty. 
    Every person erecting, maintaining or altering any fence, screen, wall or exterior partition in violation of or contrary to the requirements of this article, and every person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to observe the requirements of this article or violate the same shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-6, in addition to paying the costs of prosecution. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Code 1973, § 6-158) 
Secs. 7-228-7-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS 

Sec. 7-246. - Purpose. 
    The general purpose of this article is to protect the public health and safety and to promote the general welfare of the public and those persons having occasion to occupy or use nonresidential buildings or portions thereof. These general objectives include, among others, the following specific purposes: 
(1)  To establish minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities and for light, heating and sanitation. 
(2)  To provide for the inspection of buildings and interior spaces to determine compliance with these standards. 
(3)  To establish responsibilities for owners and occupants. 
(Code 1973, § 6-171) 
Sec. 7-247. - Inspections. 
    The building commissioner shall make inspections to determine the condition of buildings, spaces, accessory structures and premises located within the city, in order that he may perform his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of the buildings and general public. For the purpose of making such inspections, the building commissioner is authorized: 
(1)  To enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all buildings, spaces, accessory structures and their premises for the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey. 
(2)  To enter, examine and inspect all buildings in which there is a change in occupancy or ownership. 
(Code 1973, § 6-173) 
Sec. 7-248. - Responsibilities of owners. 
(a)  Every owner of a building shall: 
(1)  Maintain in a clean and sanitary condition all interior and exterior walks and steps and any other shared or public areas of the building and premises. 
(2)  Maintain landscaping in all landscaped spaces in good condition including trimming of trees and shrubbery and the prompt replacement of dead or diseased planting. All areas between nonresidential buildings and adjacent streets intended as landscaped areas shall be provided with landscaping as required and approved by the building commissioner. 
(3)  Keep premises and buildings free from infestation by prohibiting and alleviating conditions around buildings and yards conducive to infestation. 
(4)  Provide at least one refuse container for each building, unless additional containers or other methods are deemed necessary by the building commissioner for sanitary storage of refuse. Such containers shall have a capacity of not less than 25 gallons and shall be constructed of galvanized iron or similar durable material. These containers shall be watertight and equipped with tightfitting lids. 
(b)  When, in the opinion of the building commissioner, it becomes necessary to expedite refuse collections because of the accumulation of refuse requiring an excessive number of containers, which constitute either an unsightly, unsanitary or hazardous condition in connection with any building within the city, the owner of such building shall, upon being directed, furnish a tank-type container or containers of a size and number sufficient to contain refuse between collections as determined by the director of public works, and such container shall be maintained in a hygienic and satisfactory condition and be placed at a collection point approved by the building commissioner. Screening shall be provided if deemed necessary by the building commissioner. 
(Code 1973, § 6-174) 
Sec. 7-249. - Heat. 
    All owners who rent or let floor space on terms expressed or implied to furnish heat to the tenants or occupants thereof shall furnish and are required to maintain, during the months of September, October, November, December, January, February, March, April and May of each year sufficient heat, in the rooms or space so occupied, to produce a temperature of not less than 70 degrees Fahrenheit during the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of each day or when the building is occupied. 
(Code 1973, § 6-175) 
Sec. 7-250. - Infestation. 
    Extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner in buildings where infestation has occurred. 
(Code 1973, § 6-176) 
Sec. 7-251. - Discontinuance of service. 
    No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any supplied service, facility, equipment or utility to be removed or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied unit let or occupied by him except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the building commissioner. 
(Code 1973, § 6-177) 
Sec. 7-252. - Occupancy permit. 
(a)  No person shall occupy, nor shall any owner or agent thereof permit the occupation of, any building, or addition thereto or part thereof, for any purpose until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building commissioner. Every owner, agent or manager of any building, or addition thereto, shall inform the building commissioner whenever any portion of the building becomes vacant or a change of ownership occurs, and request an inspection thereof under the provisions of this article. The certificate of occupancy so issued shall state that the occupancy complies with all provisions of this article. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly make any false statement in an application for an occupancy permit. 
(Code 1973, § 6-178) 
Sec. 7-253. - Responsibilities of occupants. 
    The occupants or tenants of all spaces in buildings shall: 
(1)  Maintain the building or that portion of the building under his control in a clean and sanitary condition unless the owner is required to do so in writing. 
(2)  Exercise proper use and reasonable care of the building or his portion thereof and each item, facility or piece of equipment provided for his use by the owner. 
(3)  Exterminate rodents or insects (except termites) when his building or portion thereof is the only one infested. 
(4)  Dispose of all refuse in approved containers. The level of the contents shall be kept at least four inches from the top. Care shall be exercised by the user to avoid spillage, and if it occurs he shall clean it promptly and restore the premises to a clean and sanitary condition. 
(5)  Maintain all plumbing fixtures in his building or portion thereof in a clean and sanitary condition and be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 6-179) 
Sec. 7-254. - General requirements. 
    The owner of every nonresidential building of any type shall be responsible for the following: 
(1)  Foundations, walls and roofs. Every foundation, exterior wall and roof shall be weathertight, watertight and rodentproof and shall be kept in a good state of maintenance and repair. 
(2)  Windows and doors. Every window and exterior door shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight and kept in sound working conditions and good repair. 
(3)  Maintenance of interior walls. Every interior wall, floor, partition and ceiling shall be kept in a good state of repair and maintenance so as to permit them to be kept in a clean, sanitary and safe condition. 
(4)  Rainwater drainage. All rainwater shall be so drained and conveyed from every roof so as not to cause dampness in the walls, ceilings or floors of any room or space. 
(5)  Protection of exterior surfaces. All exterior wood or metal surfaces and gutters shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by paint or other approved protective coating applied in a workmanlike manner. 
(6)  Stairways and porches. Every inside or outside stairway and appurtenance thereto shall be kept in sound condition and in a good state of maintenance and repair. 
(7)  Public hallways and exits. 
a.  All public hallways and stairs required as exits shall be maintained free of obstructions and in compliance with the requirements of the building code. 
b.  All exit stairways extending to the basement shall be separated from the basement with a metal or 13/4-inch solid wood door or approved fire door as required by the building commissioner. 
(8)  Maintenance of plumbing. Every plumbing fixture, water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in a sanitary working condition, free from defects and obstructions. 
(9)  Toilet and bathroom floor surface. Every water closet compartment, bathroom or restroom floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water, and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(10)  Heating facilities. Every building shall have heating facilities which are properly installed and maintained in a safe and good working condition and are capable of safely and adequately heating all occupiable rooms to the temperature required in section 7-249. 
(11)  Water heater. Every building shall have water heating facilities capable of supplying hot water of not less than 120 degrees to each toilet room or restroom in the building. 
(12)  Electrical facilities. All electrical wiring, fixtures and receptacles shall be maintained in a safe condition and in compliance with the electrical code. All existing electrical panels shall be adequate to safely provide fusing for the building circuits. 
(Code 1973, § 6-180) 
Sec. 7-255. - Light and ventilation. 
    Light and ventilation in restrooms and toilet rooms shall meet the requirements of the building code. 
(Code 1973, § 6-181) 
Sec. 7-256. - Accessory structures and yard areas. 
    All accessory buildings and structures including retaining walls, fences and planting boxes shall be maintained in a good state of repair. 
(Code 1973, § 6-182) 
Sec. 7-257. - Written notice. 
    Whenever the building commissioner determines that there has been a violation of any provision of this article, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the persons responsible therefor, as provided in this section. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing. 
(2)  State the violations or the conditions to be rectified. 
(3)  Allow a reasonable specified time for the performance of any act it requires. 
(4)  Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case may require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent or upon such occupant if a copy thereof is served upon him personally; or if a copy thereof is sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address; or if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure or premises affected by the notice. 
(Code 1973, § 6-183) 
Sec. 7-258. - Fees. 
(a)  A fee of $100.00 shall be paid to the city and shall accompany each request for inspection of a nonresidential building or portion thereof having a floor area of 1,500 sq. ft. or less. Buildings having a floor area in excess of 1,500 sq. ft. shall pay, in addition to the base fee of $100.00, an additional amount determined by multiplying the square footage in excess of 1,500 sq. ft by $0.02. 
(b)  The fee for an occupancy permit shall be $15.00 for each nonresidential building, or portion thereof, to be occupied. 
(Code 1973, § 6-185; Ord. No. 2710, § 1, 11-23-98; Ord. No. 07-10, § 1, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 7-259. - Penalty. 
    Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this article or any person found guilty of aiding or assisting in any violation of this article shall be subject to the penalty provided for in section 1-6 of this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 6-184) 
Secs. 7-260-7-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINER PERMIT 

Sec. 7-300. - Definition. 
    A storage container is a fully enclosed and securable single unit body for the temporary storage of equipment, product, raw materials, fixtures, etc., similar in function and design to a containerized shipping unit, typically constructed of metal, without running gear or other permanently attached equipment allowing movement from place to place, and intended for temporary use to alleviate short term storage needs. This definition is not intended to include trailers or other similar items. 
(Ord. No. 2511, § 1, 3-25-96) 
Sec. 7-301. - Purpose. 
    The purpose in establishing these regulations is to acknowledge that business in Ballwin periodically encounter circumstances that require temporary expansion of their on-site storage facilities, for a limited period of time, due to an unanticipated or annual upturn in operations. This article is intended to allow a means for these businesses to temporarily expand their storage needs without having to undergo the prohibitive cost of a permanent addition. This will allow business to stay within Ballwin when they might otherwise have to relocate to a different community. 
(Ord. No. 2511, § 1, 3-25-96) 
Sec. 7-302. - Permit required. 
    No person shall set, drop, construct, erect or otherwise cause to be placed any storage container within the city without first having secured a permit therefor from the building commissioner and paid the required fee. 
(Ord. No. 2511, § 1, 3-25-96) 
Sec. 7-303. - Permit duration. 
    Storage container permits shall be valid for a maximum period of 90 days from the date of issuance. A renewal, for one additional 90-day period, may be obtained via application and payment of an additional fee. Only one permit and one renewal shall be issued per business within a one-year period. This period shall commence on the effective date of the issuance of the storage container permit. Additional units, up to the maximum allowed per business, may be added to an existing permit. The time for the additional units shall expire on the expiration date of the permit issued for the original units(s). Such additional units may be renewed in accordance with the renewal provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2511, § 1, 3-25-96) 
Sec. 7-304. - Permit fee. 
    The fee for a temporary storage container permit shall be $150.00 per container and shall be assessed on containers originally permitted and for any containers subsequently added to the permit regardless of the time the added containers will be in place. The renewal fee shall be the same. 
(Ord. No. 2511, § 1, 3-25-96) 
Sec. 7-305. - Eligibility. 
    Temporary storage container permits may only be issued to business licensed in Ballwin. 
(Ord. No. 2511, § 1, 3-25-96) 
Sec. 7-306. - Containers per business. 
    Temporary storage containers will be permitted at the rate of one container per 10,000 square feet of gross floor area of the business requesting the permit. Fractions of .50 or more will be rounded to the next higher unit. In no case will the number of containers per plaza or other multiple tenant facility exceed the maximum number allowed based upon the gross floor area of the multiple tenant facility. 
(Ord. No. 2511, § 1, 3-25-96) 
Sec. 7-307. - Special development plans. 
    Due to the temporary nature of the placement of temporary storage containers, permits may be issued without an amendment to a site development plan associated with a special use exception or other special development review procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2511, § 1, 3-25-96) 
Sec. 7-308. - Location limits. 
    Temporary storage containers must comply with the following locational criteria: 
A.  Shall not block the visibility or create a dangerous visibility problem for vehicular or non-vehicular traffic. 
B.  Shall not be placed so as to create an area that is secluded or cannot be observed from patrolling police vehicles or by customers, employees, neighbors, etc. 
C.  Shall not be placed within any designated front or side yard or closer to a public or private roadway than the required building line of the zoning district. 
D.  Shall not block or restrict emergency, delivery or other vehicle circulation. 
E.  Shall not infringe or otherwise reduce the width of any driveway required by ordinance or designated on any approved site development plan. 
F.  Adhere to the minimum setback requirements for main buildings within the zoning district. 
G.  Be allowed only in the C-1 and S-1 zoning districts. 
H.  Shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet from any building. 
(Ord. No. 2511, § 1, 3-25-96) 
Sec. 7-309. - Size limits. 
    Temporary storage containers may not exceed the following maximum exterior dimension criteria: 
A.  Length-45 feet 
B.  Width-Ten feet 
C.  Height-12 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2511, § 1, 3-25-96) 
Sec. 7-310. - Occupancy/storage use. 
A.  Petitioners shall be required to disclose the nature and condition of all materials intended to be stored within any temporary storage container. 
B.  No hazardous, flammable, explosive, corrosive or biologically infectious or contagious materials shall be stored within any temporary storage container. 
C.  No live animals or plants shall be stored within any such container. 
D.  No trash, garbage or refuse shall be stored within or allowed to accumulate around any temporary storage container. 
E.  No temporary storage container shall be used to house any business activity other than storage. 
F.  No individual may work or live in or from a temporary storage container. 
G.  Nothing may be stacked or stored on top on any temporary storage container. 
(Ord. No. 2511, § 1, 3-25-96) 
Sec. 7-311. - Container condition. 
    All temporary storage containers shall meet the following minimum condition requirements and shall be inspected by the Ballwin Building Commissioner and certified as meeting these requirements within 30 days of placement. Failure of the container to meet this certification will result in enforcement in accordance with the procedures established in the Ballwin Housing Code. 
A.  All containers shall be structurally sound, free of corrosion, rust, rot, holes, dents, leaks, or other deterioration. 
B.  No container shall bear any sign, label, logo or other advertising or identification without such being approved and permitted in accordance with the Ballwin sign code. 
C.  All containers shall be painted or otherwise decorated in a manner and form consistent with the architectural character of the adjoining building faces and surrounding neighborhood. 
D.  All containers shall be securable and kept secure at all times. 
E.  All containers shall be kept free of graffiti, posters, bills, accumulated solid waste, or other blighting or deteriorating impacts. 
(Ord. No. 2511, § 1, 3-25-96) 
Sec. 7-312. - Placement. 
    All temporary storage containers shall be placed and maintained at the approved location in accordance with the following criteria: 
A.  All containers must be properly held in place or otherwise secured in accordance with the requirements of the Ballwin Building Code to prevent shifting, rolling or other movement. 
B.  A building permit must be obtained from Ballwin for the placement of each individual container to assure that it is inspected and properly held in place. 
C.  Utility services must be provided according to code and the building permits. Overhead service laterals will be permitted up to a maximum distance of 25 feet. Longer runs must be installed under ground. Extension cords or other temporary connections may not be used to provide utility services. 
D.  Containers must be placed on reasonably flat surfaces and upon materials sufficient to bear the weight of the container, delivery vehicle and anticipated contents. 
E.  Container doors must face away from any building by a minimum of 90 degrees or be a minimum of 30 feet from a building on the door side of the container. In all cases containers shall be no closer to the main building than ten feet. 
F.  An open area with at least a 30-foot radius must be maintained in front of the door(s) of the container. 
G.  The area of a temporary storage container must be lighted to deter theft and provide safety for users. 
(Ord. No. 2511, § 1, 3-25-96; Ord. No. 2531, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 7-313. - Removal. 
    All temporary storage containers shall be removed upon the expiration of the permit issued pursuant to this code or upon the receipt of a notice to remove. A notice to remove may be issued by the building commissioner for failure to meet or adhere to the minimum provisions of this article. Enforcement of a notice to remove shall follow the procedures set forth in chapter 13, housing, article II, inspections and certificates of the Ballwin Housing Code. 
(Ord. No. 2511, § 1, 3-25-96) 
Sec. 7-314. - Storage containers in residential zoning districts. 
    Portable moving and storage, on-site movable storage container, or mini-storage and relocation devices, a/k/a PODS, are permitted in a residential zoning districts under the provisions of this section. Not more than one such device shall be allowed per residential lot. Devices shall not have dimensions that exceed 16 feet by eight feet by eight feet (16' x 8' x 8'). In no instance shall the device be placed in the public right of way or easements. The use of mini-storage and relocation devices shall not exceed 30 days, unless due cause for an extension of time can be demonstrated. For good cause shown, one 30-day extension may be granted. One storage box may be allowed in conjunction with a building or demolition permit during the valid time of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 05-09, § 1, 2-28-05) 
Chapter 7.5 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 01-32, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 9, 2001 repealed the former ch. 7.5, §§ 7.5-26-7.5-40, and enacted a new ch. 7.5 as set out herein. The former ch. 7.5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2478, §§ 1-14, adopted Nov. 13, 1995; Ord. No. 2542, § 1, adopted Aug. 26, 1996. 
Cross reference- Basic cable television rates, § 14-321 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.5-1. - Declaration of findings. 
    The city hereby declares as a legislative finding that the rights-of-way within the City of Ballwin: 
(1)  Are a unique and physically limited resource; 
(2)  Are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property in the city; and 
(3)  Are intended for public uses and must be managed and controlled consistent with that intent; and can be partially occupied by the facilities of utilities and public service entities, to the enhancement of the health, welfare, and general economic well being of the city and its citizens; and require adoption of the specific additional regulations established by this code to ensure coordination of users, maximize available space, reduce maintenance and costs to the public, and facilitate entry of a maximum number of providers of cable, communications, and other services in the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-2. - Title. 
    This chapter may be referred to and cited as the "Communications and Cable Services Code" or herein as the "code" of the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-3. - Applicability. 
    The requirements of this code shall apply to the full extent of the terms herein and shall be limited in scope or application only to the extent as may be required by applicable federal or state law, including such changes in applicable law as may be hereinafter enacted. No provisions of this code shall be disregarded pursuant to this section except on express application to and determination by the city to such effect based on the specific factual circumstances demonstrated. The provisions of this code shall be deemed incorporated in each franchise or agreement granted. Nothing in this code shall be interpreted to unilaterally deprive any person of any rights or obligations imposed by any binding and existing valid franchise or contract during the term thereof, and shall impose obligations on any such person additional to those included in such franchise or contract only to the extent permitted by law; provided that the failure of the city to enforce any provision herein or the failure of any person to comply with any provision herein shall not be a waiver of the city's right to enforce such provisions nor shall it in any way constitute evidence or agreement by the city that such person has a valid existing franchise. The provisions of this code shall apply irrespective of whether a provider is determined to be operating pursuant to a valid franchise or agreement. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-4. - Preservation of police power authority. 
    Any rights granted pursuant to this code and pursuant to any franchise or agreement authorized hereunder are subject to the authority of the city to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety, and welfare of the public. Providers shall be subject to and comply with all applicable laws enacted by the city pursuant to its statutory powers, to the extent not in conflict with Missouri or federal law. Nothing in this code shall be deemed to waive a right, if any, that any party may have to seek judicial or regulatory review as to the provisions herein or as to actions of the parties under applicable federal, state, or local law currently in effect or as may hereinafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-5. - Public inspection of records. 
    Certain information required to be filed with the city pursuant to this code is subject to inspection and copying by the public pursuant to the provisions of the Missouri Open Records Act, R.S.Mo. § 610.010 et seq. Notwithstanding any ordinance or provision to the contrary, the city may disclose any proposed or existing facilities locations of provider as deemed in the public interest and as may be established by city policy establishing requirements for notification and/or joint installation of facilities. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-6. - Indemnification. 
    As a condition of use of the rights-of-way, provider at its sole cost and expense, shall indemnify, protect, defend (with counsel acceptable to the city) and hold harmless the city, its elected officials, officers, employees, and agents, from and against any and all claims, demands, losses, damages, liabilities, fines, charges, penalties, administrative and judicial proceedings and orders, judgments, remedial actions of any kind, and all costs and expenses of any kind, including, without limitation, reasonable attorney's fees and costs of defense arising, directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, out of the fact that the city approved an agreement or franchise with provider, the rights granted to provider, or the activities performed, or failed to be performed, by provider under the agreement or use of the rights-of-way, or otherwise, except to the extent arising from or caused by the sole or gross negligence or willful misconduct of the city, its elected officials, officers, employees, agents or contractors. This indemnification shall survive the expiration or termination of any agreement or use of the rights-of-way for a period of five years after the effective date of expiration or termination. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-7. - Compliance with laws. 
    In performing activities and exercising its rights and obligations under any agreement or franchise, the provider shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, regulations and policies, including, but not limited to, all laws, ordinances, regulations and policies relating to construction and use of public property. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-8. - Enforcement; attorneys' fees. 
    The city shall be entitled to enforce this code and any agreement or franchise through all remedies lawfully available, and provider shall pay city its costs of enforcement, including reasonable attorneys' fees in the event that provider is determined judicially to have violated the terms of this code or any agreement or franchise. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-9. - Relationship of the parties. 
    Under no circumstances shall any agreement or franchise authorized by this code be construed to create any relationship of agency, partnership, joint venture, or employment between the parties. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-10. - Defined terms. 
    For purposes of this code, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the single number include the plural number, and words in the plural number include the singular. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
    Access facilities means: 
(1)  Channel capacity designated for public, educational or governmental access use; and 
(2)  The facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity. 
    Affiliate means each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the licensee; provided that affiliate shall in no event mean any limited partner or shareholder holding an interest of less than 15 percent of such licensee, or any creditor of such licensee solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliate by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management, or common control with, such licensee. 
    Agreement means a communications rights-of-way use agreement authorized herein and executed by the city and licensee. 
    Antenna means any device that transmits and/or receives radio waves for voice, data or video communications purposes including, but not limited to: television, AM/FM radio, microwave, cellular telephone and similar forms of communications. A combination of panels, boxes, or other antenna physically connected and designed in conjunction to receive signals at one location in the system shall be considered one antenna. 
    Basic cable service means any cable service tier that includes the lawful retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public, educational, and governmental access programming required by this chapter to be carried on the basic tier. Basic cable service as defined herein shall be consistent with 47 U.S.C. § 543(b)(7) (1997). 
    Cable act means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-549, (codified at 47 U.S.C. §§ 521-611 (1982 & Supp. V. 1987) as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-104 (1996) as it may, from time to time, be amended. 
    Cable services means: 
(1)  The one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming, or (ii) other programming service; and 
(2)  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service; 
    Cable Internet services means the offering of direct access by a cable license to the international computer network of both federal and non-federal interoperable packet switched data networks to customers for a fee. For purposes of an agreement, cable Internet service shall mean the direct access to the Internet provided to customers over the cable system and shall include the provision of incidental services or revenues that are required by law to be treated under the same regulation as such direct access service. Except as may be otherwise required by applicable law or a binding provision of a franchise issued by the city prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this code derives (April 9, 2001), a provider receiving revenue from cable Internet service shall include such revenue in the calculation of gross receipts from communications services and shall be required to have a communications agreement with the city governing the use of the rights-of-way for such purposes. Except as may lawfully be required by the city or otherwise dictated by applicable law, all agreements or franchises granted hereinafter shall authorize use of the rights-of-way for cable Internet service only pursuant to a communications use agreement. All prior payments to the city attributable to such cable Internet service under a cable franchise shall be irrefutably deemed to be lawful compensation for the past use prospectively paid under any new communications agreement, irrespective of any additional rates or terms required for any future use under any new communications agreement. 
    Cable system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the franchise area, but such term does not include: 
(1)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
(2)  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way; or 
(3)  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. §§ 201-226, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 541(c)) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; 
(4)  An open video system that complies with Section 653 of the Cable Act; or 
(5)  Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
    Capital costs means costs associated with the purchase of assets, products or other resources that will provide service for more than one year, but shall not have any meaning inconsistent with generally accepted accounting principles. 
    Channel means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of carrying one industry standard video signal, in either analog or digital form. At the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this code derives, analog standard channel is defined as 6 MHz. 
    City or grantor means the City of Ballwin, Missouri. 
    City engineer means the city engineer, director of public works, or other designated city official. 
    Code means this "Communications and Cable Services Code" and all provisions therein established by this chapter. 
    Collocation means the shared use of facilities, including, but not limited to, the placement of conduit owned by more than one rights-of-way user in the same trench or boring and the placement of equipment owned by more than one user in the same or connected conduit. Collocation does not include interconnection of facilities or the sale or purchase of capacity (whether bundled or unbundled). 
    Communications means the transmission via the facilities, in whole or in part, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing (e.g., data, video, voice), without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received, regardless of the statutory or regulatory scheme to which such transmissions may be subject. 
    Communications service means the transmission via facilities, in whole or in part, of any writings, signs, signals, pictures, sounds or other forms of intelligence through wire, wireless or other means, including, but not limited to, any "telecommunications service," "enhanced service," "information service," or "Internet service" and "cable Internet service," as such terms are now, or may in the future be, defined under federal law, and including all instrumentalities, facilities, conduit, apparatus ("communications facilities"), and services (among other things, the receipt, forwarding, and delivery of telecommunications) incidental to or designed to directly or indirectly facilitate or accept such transmission. This term does not include "cable service," but these services shall be subject to separate cable franchising requirements and application. 
    Complaint means any oral, written or electronic inquiry, allegation, or assertion made by a person regarding cable service or cable system operations. 
    Converter means an electronic device that converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber and, through the use of an appropriate channel selector, permits a cable subscriber to view all authorized cable subscriber signals delivered at designated converter dial locations. Converters include all devices furnished to the subscriber and owned by the cable provider. 
    Direct incremental costs means the costs actually incurred by a cable provider in meeting an obligation under its franchise which the provider would not otherwise have incurred in order to either operate and conduct the business of its cable system or meet another obligation of the franchise. 
    Drop means the cable or cables that connect the ground block on the cable subscriber's property to the nearest feasible point on the cable system in order to receive cable service. 
    Facilities means any portion of a system located in, along, over, upon, under, or through the rights-of-way. 
    Franchise means the rights and obligations extended by the city to a person to own, lease, construct, maintain, or operate a cable system in the rights-of-way within the franchise area for the purpose of providing cable services. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include: (i) any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city required by the ordinances and laws of the city, including the provision of communications services; (ii) any permit, agreement, or authorization required in connection with operations in the rights-of-way including, without limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits, or other structures, whether owned by the city or a private entity, or for excavating or performing other work in or along the rights-of-way. 
    Franchise fee means any tax, fee, or assessment of any kind imposed by the city or other governmental entity on a cable service provider or its cable subscribers, or both, solely because of their status and activities as such, pursuant to article 3 of this chapter. The term "franchise fee" does not include: (i) any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their cable services but not including a tax, fee, or assessment that is unduly discriminatory against cable service providers or cable subscribers); (ii) capital costs that are required by a cable franchise to be incurred by a grantee for public, educational or governmental ("PEG") access facilities; (iii) requirements or charges incidental to the award or enforcement of a cable franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; (iv) any permit fee or other fee imposed under any valid right-of-way ordinance; or (v) any fee imposed under Title 17 of the United States Code. 
    Governing body means the legislative body of the city. 
    Grantee means a person who is granted a cable franchise and that person's agents, employees, lawful successors, transferees, or assignees. 
    Gross receipts means all revenues received directly or indirectly by a licensee or its affiliates for communications services originating, terminating or otherwise rendered within the corporate limits of the city and all revenue derived from the use of the communications services facilities. Except to the extent as may be prohibited by law, such "gross receipts" shall specifically include, but shall not be limited to, all revenue of the licensee derived from the following: 
(1)  Recurring local exchange service revenues for business and residence which include basic telephone exchange service, touch tone, custom calling services and measured local calls; 
(2)  Recurring local exchange service revenues for public, semi-public and private coin; 
(3)  Local directory assistance (411); 
(4)  Line status verification/busy interrupt; 
(5)  Local operator assistance; 
(6)  Information delivery service; 
(7)  Cellular and other wireless communication services revenue; provided that such revenues derive from a system having antennae or other parts of the mobile system are physically located within the rights-of-way; 
(8)  Nonrecurring local exchange service revenue which shall include customer service for installation of lines, reconnection of service and charge for duplicate telephone bills; 
(9)  Revenue received by the licensee from reseller service providers (except for revenues from reseller service providers that have a separate enforceable agreement with the city providing for payment of gross receipts of that reseller service provider); 
(10)  Internet access charges or services and including all high-speed and traditional subscriber line charges or services (and including cable Internet service, unless such service revenues are validly required to be included and are collected as gross revenues in a cable agreement between licensee and the city); 
(11)  Revenue from rent, physical use, collocation, or sale of the facilities, network elements, or a portion thereof for any purpose; 
(12)  Late charges or interest received on gross receipts; 
(13)  Any portion of the use fees collected by licensee from any person; 
(14)  All other applicable revenues not listed herein. 
"Gross receipts" shall not include uncollectable debt, any federal, state or local taxes separately stated on a customer's bill. "Gross receipts" shall not include revenues from affiliates where the affiliates have a separate enforceable agreement with the city providing for payment of such affiliate gross receipts or where the affiliate does not utilize, transmit communications through, or connect to any part of the facilities. In the event a licensee receives revenues for communications services or other activities within and without the city of which the specific portion attributed to operations in the city cannot be directly determined ("unallocated revenues"), "gross receipts" with respect to such revenues shall mean the portion thereof derived by multiplying such revenues by a fraction, the numerator of which is the gross receipts from the city and the denominator of which is the total revenues of licensee attributable from the area generating such unallocated revenues. All revenue from or relating to or connected with communication services deriving from any billing address within the city shall be presumed to be gross receipts of licensee, unless demonstrated in writing to the contrary as to each such revenue. 
    Gross revenues means any revenue actually received by a grantee, or by any other entity that is a cable operator on a grantee's cable system including the grantee's affiliates, from the operation of the grantee's cable system to provide cable services. By way of illustration and not limitation, this definition would include revenue derived from pay cable fees, installation and reconnection fees, leased channel access fees; converter rentals; franchise fees collected from subscribers; revenue from cable Internet service (if it is not required to be included in the gross receipts of a separate binding agreement with the city as prescribed in this code); revenue from home shopping to the extent conducted through a cable service; all cable service lease payments from the cable system; payments or other consideration received by the grantee from programmers for carriage of programming on the cable system and accounted for as revenue under generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"); advertising revenues; revenues from data transmissions to the extent these transmissions are considered cable services under federal law; payments or other consideration received by the grantee for the use of the cable system to provide cable service and accounted for as revenue under GAAP. Gross revenues shall include revenue received by any entity other than the grantee where necessary to prevent evasion or avoidance of the obligations under this code or a franchise to pay the applicable cable franchise fees. Revenues which are not directly attributable to specific cable subscribers, including, but not limited to, leased access fees, advertising revenues, and home shopping commissions, shall be allocated among the franchising jurisdictions served by the grantee's cable system on a per subscriber or other equitable basis measured in a consistent manner from period to period. Gross revenues shall not include (i) to the extent consistent with GAAP, bad debt; provided, however, that all or part of any such bad debt that is written off but subsequently collected shall be included in gross revenues in the period collected; (ii) amounts collected from cable subscribers for public, educational and governmental access, provided, however, this exclusion does not limit a grantee's ability to pass through franchise related costs to the extent allowed by applicable law; or (iii) any taxes on cable services furnished by grantee which are imposed directly upon any subscriber or user by the state, city or other governmental unit and which are collected by grantee on behalf of said governmental unit. 
    Institutional network or I-net means a communication network which is constructed or operated by grantee and which is generally available only to cable subscribers who are not residential subscribers. The I-net shall consist of capacity, fibers or both, from both within the primary cable network and/or separately constructed networks that may be dedicated to governmental, educational and other publicly funded users for two-way, broadband communications. The I-net includes all equipment and maintenance of equipment required to make the capacity available, including, but not limited to, fiber and coaxial cable, cable modems, switching, routing, transmitting and receiving necessary for the use of the network as set out in the individual cable franchise. 
    Institutional network services means the provision of an I-net by a cable system operator to governmental, educational and other non-profit, publicly funded users, as determined by the city, pursuant to the terms of its franchise for non-commercial applications including, but not limited to, two-way dedicated voice, video, data and telephony channels connecting and interconnecting user facilities. 
    Licensee means the party subject to a communications rights-of-way agreement, or its successor, assigns, or transferee. 
    Linear foot means the length in feet of cable, wire, fiber, conduit or other linear facilities. Facilities that are physically connected, wrapped, or lashed as a single cable, conduit or bundle of cables or conduit shall be considered a single facility for purposes of calculating each linear foot, provided that each conduit or bundle of conduit up to and including four inches in exterior diameter shall constitute a separate facility for calculating linear feet. Conduit having fiber optic or other cable or wire installed within it shall not be considered separate facilities but shall be considered part of the single "conduit" or bundle for purposes of calculating linear feet. Each provider shall be subject to a separate linear foot charge for facilities used by provider and subject to this code. 
    Normal business hours means those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, normal business hours must include some evening hours, at least one night per week, and some weekend hours. 
    Normal operating conditions means those cable services or conditions that are within the control of a cable system franchise grantee. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions; pay-per-view events; rate increases; regular peak or seasonal demand periods; and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. Those conditions that are not within the control of grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters; civil disturbances; power outages; telephone network outages; vandalism, public works projects for which no advanced notice is given, and severe or unusual weather conditions. 
    Open video services means any video programming services provided to any person by a licensee certified by the FCC to operate an open video system pursuant to Section 47 U.S.C. § 573, as may be amended, regardless of the facilities used. 
    Person means any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, individual, organization, governmental entity or any natural person. 
    Provider means a licensee or grantee or any person required to have a communications service agreement or cable service franchise. 
    Public building means any building owned or for the greater part occupied by the city or other governmental unit. 
    Renewal means a new communications service agreement or cable service franchise granted to an existing provider. 
    Reports means any and all non-trade secret documents and information required to be completed and/or kept or filed by a grantee or licensee on order of the Federal Communications Commission, state or city. In accordance with applicable law, the city shall maintain such information as confidential to the extent that the provider identifies specific information as such. 
    Reseller service provider means a person providing communications or cable service within the city that does not have ownership, possessory interest, or control of identifiable facilities in the rights-of-way, but instead uses the rights-of-way by interconnecting with or using the network elements of another communications service provider utilizing the rights-of-way, and/or by using excess capacity or bandwidth from a facility-based communications service provider. 
    Rights-of-way means the surface and space on, above and below every municipal street, alley, road, highway, lane or city right-of-way dedicated or commonly used now or hereafter for utility purposes and facilities thereon, including, but not limited to, overhead lighting facilities. This term shall not include any county, state, or federal rights-of-way except where controlled or maintained by the city, or as other provided by applicable laws or pursuant to an agreement between the city and any such person or agency. "Rights-of-way" shall not include public property owned or leased by the city and not intended for right-of-way use, including, but not limited to, city hall property or public works facilities. 
    ROW ordinance means the ROW Management Ordinance of the City of Ballwin, Missouri," adopted as Chapter 24 of the Ballwin Code of Ordinances, that regulates, without limitation, the excavation, construction and use of the rights-of-way by all persons. 
    Service interruption means the loss of picture or sound on one or more channels on the cable system. 
    Standard installation means any service installation that can be completed using a drop of 125 feet or less. 
    Subscriber means any person, who or which lawfully elects to subscribe for any purpose to cable service provided by a grantee by means of, or in connection with, the cable system, and whose premises or facilities are physically wired and lawfully activated to receive cable service from grantee's cable system, including persons who receive cable service without charge according to the terms of the code or franchise. 
    System means the cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides, optic fiber, antennae, and any associated converters, equipment, or other facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying or distributing communications to or from locations within the city. 
    Telecommunications act means the Telecommunications Act of 1996 codified at Title 47 of the Unites States Code. 
    Trained representative means employees of a grantee who have the authority and capability while speaking with a cable subscriber to, among other things, answer billing questions, adjust bills, and schedule service and installation calls. 
    Use fee means the fee imposed by the city on licensee for use of the rights-of-way for communications services pursuant to article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-11. - Ratification of existing video franchises. 
(a)  To the extent permitted by the 2007 Video Services Providers Act, the Board of Aldermen of the City of Ballwin, Missouri, hereby ratifies all existing agreements, franchises, Code provisions and ordinances regulating cable television operators and other video service providers, including the imposition of a franchise fee of five percent imposed on the gross revenues of all such providers and further declares that such agreements, franchises and ordinances shall continue in full force and effect until expiration as provided therein or until pre-empted by the issuance of video service authorizations by the Missouri Public Service Commission or otherwise by law, but only to the extent of said pre-emption. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to provide video services, as defined in RSMo 67.2677, within the city without an agreement, franchise or ordinance approved by the city or a video service authorization issued by the Missouri Public Service Commission. 
(Ord. No. 11-61, § 1, 11-28-11) 
Secs. 7.5-12-7.5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES 

Sec. 7.5-31. - Unlawful to operate without an agreement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, operate, own or maintain communications facilities or to provide communications services by use of facilities in the rights-of-way in the city without a valid, unexpired rights-of-way use agreement from the city, unless otherwise specifically authorized under applicable federal or state law, or otherwise provided by ordinance. Unless otherwise provided hereinafter by city ordinance, a reseller service provider shall not be required to obtain an agreement. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-32. - Agreements nonexclusive. 
    The authority granted by the city in any agreement shall be for nonexclusive use of the rights-of-way. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional agreements or other rights to use the rights-of-way for any purpose and to any other person, including itself, as it deems appropriate, subject to all applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-33. - Nature of rights granted by any agreement. 
    Agreements shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in the rights-of-way, and shall give only the right to occupy rights-of-way, for the purposes and for the period stated in this code and as may be further limited by the agreement. No agreement shall grant the right to use facilities owned or controlled by the city or a third-party, without the consent of such party, nor shall it excuse licensee from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before locating on the facilities controlled or owned by the city or a third party. All agreements shall be deemed to incorporate and be limited by the provisions of this code and shall create rights solely applicable to licensee. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-34. - Application and application fee required. 
    Any person seeking to use the rights-of-way for any communications service, or seeking renewal of an existing agreement, shall submit a completed application on such form as approved by the city. Such application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee in an amount as may be established by the city, to compensate the city and defray in whole or part the city's costs in review, negotiation and administration of any application filed under this code. On request of the city, the applicant shall provide such additional information that is deemed necessary or appropriate to the city in reviewing the application and proposed use of the rights-of-way. Licensee shall be responsible for payment of any reasonable costs incurred by city in processing these applications or in adapting or executing the agreement for use by licensee to the extent such costs exceed the application fees paid. The city may provide for the waiver of these application fees and/or of use fees for use of the rights-of-way by other governmental entities where such waiver is deemed by the city to be lawful and in the public interest. The information provided by licensee shall be certified as true and correct and licensee shall be responsible to certify to the city any material changes to the information provided in such completed application during the term of any agreement. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-35. - Standard for approval or renewal of agreements. 
    The city shall authorize agreements or renewals to any eligible licensee for the right and privilege to construct, operate, and maintain facilities in, through and along the city's rights-of-way for the purposes of supplying communications services on a nonexclusive basis within the city, subject, however, to the standards, terms and conditions herein set forth within this code, which shall be deemed incorporated therein, and any special conditions as may be provided for in the agreement. All licensees shall be required to obtain and maintain any necessary and lawful permit, license certification, grant, registration or any other authorization required by any appropriate governmental entity, including, but not limited to, the city, the FCC or the Missouri Public Service Commission. In reviewing an application, the city may consider prior conduct of the licensee in performance of its obligations or compliance with the city's ordinances in the past, or the existence of any outstanding violations or deficiencies. The city may deny or condition any agreement where the proposed use would interfere with the public use of the rights-of-way or otherwise conflict with the legitimate public interests of the city or as otherwise provided by law. The city may establish standard agreements setting forth the minimum requirements for all licensees. Applications for agreements may be approved, denied, or approved with conditions consistent with applicable requirements of the Telecommunications Act or other applicable requirements as may be necessary to fulfill the requirements and objectives of this code. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-36. - Cable service and open video systems (OVS); separate franchise or agreement required. 
    An agreement for communications service shall not provide licensee the right to provide cable service as a cable operator (as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 522 (5)) within the city. Upon licensee's request for a franchise to provide cable service as a cable operator (as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 522(5)) within the city, the city shall timely negotiate such cable television services franchise in good faith with licensee. A communications services agreement shall also not permit licensee to operate an open video system, except where otherwise expressly provided in the agreement or by separate agreement, and licensee remits the maximum fees permitted by 47 U.S.C. § 573(c)(2)(B) and where licensee otherwise complies with FCC regulations promulgated pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 573. Absent such applicable agreement from the city, licensee shall be prohibited from offering OVS service and any such service shall be considered a breach of the agreement. Unless otherwise specified, any such new agreement or amendment to an agreement shall obligate licensee to pay a use fee of five percent on all gross revenues directly or indirectly attributable to the provision of OVS service within the city. The city may, at its option, negotiate with licensee to exchange all or a part of the use fees for capacity or facilities used for city or other public purposes. Any such exchange shall be negotiated based on the licensee's cost of providing capacity or facilities to the city, and shall be credited towards the calculation of applicable use fees. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-37. - Use of rights-of-way; police powers; licensee's use subordinate. 
    The licensee shall construct and maintain its facilities in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, including all permit requirements, and fee payments, and all other city codes and ordinances in effect as of the date of an agreement or hereinafter adopted to the extent not in contravention of state or federal law. The grant of an agreement does not in any way impact the continuing authority of the city through the proper exercise of its home rule or statutory powers to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public. The city makes no express or implied representation or warranty regarding its rights to authorize the installation or construction of facilities on any particular segment of rights-of-way. The burden and responsibility for making all such determinations in advance of construction or installation shall be entirely upon the licensee. The use of the rights-of-way authorized by any agreement shall in all matters be subordinate to the city's use and rights therein. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-38. - Term. 
    An agreement shall be effective for a term of five years from its effective date, unless the city reasonably determines that a shorter term is warranted under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-39. - Use fees. 
    Licensee shall pay to the city as monthly compensation for the use of the rights-of-way pursuant to an executed agreement a use fee equal to five percent of monthly gross receipts, but in no event shall the monthly use fee be less than the sum of: 
$5,000.00 for the first mile of linear facilities, or part thereof, plus $1.90 per linear foot thereafter up to a monthly charge under this subsection of $30,000.00, and 
$65.00 for each antenna in the rights-of-way, but not less than $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-40. - Bundled services. 
    To the extent licensee markets "bundled" services, including combinations of services that may be subject to an agreement and also a cable services franchise, licensee shall fairly reflect to the city an appropriate and reasonable division of services among the various services offered based on the actual value of each separate service. Whether or not licensee separates services on a subscriber's bill, it will provide to the city the amounts upon which it will pay the communications services use fee and any applicable taxes or fees based on the provision of communications service, and the amounts upon which it will pay the franchise fee. Should licensee engage in billing practices that, in the determination of the city, do not fairly reflect an appropriate split of communications services and cable services the city will notify licensee in writing of its determination. The parties will meet and discuss in good faith whether the billing practices result in an unfair payment of fees to the city. If the parties do not agree on an appropriate method of determining which charges are subject to communications services use fees and which are subject to the franchise fee, the parties may subject the dispute to arbitration, or may resort to other methods of dispute resolution, including litigation. Fees or taxes which are not paid on the appropriate division of bundled services receipts, when ultimately paid, will be subject to all interest and penalties provided by the applicable agreements. If licensee holds a cable service franchise, any fee that could be lawfully attributed to gross receipts or alternatively "gross revenues" under this code shall be deemed to be subject to the higher fee. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-41. - Timing of payment of use fees. 
    Unless otherwise agreed to in writing, all use fees shall be due and payable on a monthly basis within 60 calendar days of the close of each month for which the payment applies (the "due date"). 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-42. - Interest on late payments and under payments. 
    If any use fee, or any portion thereof, is not postmarked or delivered on or before the due date, interest thereon shall accrue from the due date until received, at the rate of 11/2 percent per month, unless such other maximum rate is established by law. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-43. - Fee statement. 
    Each use fee payment shall be accompanied by a statement showing the manner in which the use fee was calculated and in such format as my be required by the city. If any fee statement is determined to understate the fee owed, then such additional amount owed shall be made with a corrected statement, including interest on said amount as provided herein. Within 90 calendar days following the end of the calendar year, each licensee shall submit a statement, certified as true, setting forth its gross revenues, the amount of linear foot and antennae within the facilities, and describing what revenues or receipts (including each type of services) were included and excluded in the fee calculations for the calendar year, and describing any adjustments made in determining the use fee. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-44. - No accord and satisfaction. 
    No acceptance by the city of any use fee shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall acceptance of any use fee payment be construed as a release of any claim of the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-45. - Maintain records. 
    Licensee shall at all times maintain complete and accurate books of account and records of the business, ownership, and operations of the licensee with respect to the system in a manner that allows the city to determine whether the licensee has properly calculated its use fee in compliance with this chapter. Should the city reasonably determine that the records are not being maintained in such manner, the licensee shall correct the manner in which the books and/or records are maintained so that the licensee comes into compliance with this section. All financial books and records which are maintained in accordance with FCC regulations and the regulations of any governmental entity that regulates utilities in Missouri, and generally accepted accounting principles shall be deemed to be acceptable under this section. Such books and records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years. The failure to provide information or maintain records as required herein shall be grounds for forfeiture or revocation of an agreement. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-46. - Right of inspection. 
    The city, or a third party designated by the city for the purposes of determining compliance with this section, shall have the right to inspect, examine, and copy records at a location acceptable to the city during normal business hours and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this code, whether the records are held by the licensee or any other person that collects or receives funds related to the use fee obligations or the provision of communications services over a licensee's communications system in the city. Licensee shall also provide reasonable access to records necessary to verify compliance with the terms of the agreement. The franchisee or licensee shall pay the city's audit expenses, costs, or travel charges, including an advance payment of such costs estimated by the city, provided that the frequency of such audits shall not exceed one per year. In addition to the annual audit, a franchisee or licensee shall make such records available for review upon reasonable notice by the city, provided that the city agrees to bear its own costs for any such additional review of records. In addition to other relevant information, the city reserves the right to request information showing circuit account ID, billing account ID, city of origination, city of termination within Greater St. Louis area, monthly recurring revenue, non-recurring revenue, turn-up dates, Common Language Location Identifier (CLLI) codes for all Greater St. Louis customers, names of CLEC's, resellers or IXC's leasing bandwidth, facilities mileage figures necessary to substantiate licensee license fee calculations. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-47. - Description of service. 
    Franchisee shall on an annual basis provide the city with a description of new local communications services offered within the city during the prior six-month period. The first annual report shall also provide a listing of each separate type of service or bundled service offered during the initial annual period. Any individual or bundled service or item for which the provider has a separate charge shall be considered a separate service under this section. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-48. - Payment of taxes; use fee not a tax. 
    The use fees required herein shall be in addition to, not in lieu of, all taxes, charges, assessments, licenses, fees and impositions otherwise applicable that are or may be imposed by the city, except that licensee, unless hereinafter provided by the city, shall receive a credit in payment of use fees in the amount of any other tax due and paid pursuant to chapter 14 of the City Code. The use fee is compensation for use of the rights-of-way and shall in no way be deemed a tax of any kind. Licensee shall be fully responsible for the payment of all applicable taxes. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-49. - Duty to notify city of resellers. 
    Within 30 days of the licensee carrying any communications of any reseller service provider through licensee's facilities, licensee shall notify the city of the name and address of such reseller service provider, the reseller rates or tariffs to be paid to licensee relating to such reseller, and provide to city any written commitment, if any, as to the payment of use fees for the revenues attributable to such reseller service provider. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-50. - Duty of reseller to provide notice of operation within city; facilities to be subject to franchise or agreement. 
    Prior to providing service within the city or transmitting communications through facilities in the city, a reseller service provider shall provide written notice to the city of the intent to do so, and shall include (1) the certification of the applicable regulatory approval necessary to undertake such service or communications (2) the name of the provider(s) owning the facilities within the city through which the communications shall be transmitted. It shall be unlawful for any provider or reseller service provider not having its own franchise or agreement authorizing such communications to transmit communications for commercial purposes through any facility owned by a provider that does not have a valid franchise or agreement with the city authorizing the use of such facilities. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-51. - Sale or lease of facilities. 
    Except as otherwise may be provided by law or agreement, licensee shall not lease, sell, or otherwise transfer possession or control of the facilities, or any portion thereof, for any purpose to any person that has not obtained a duly issued agreement, or other grant by the city to use the rights-of-way and which includes the authority to use or maintain such leased or transferred facilities. Licensee shall provide the city at least 30 days' prior notice of such intended sale, lease or transfer of possession or control. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-52. - Assignment of agreement. 
    The licensee shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or voluntary sale, or by ordinary sale, consolidation, or otherwise, an agreement or any of the rights or privileges granted by an agreement, without the prior written consent of the city; provided that such transfer may occur without written consent of the city to a wholly owned parent or subsidiary, or between wholly owned subsidiaries, upon 30 days' prior notice to the city. Such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. The city reserves the right to be reimbursed for its reasonable costs relating to a transfer of ownership. Licensee shall not change its name under which it does business with the public without providing at least 30 days' prior notice to the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-53. - Forfeiture of agreement and privilege. 
    In case of failure on the part of the licensee, its successors and assigns, to comply with any of the provisions of this code or an agreement, or if the licensee, its successors and assigns, should do or cause to be done any act or thing prohibited by or in violation of this code or the terms of an agreement, the licensee, its successors and assigns, shall forfeit all rights and privileges permitted by this code and any agreement, and all rights hereunder shall cease, terminate and become null and void, provided that said forfeiture shall not take effect until the city shall carry out the following proceedings: Before the city declares the forfeiture or revocation of an agreement, it shall first serve a written notice upon the company, setting forth in detail the neglect or failure complained of, and the company shall have 30 days thereafter, or such other reasonable period established by the governing body, in which to cure the default by complying with the conditions of an agreement and fully remedying any default or violation. If at the end of such 30-day period the city determines that the conditions have not been complied with, and that the company did not reasonably and in the public interest require more than 30 days to cure the default, the city shall take action by an affirmative vote of the governing body present at the meeting and voting, to terminate the agreement; setting out the grounds upon which said agreement is to be forfeited or revoked. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from invoking any other remedy or from declaring immediate forfeiture where the default is incapable of being cured by licensee, including where such defaults or violations have repeatedly occurred. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Secs. 7.5-54-7.5-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CABLE SERVICES 

Sec. 7.5-71. - Cable franchise requirements. 
(a)  Video services providers. 
(1)  Definitions. The words and phrases used in this subsection (a) shall have the meanings as set forth in RSMo 67.2677 or, if not defined therein, shall have such meanings as established by this Code. 
(2)  Franchise fee. Pursuant to RSMo 67.2689, and as partial compensation for use of the city's public rights-of-way, each video service provider or other person providing cable services or video services within the city shall, to the extent permitted by law, pay to the city a fee of five percent of the gross revenues from such video services provider in the geographic area of the city. Such payment shall be made as required by RSMo 67.2689. The city shall have the right to audit any video service provider as authorized by RSMo 67.2691. Late payments shall accrue interest due to the city compounded monthly at 1.5 percent or such other maximum rate as may be established by law. 
(3)  Customer service requirements. All video service providers providing service within the city shall adopt and comply with the minimum customer service requirements set forth in RSMo 67.2692. Notice or receipt of this section by the video service provider shall be deemed notice of the city invoking such customer service requirements. 
(4)  Rights-of-way regulation; indemnification; permits and compliance with other laws. Video service providers shall comply with the requirements of RSMo 67.2707, 67.2709 and all applicable ordinances and regulations consistent with RSMo 67.1830 to 67.1846, relating to use of the city rights-of-way. Each video service provider shall indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers, employees and agents from any loss or damage, including, but not limited to attorneys' fees, as provided in such ordinances or regulations, but in no event less than the obligation on video service providers set forth in RSMo 67.2695. The city may require documentation of such indemnification by written agreement or other instrument to the extent permitted by law. In addition, video service providers shall be subject to and comply with such supplementary provisions relating to placement, screening and relocation of facilities as provided in subsection (b) herein, and such other applicable laws of the city, except as may be otherwise validly preempted. Notwithstanding any other ordinance to the contrary, no facilities to be used for video services shall be installed without obtaining a permit from the city authorizing the location and plans for such facilities; provided that this provision shall not apply to installation of otherwise lawful and authorized poles or wires. 
(5)  Public, educational and governmental channels. Each video service provider shall designate a number of channels for public, educational and governmental programming consistent with RSMo 67.2703; provided that any greater number of channels, as may be required in the incumbent cable franchise or franchise ordinance, shall be required pursuant to RSMo 67.2703.2. The city shall bear no cost relating to the transmission, availability or maintenance of such channels unless expressly authorized by the city in writing and approved by the governing body. Incumbent cable operators and other video service providers shall provide support for such public, educational and governmental channels consistent with RSMo 67.2703.8. 
(6)  Continued obligations. The obligations of a cable service provider or video service provider as set forth in any existing cable services or video services franchise or ordinance shall also continue to apply to the full extent permitted by applicable law. 
(7)  Reservation of rights. The city retains all rights in RSMo 67.2675 through 67.2714, inclusive, and may take any and all actions permitted by law to exercise such rights or to enforce such obligations on providers of video service. 
(8)  Notice. A copy of the ordinance from which this section derives shall be delivered to each video service provider operating in the city after notice to the city that such provider is authorized to provide service within the city; provided that the provisions of this section shall, to the extent permitted by law, not be affected by any claimed or actual failure of a service provider to have received delivery of a copy of the ordinance. 
(b)  Accessory utility facilities; supplementary regulations. Every public utility, cable company, video service provider and other users of the city rights-of-way or adjacent easements to provide services shall comply with the supplemental regulations in this section regarding the placement of accessory utility facilities on public or private property. For purposes of this section, "accessory utility facilities" shall mean such facilities, including pedestals, boxes, vaults, cabinets, or other ground-mounted or below-ground facilities that directly serve the property or local area in which the facility is placed, are not primarily for transmission or distribution to other locations, do not materially alter the character of the neighborhood or area, and otherwise are customarily found in such areas. 
    Except where limited by other provisions of city ordinance, accessory utility facilities shall be subject to the following supplementary regulations: 
(1)  Approval; design; location; application. The design, location, and nature of all accessory utility facilities on private or public property shall require approval of the city, which approval shall be considered in a nondiscriminatory manner, in conformance with this section, and subject to reasonable permit conditions as may be necessary to meet the requirements of this section. In considering applications individual or multiple location applications, the city shall review the request to ensure the proposed facilities do not impair public safety, harm property values or significant sight-lines, or degrade the aesthetics of the adjoining properties or neighborhood, and taking into consideration reasonable alternatives. Any material changes or extensions to such facilities or the construction of any additional structures shall be subject to the requirements and approvals as set forth herein. Unless otherwise prohibited, utility facilities subject to this subsection may be located in minimum setback areas provided that all other requirements are met. To the extent permitted by RSMo 67.2707.3, the time, method, manner or location of facilities to be located in the rights-of-way may be established or conditioned by the city to protect the rights-of-way or to ensure public safety. An inspection fee shall be required as may be established by the city to reimburse the city for the costs of review and inspection of accessory utility facilities as may be permitted by applicable law. 
(2)  General regulations. The following general regulations apply to all accessory utility facilities: 
a.  All such facilities shall be placed underground, except as otherwise provided in subsections c. and d. herein or as approved by special use permit. 
b.  All such facilities shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner so as not to emit any unnecessary or intrusive noise. 
c.  All facilities and utility boxes shall be deemed abandoned after six continuous months of non-use, and shall therefore be removed within 30 days thereafter at the cost of the utility. 
d.  Unless otherwise restricted, utility poles for authorized above ground lines or facilities shall be permitted in accordance with the height regulations of the applicable zoning district where utilities are not otherwise required to be placed underground; provided that such poles shall be no higher than necessary, maintained so as to avoid leaning from upright position, and without use of guy wires crossing rights-of-way or pedestrian routes except where approved by the city as necessary due to the lack of feasible alternatives. 
e.  Utility facilities placed in designated historic areas may be subject to additional requirements regarding the placement and appearance of facilities as may be necessary to reasonably avoid or reduce any negative impact of such placement. 
f.  Any damage to landscaping or vegetation on private or public property during installation or maintenance of facilities shall be promptly remedied by the facility owner. 
g.  At least 48 hours prior to any installation, replacement or expansion of any facility located on private property, the facility owner shall provide notice to all property owners within 185 feet from the site. Notice shall include detailed description of work to be done, the exact location of work and the time and duration when it will be undertaken. 
h.  No facilities may be located so as to interfere, or be likely to interfere, with any public facilities or use of public property. 
i.  All utility facilities not authorized by this subsection or specifically addressed elsewhere in this Code shall be authorized only as a special use permit. 
(3)  Residential districts. In residential districts, accessory utility facilities less than 3.5 feet in height and covering less than eight square feet in area may be installed above ground with the prior approval of the city. Except as otherwise may be authorized herein, any larger utility facility shall be installed underground or authorized to be installed above ground only by special use permit. All above ground facilities, where authorized, shall be placed in the rear yard wherever practical. If locating these facilities in the rear yard is not practical, then such facilities may be located in the side yard. Such facilities shall not be located in the front yard or within the public right-of-way unless otherwise approved by the city upon a determination that all other alternatives are not feasible. 
(4)  Non-residential districts. In non-residential districts, accessory utility facilities with a height of less than five feet and covering less than 16 square feet in area may be installed aboveground with the prior approval of the city. Except as otherwise may be authorized herein, any larger utility facility shall be installed underground or authorized to be installed above ground only by special use permit. All aboveground facilities, where authorized, shall be placed in the rear yard wherever practical. If locating these facilities in the rear yard is not practical, then such facilities may be located in the side yard. Such facilities shall not be located in the front yard or within the public right-of-way unless otherwise approved by the city upon a determination that all other alternatives are not feasible. 
(5)  Landscape screening. A sight-proof landscape screen shall be provided for all authorized aboveground facilities taller than three feet in height or covering in excess of four square feet in size. Such screen shall be required to sufficiently conceal the facility. A landscape plan identifying the size and species of landscaping materials shall be submitted by the utility and approved by the city prior to installation of any facility requiring landscape screening. The utility shall be responsible for the installation, repair, or replacement of screening materials. Alternative screening or concealment may be approved by the city to the extent it meets or exceeds the purposes of these requirements. Facilities located in rear yards may be exempted from screening where located so as not to be visible from (1) any public property; and (2) more than two residential dwelling units. 
(6)  Compliance with other laws. All accessory utility facilities shall be subject to all other applicable regulations and standards as established as part of this Code, including but not limited to building codes, zoning requirements and rights-of-way management regulations in addition to the supplementary regulations herein. The provisions of this subsection (b) shall not apply to any circumstance or entity in which application under such circumstances is preempted or otherwise precluded by superseding law. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01; Ord. No. 07-19, §§ 2, 3, 7-23-07) 
Secs. 7.5-72-7.5-81. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-21, § 1, adopted July 25, 2016, repealed § 7.5-72-7.5-81, which pertained to design, services and capabilities, institutional network and public educational and governmental access or "PEG access", technical standards and customer services practices, operation and maintenance, financial provisions, remedies, procedures and due process, foreclosure, receivership and abandonment, purchase of system, sale or transfer of franchise, rights of individuals protected, and miscellaneous provisions, and derived from Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, adopted April 9, 2001. 
Secs. 7.5-82-7.5-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-21, § 3, adopted July 25, 2016, recodified Art. IV, §§ 7.5-101-7.5-116, as Ch. 24, Art. IV, §§ 24-75-24-84. The previous Art. IV, §§ 7.5-101-7.5-116, pertained to rights-of-way management and facilities requirements, and derived from Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, adopted April 9, 2001. 

Secs. 7.5-101-7.5-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 7.5-131. - Administration of franchise. 
    The city shall be responsible for the continued administration of this Code and any agreement or franchises granted hereunder. The city may delegate this authority from time to time in any manner consistent with applicable law, provided, however, that the city shall not delegate enforcement authority. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-132. - Appeals. 
    Unless otherwise provided herein or by any generally applicable administrative appeal process, a provider may appeal any decision of the city pursuant to this Code to the governing body of city within 15 days of such decision where, upon written request of the provider specifying this provision and including the details of the alleged claim, an evidentiary hearing shall be held on such appeal. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-133. - Non-enforcement by the city. 
    A provider shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this Code or its applicable agreement or franchise by reason of any failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-134. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any provision of this Code shall be subject to a fine of $500.00 per day per violation. The payment of such fine notwithstanding, all such violators shall be subject to all other applicable provisions of this Code to the fullest extent allowed by law, including, but not limited to, the payment of a use fee or franchise fee. In addition to all other remedies; any person who shall have installed facilities in the rights-of-way prior to the effective date the ordinance from which this Code derives, or hereinafter, without the consent of the city shall be subject to pay as a penalty to the city three times the use fees calculated from the date of installation to the earlier of the effective date of a lawful use agreement or franchise with the city or the date the facilities are properly removed; provided that if such person accurately discloses the facilities and applies for a lawful Use agreement or franchise within 30 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this Code derives, such person may avoid this penalty by paying with the application the actual use fee amount calculated for such period, plus interest and other fees provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-135. - Publication of notices. 
    All public notices or ordinances required to be published by law shall be published in the official newspaper of the city. A grantee shall be responsible for all costs of publication that may be required with respect to its agreement or franchise or any amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 7.5-136. - Severability. 
    If any material section of this code or an agreement or franchise granted pursuant to it is held by a governmental authority of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid or unlawful as conflicting with applicable laws now or hereafter in effect, or is held by a court or competent governmental authority to be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such applicable laws, such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct, and independent part of the code, agreement or franchise, and, to the extent possible, such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions therein. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § 2, 4-9-01) 
Chapter 7.6 - WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES AND SUPPORT STRUCTURES 

Sec. 7.6-1. - Purposes. 
    The general purpose of this chapter 7.6 is to regulate the placement and, construction of wireless communications facilities and support structures in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace in the City of Ballwin. Specifically, this section is intended to: 
(a)  Provide for the appropriate location and deployment of wireless communications infrastructure to serve citizens and businesses in the City of Ballwin and the metropolitan St. Louis area; 
(b)  Minimize adverse visual impacts of wireless facilities and support structures through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(c)  Ensure that any new support structure is located in an area compatible with the neighborhood or surrounding community to the extent possible; 
(d)  Comply with applicable law including the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 USC 332, and the Missouri Uniform Wireless Communications Infrastructure Deployment Act, RSMo 67.5090 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 14-24, § 1, 8-18-14) 
Sec. 7.6-2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings and usages indicated: 
    Accessory equipment: Any equipment serving or being used in conjunction with a wireless communications facility or wireless support structure. The term includes utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets and storage sheds, shelters, or similar structures. 
    Antenna (antennae): Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of any type of wireless communications services. The term shall exclude satellite earth station antennae less than six feet in diameter and any receive-only home television antennae. 
    AGL: Above ground level. Ground level shall be determined by the average elevation of the natural ground level within a radius of 50 feet from the center location of measurement. 
    Applicant: Any person engaged in the business of providing wireless communications services or the wireless communications infrastructure required for wireless communications services who submits an application. 
    Application: A request submitted by an applicant to the city to construct a new wireless support structure, for the substantial modification of a wireless support structure, or for collocation of a wireless facility or replacement of a wireless facility on an existing structure. 
    Building permit: A permit issued by the city prior to commencement of work on the collocation of wireless facilities on an existing structure, the substantial modification of a wireless support structure, or the commencement of construction of any new wireless support structure, solely to ensure that the work to be performed by the applicant satisfies the applicable building code. 
    Collocation: The placement or installation of a new wireless facility on a structure that already has an existing wireless facility, including electrical transmission towers, water towers, buildings, and other structures capable of structurally supporting the attachment of wireless facilities in compliance with applicable codes. 
    Director: The City Planner of the City of Ballwin or other designee made by the city administrator. 
    Disguised support structure: Any free-standing, man-made structure designed for the support of wireless facilities, the presence of which is camouflaged or concealed as an appropriately-placed architectural or natural feature. Such structures may include but are not limited to clock towers, campaniles, free standing bell towers, observation towers, pylon signs, water towers, light standards, flag poles and artificial trees. 
    Electrical transmission tower: An electrical transmission structure used to support high voltage overhead power lines. The term shall not include any utility pole. 
    Equipment compound: An area surrounding or near a wireless support structure within which are located wireless facilities. 
    Existing structure: A structure that exists at the time a request to place wireless facilities on a structure is filed with an authority. The term includes any structure that is capable of supporting the attachment of wireless facilities in compliance with applicable building codes, National Electric Safety Codes, and recognized industry standards for structural safety, capacity, reliability, and engineering, including, but not limited to, towers, buildings, and water towers. The term shall not include any utility pole. 
    FAA: The Federal Aviation Commission. 
    FCC: The Federal Communications Commission. 
    Height: The vertical distance measured from the average grade of the base of the structure at ground level to its highest point and including the main structure and all attachments thereto. This is typically expressed as AGL, meaning above ground level. 
    Replacement: Includes constructing a new wireless support structure of equal proportions and of equal height or such other height that would not constitute a substantial modification to an existing structure in order to support wireless facilities or to accommodate collocation and includes the associated removal of the preexisting wireless facilities or wireless support structure. 
    Substantial modification: The mounting of a proposed wireless facility on a wireless support structure which, as applied to the structure as it was originally constructed. 
(a)  Increases the existing vertical height of the structure by: 
(1)  More than ten percent; or 
(2)  The height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; or 
(b)  Involves adding an appurtenance to the body of a wireless support structure that protrudes horizontally from the edge of the wireless support structure more than twenty feet or more than the width of the wireless support structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater (except where necessary to shelter the antenna from inclement weather or to connect the antenna to the tower via cable); 
(c)  Involves the installation of more than the standard number of new outdoor equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four new equipment cabinets; or 
(d)  Increases the square footage of the existing equipment compound by more than 1,250 square feet. 
    Utility: Any person, corporation, county, municipality acting in its capacity as a utility, municipal utility board, or other entity, or department thereof or entity related thereto, providing retail or wholesale electric, natural gas, water, waste water, data, cable television, or telecommunications or internet protocol-related services. 
    Utility pole: A structure owned or operated by a utility that is designed specifically for and used to carry lines, cables, or wires for telephony, cable television or electricity, or to provide lighting. 
    Water tower: A water storage tank, or a standpipe or an elevated tank situated on a support structure, originally constructed for use as a reservoir or facility to store or deliver water. 
    Wireless communications service: Includes the wireless facilities of all services licensed to use radio communications pursuant to Section 301 of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 USC 301. 
    Wireless facility: The set of equipment and network components, exclusive of the underlying wireless support structure, including, but not limited to, antennas, accessory equipment, transmitters, receivers, power supplies, cabling and associated equipment necessary to provide wireless communications services; 
    Wireless support structure: A structure, such as a monopole, tower, or building capable of supporting wireless facilities. This definition does not include utility poles. The term shall not include any support structure including attachments of 50 feet or less in height owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communication Commission 
(Ord. No. 14-24, § 1, 8-18-14) 
Sec. 7.6-3. - General requirements. 
    The requirements set forth in this section shall be applicable to all wireless facilities and support structures installed, built or modified after the effective date of this chapter to the full extent permitted by law. 
(a)  Principal or incidental use. Wireless facilities and support structures may be either a principal use in all zoning districts or an incidental use to existing multi-family, institutional or non-residential uses, subject to any applicable district requirement relating to location or setback. 
(b)  Building codes and safety standards. All wireless facilities and support structures shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with all standards contained in applicable state and local building codes, National Electric Safety Codes, and recognized industry standards for structural safety, capacity, reliability, and engineering. In addition to any other approvals required by this section, no wireless facility or support structure shall be erected prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(c)  Regulatory compliance. All wireless facilities and support structures shall meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, FCC and any other state or federal agency with the authority to regulate such facilities and support structures. Should such standards or regulations be amended, then the owner shall bring such facilities and support structures into compliance with the revised standards or regulations within the time period mandated by the controlling agency. 
(d)  Lighting. Wireless facilities and support structures shall not be illuminated at night unless required by the FAA or other state or federal agency, in which case a description of the required lighting scheme will be made a part of the application. Accessory equipment may have lighting only as approved by the director on the approved site development plan or by the board of aldermen in the case of a special use exception. 
(e)  Advertising. Other than a disguised support structure in the form of an otherwise lawfully permitted pylon sign, the placement of advertising on wireless support structures is prohibited. 
(f)  Design. 
(1)  Wireless support structures shall maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to the requirements of the FAA or any other applicable state or federal agency, be painted a neutral color consistent with the natural or built environment of the site. 
(2)  Wireless facilities other than antennae shall have an exterior finish compatible with the natural or built environment of the site and shall also comply with any design guidelines as may be applicable to the particular zoning district in which the facilities are located. 
(3)  Antennae attached to a building or a disguised support structure shall be of a color identical to or closely compatible with the surface to which they are mounted. 
(4)  Wireless facilities shall be screened by appropriate landscaping and/or fencing. All wireless support structures shall be surrounded by a minimum six-foot high decorative wall constructed of brick, stone or comparable masonry materials and a landscape strip of not less than ten feet in width and planted with materials which will provide a visual barrier to a minimum height of six feet. The landscape strip shall be exterior to any security fencing. In lieu of the required wall and landscape strip, an alternative means of screening may be approved by the director in the case of a permitted use or use permitted by administrative permit, or by the board of aldermen in the case of a special use exception, upon demonstration by the applicant that an equivalent degree of visual screening is achieved. 
(5)  All wireless support structures shall be separated from any off-site single or two-family residential structure a distance equal to the height of the support structure plus ten feet. Support structures on parcels adjacent to residentially zoned property shall meet the setbacks of the applicable zoning district as are required for a principal structure along the adjoining property line(s). Where adjacent to nonresidential zoned property, support structures shall meet setbacks as are required for accessory structures. Such structures are defined in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(6)  Ground anchors of all guyed support structures, if permitted, shall be located on the same parcel as the support structure and meet the setbacks of the applicable zoning district. 
(7)  Vehicle or outdoor storage on the site of wireless facilities or support structures is prohibited. 
(8)  On-site parking for periodic maintenance and service shall be provided at all locations of wireless facilities and support structures as deemed necessary by the director or by the board of aldermen in the case of a special use exception. 
(9)  All wiring to or from wireless facilities located more than five feet from the nearest building wall shall be underground. 
(Ord. No. 14-24, § 1, 8-18-14) 
Sec. 7.6-4. - Permitted use. 
    The placement of the following types of wireless facilities and support structures is permitted in all zoning districts by issuance of a building permit: 
(a)  Collocation and replacement applications, provided that no permit may be issued for collocation to a certified historic structure as defined in RSMo 253.545 until at least one public hearing has been held by the director within 30 days prior to issuance. The director shall provide public notice of such public hearing in the same manner as required for proposed zoning code changes. Such applications are subject to general condition 7.6-3(b) of this section, but no other zoning or land use requirements, including design or placement requirements, or public hearing review. 
(b)  The mounting of wireless facilities on any existing building or structure other than a single-family residence or a building constructed primarily for the support of antenna, provided that the presence of the facilities is concealed by architectural elements or satisfactorily camouflaged by painting a color identical to the surface to which they are attached. 
(c)  The mounting of antennae on an electrical transmission tower, but not exceeding the height of such tower by more than ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 14-24, § 1, 8-18-14) 
Sec. 7.6-5. - Authorization by administrative permit. 
    The placement of the following types of wireless facilities and support structures is permitted in all zoning districts by administrative permit approved by the director and issuance of building permits: 
(a)  The construction of a disguised support structure and related wireless facilities provided that all related equipment shall be placed underground or concealed within the structure when the structure is located in any residential zoning district or the residential portion of any planned zoning district. 
(b)  Wireless support structures erected and maintained for a period not to exceed 30 calendar days for the purpose of replacement of an existing support structure, testing an existing or proposed network, or special events requiring such temporary facilities. 
(c)  Application procedures: Applications for administrative permits shall be made on the appropriate forms to the director and accompanied by payment of the established fee. 
(1)  A detailed site plan, based on a closed boundary survey of the host parcel, shall be submitted indicating all existing and proposed improvements including buildings, drives, walkway, parking area and other structures, public rights-of-way, the zoning categories of the subject and adjoining properties, the location of and distance to off-site residential structures, required setbacks, required buffer and landscape areas, hydrologic features, and the coordinates and height AGL of the existing or proposed support structure. 
(2)  The application shall be reviewed by the city engineer to determine compliance with the applicable standards, who shall transmit the application for review and comment by other departments and public agencies as may be affected by the proposed facilities and/or support structures. 
(3)  The director shall issue a decision on the permit within applicable time limits. The director may deny the application or approve the application as submitted or with such modifications as are, in his/her judgment, reasonably necessary to protect the safety or general welfare of the citizens consistent with the purposes of this section and applicable law. The director may consider the purposes of this section and the factors established herein for granting a special use exception as well as any other considerations consistent with this ordinance and applicable law. A decision to deny an application shall be made in writing, and state the specific reasons for the denial. 
(d)  Appeals: Appeals from the decision of the director shall be made in the same manner as otherwise provided for the appeal of administrative decisions. 
(e)  Administrative permit fee: A fee of $1,500.00 shall accompany any application for administrative permit pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 14-24, § 1, 8-18-14) 
Sec. 7.6-6. - Special use exception required. 
    All applications for wireless facilities and support structures not permitted under section 7.6-4 or 7.6-5 above shall require the approval by special use exception pursuant to the procedures and requirements of appendix A of the City Code and issuance of building permits. 
    Applications for a special use exception shall be filed and processed in the manner established in appendix A of the Code of Ordinances of the city (zoning ordinance). A decision by the board of aldermen shall be accompanied by substantial evidence supporting the decision, which shall be made a part of the written record of the meeting at which a final decision on the application is rendered. Evidence shall be submitted with the application or thereafter or presented during the public hearing by the applicant or others. 
    The applicant shall provide an analysis to demonstrate that no existing towers, structures or buildings within the necessary geographic area for the applicant's tower meet the applicant's necessary engineering requirements considering: (1) height; (2) structural strength; (3) resulting signal interference; (4) feasibility of retrofitting; (5) feasibility of redesigning the applicant's tower network; or (6) other limiting conditions that render existing towers, structures or buildings within the applicant's required geographic area unsuitable. 
(Ord. No. 14-24, § 1, 8-18-14) 
Sec. 7.6-7. - Removal. 
    Any wireless facility or support structure no longer used for its original communications purpose shall be removed at the owner's expense. The owner and applicable co-users shall provide the city with a copy of any notice to the FCC of intent to cease operations and shall have 90 days from the date of ceasing operations to remove the facility and/or support structure. In the case of co-use, this provision shall not become effective until all users cease operations. Any wireless support structure not in use for a period of one year shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be removed by the city at the owner's expense. Removal of facilities shall not be a condition of approval of any application. 
(Ord. No. 14-24, § 1, 8-18-14) 
Sec. 7.6-8. - Time limits and fees. 
(a)  Time limits: All applications regarding wireless facilities and support structures shall be processed in accordance with the time limits established by RSMo 67.5090 to 67.5103. 
(b)  Fees: Fees for applications regarding wireless facilities and support structures shall not exceed the limits established by RSMo 67.5090 to 67.5103. 
(Ord. No. 14-24, § 1, 8-18-14) 
Sec. 7.6-9. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 14-24, § 1, 8-18-14) 
Chapter 8 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; administration, ch. 2; flood hazard areas, ch. 10; exceptions to traffic laws, § 15-32; police, ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Civil defense, RSMo Ch. 44; acceptance of goods and services, RSMo 44.028; local disaster planning organization, RSMo 44.080; cooperation with other agencies, RSMo 44.090; oath of personnel, RSMo 44.115. 

Sec. 8-1. - Organization created. 
    There is hereby created a local municipal organization for the preparation and the carrying out of all the emergency functions, other than functions for which the military forces are primarily responsible, to minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters in accordance with RSMo ch. 44. 
(Code 1973, § 7-1) 
Sec. 8-2. - Composition of organization. 
    The organization created by this chapter shall consist of a coordinator and other additional members to be selected by the coordinator in order to conform to the state organization and procedures for the conduct of emergency operations as outlined in the state disaster plan. 
(Code 1973, § 7-2) 
Sec. 8-3. - Functions of organization. 
    The organization created by this chapter shall perform such emergency management functions within the city as shall be prescribed in and by the state emergency management plan and program prepared by the governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the governor; and in addition, shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other public and private agencies within and without the state, entered into as provided by law, or the state disaster plan. 
(Code 1973, § 7-3) 
Sec. 8-4. - Mayor may appoint, remove personnel. 
    The mayor may appoint, without compensation, or remove any personnel needed by the organization created by this chapter for the proper function of its duties. 
(Code 1973, § 7-4) 
Sec. 8-5. - Coordinator-Appointment, tenure. 
    A coordinator of the organization created by this chapter for the conduct of emergency operations may be appointed by the mayor and shall serve until removed by the same. 
(Code 1973, § 7-5) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 8-6. - Same-General duties. 
    The coordinator shall have such responsibilities for the organization, administration and operation of the organization created by this chapter as is delegated by the mayor, subject to the direction and control of the board of aldermen as provided by statute. 
(Code 1973, § 7-6) 
Sec. 8-7. - Same-Emergency authority. 
    In the event of an emergency as defined by law, the coordinator of the organization created by this chapter is authorized on behalf of the city to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the exigency, without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to municipal contracts or obligations, as authorized by law; provided that, if the board of aldermen meets at such time, he shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body. 
(Code 1973, § 7-7) 
Sec. 8-8. - Oath. 
    Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the organization created by this chapter shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the following oath, which shall be filed with the director: 
    "I, ____________ , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Missouri, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I a member of any political party or organization that advocates, the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by force or violence; and that during such a time as I am a member of the municipal emergency management organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by force or violence." 
(Code 1973, § 7-8) 
Sec. 8-9. - Office space. 
    The mayor or board of aldermen is authorized to designate space in any building owned or leased by the city for the organization created by this chapter as its office. 
(Code 1973, § 7-9) 
Sec. 8-10. - Cooperation by other departments. 
    In carrying out the emergency powers under the provisions of this chapter, the governor and the mayor and board of aldermen shall use the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments, offices and agencies of the state and of the city. The officers and personnel of all such departments, offices and agencies are directed to cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the governor and the organization created by this chapter, upon request. 
(Code 1973, § 7-10) 
Sec. 8-11. - Mobile support teams. 
(a)  The director of the organization created by this chapter shall form mobile support units as provided by law and the state disaster plan and shall designate the leaders thereof. 
(b)  Any member of a mobile support team who is a city employee or officer, while serving on call to duty by the governor or the state director of emergency management, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to such employment or office. 
(Code 1973, § 7-11) 
Sec. 8-12. - Mutual aid agreements. 
(a)  The mayor, with the approval of the governor, may enter into mutual aid arrangements or agreements with other public and private agencies within and without the state for reciprocal emergency management aid. Such arrangements or agreements shall be consistent with the state disaster plan and program. In time of emergency it shall be the duty of the local organization for emergency management to render assistance in accordance with the provisions of such mutual aid arrangements or agreements. 
(b)  The coordinator of the organization created by this chapter for emergency management may assist in negotiation of reciprocal mutual aid agreements between his organization and other public and private agencies and between the governor and the adjoining states or political subdivisions thereof, and shall carry out arrangements or agreements relating to the local unit. 
(Code 1973, § 7-12) 
State Law reference- Authority to enter mutual aid agreements, RSMo 44.090. 
Sec. 8-13. - Accepting federal aid. 
    Whenever the federal or state government, or any officer or agency thereof, shall offer through the state to any political subdivision thereof, services, equipment, supplies, material or funds by way of gift, grant or loan, for the purpose of emergency management, the city, acting with the consent of the governor and through the mayor, may accept such offer and upon acceptance, the mayor may authorize any officer of the city to receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds on behalf of the city subject to the terms of the offer. 
(Code 1973, § 7-13) 
Sec. 8-14. - Waiver of bid requirements. 
    In the event of enemy attack, the mayor or board of aldermen may waive any time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by statute pertaining to the advertisement for bids for the performance of public work or entering into contracts. 
(Code 1973, § 7-14) 
Chapter 9 - EXPLOSIVES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; buildings and structures, ch. 7; licenses and business regulations, ch. 14; fireworks, § 17-57; explosives in parks, § 18-35. 

Sec. 9-1. - County explosives code adopted. 
    The St. Louis County Explosives Code, section 111.330, as amended, which was adopted by the county on June 6, 1994, is hereby adopted as the Explosives Code of the City of Ballwin, as if fully set out in this section. 
(Code 1973, § 81/2-1; Ord. No. 2647, § 1, 11-10-97; Ord. No. 99-16, § 2, 3-8-99) 
Chapter 10 - FLOODWAY AND FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, adopted January 12, 2015, repealed the former Ch. 10, §§ 10-1-10-3, 10-21-10-27, 10-41-10-44, 10-61-10-65, 10-81-10-86, 10-101, 10-121, 10-141, and enacted a new Ch. 10 as set out herein. The former Ch. 10 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; buildings and structures, ch. 7; grading, mining, filling and clearing, ch. 11; planning and development, ch. 19; sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 21; storm sewers, § 25-71 et seq.; trailers and recreational vehicles, ch. 28. 
State Law reference- County powers as to flood insurance, RSMo 49.600 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, AND PURPOSES 

Sec. 10-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of Missouri has in RSMo 79.110 delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management regulations designed to protect the health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the Board of Aldermen of the City of Ballwin, Missouri ordains as follows. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 10-2. - Findings of fact. 
(1)  Flood losses resulting from periodic inundation. The special flood hazard areas of the City of Ballwin, Missouri are subject to inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base; all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  General causes of the flood losses. These flood losses are caused by (1) the cumulative effect of development in any delineated floodplain causing increases in flood heights and velocities; and (2) the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods, hazardous to others, inadequately elevated, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(3)  Methods used to analyze flood hazards. The flood insurance study (FIS) that is the basis of this ordinance uses a standard engineering method of analyzing flood hazards which consist of a series of interrelated steps. 
(a)  Selection of a base flood that is based upon engineering calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated, and the depth of inundation. The base flood selected for this ordinance is representative of large floods which are characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this chapter. It is in the general order of a flood which could be expected to have a one percent chance of occurrence in any one year as delineated on the Federal Insurance Administrator's FIS, and illustrative materials for St. Louis County dated February 4, 2015 as amended, and any future revisions thereto. 
(b)  Calculation of water surface profiles are based on a standard hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and overbank areas to convey the regulatory flood. 
(c)  Computation of a floodway required to convey this flood without increasing flood heights more than one foot at any point. 
(d)  Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no development is permitted that would cause any increase in flood height. 
(e)  Delineation of flood fringe, i.e., that area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but still subject to inundation by the base flood. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 10-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare; to minimize those losses described in article I, section 10-2(1); to establish or maintain the community's eligibility for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 59.22(a)(3); and to meet the requirements of 44 CFR 60.3(d) by applying the provisions of this chapter to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities that serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial construction; and 
(3)  Protect individuals from buying lands that are unsuited for the intended development purposes due to the flood hazard. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Secs. 10-4-10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 10-21. - Lands to which ordinance applies. 
    This chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Ballwin, Missouri identified as numbered and unnumbered A zones and AE zones, on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) for St. Louis County on map panels 29189C0277K, 29189C0279K, 29189C0281K, 29189C0282K, 29189C0283K, 29189C0284K, and 29189C0295K dated February 4, 2015 as amended, and any future revisions thereto. In all areas covered by this chapter, no development shall be permitted except through the issuance of a floodplain development permit, granted by the board of aldermen or its duly designated representative under such safeguards and restrictions as the board of aldermen or the designated representative may reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the community, and as specifically noted in article IV. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 10-22. - Floodplain administrator. 
    The building inspector/plans examiner is hereby designated as the floodplain administrator under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 10-23. - Compliance. 
    No development located within the special flood hazard areas of this community shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 10-24. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 10-25. - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 10-26. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This ordinance does not imply that areas outside the floodway and flood fringe or land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This chapter shall not create a liability on the part of the City of Ballwin, any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 10-27. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Secs. 10-28-10-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 10-41. - Floodplain development permit (required). 
    A floodplain development permit shall be required for all proposed construction or other development, including the placement of manufactured homes, in the areas described in article 2, section 10-21. No person, firm, corporation, or unit of government shall initiate any development or substantial-improvement or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate floodplain development permit for each structure or other development. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 10-42. - Designation of floodplain administrator. 
    The building inspector/plans examiner is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 10-43. - Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator. 
    Duties of the building inspector/plans examiner shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review of all applications for floodplain development permits to assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding and that the floodplain development permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
(2)  Review of all applications for floodplain development permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required by federal, state, or local law; 
(3)  Review all subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(4)  Issue floodplain development permits for all approved applications; 
(5)  Notify adjacent communities and the Missouri State Emergency Management Agency (Mo SEMA) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(6)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished and shall be maintained within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse; 
(7)  Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(8)  Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) that the new or substantially improved non-residential structures have been floodproofed; 
(9)  When floodproofing techniques are utilized for a particular non-residential structure, the building inspector/plans examiner shall require certification from a registered professional engineer or architect. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 10-44. - Application for floodplain development permit. 
    To obtain a floodplain development permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every floodplain development permit application shall: 
(1)  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block and tract, house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and specifically locate the proposed structure or work; 
(2)  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the floodplain development permit; 
(3)  Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended; 
(4)  Indicate the assessed value of the structure and the fair market value of the improvement; 
(5)  Specify whether development is located in designated flood fringe or floodway; 
(6)  Identify the existing base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed development; 
(7)  Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the building inspector/plans examiner; 
(8)  Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction; and 
(9)  Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Secs. 10-45-10-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 10-61. - General standards. 
(1)  No permit for floodplain development shall be granted for new construction, substantial-improvements, and other improvements, including the placement of manufactured homes, within any numbered or unnumbered A zones and AE zones, unless the conditions of this section are satisfied. 
(2)  All areas identified as unnumbered A zones on the FIRM are subject to inundation of the 100-year flood; however, the base flood elevation is not provided. Development within unnumbered A zones is subject to all provisions of this chapter. If flood insurance study data is not available, the community shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available from federal, state, or other sources. 
(3)  Until a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development, including fill, shall be permitted within any numbered A zone or AE zone on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(4)  All new construction, subdivision proposals, substantial-improvements, prefabricated structures, placement of manufactured homes, and other developments shall require: 
(a)  Design or adequate anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(b)  Construction with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(c)  Utilization of methods and practices that minimize flood damages; 
(d)  All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning equipment, and other service facilities be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(e)  New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and on-site waste disposal systems be located so as to avoid impairment or contamination; and 
(f)  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, located within special flood hazard areas are required to assure that: 
1.  All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
2.  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; 
3.  Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
4.  All proposals for development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, of five acres or 50 lots, whichever is lesser, include within such proposals base flood elevation data. 
(5)  Storage, material, and equipment. 
(a)  The storage or processing of materials within the special flood hazard area that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited. 
(b)  Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods, if firmly anchored to prevent flotation, or if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning. 
(6)  Accessory structures. Structures used solely for parking and limited storage purposes, not attached to any other structure on the site, of limited investment value, and not larger than 400 square feet, may be constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed provided there is no human habitation or occupancy of the structure; the structure is of single-wall design; a variance has been granted from the standard floodplain management requirements of this chapter; and a floodplain development permit has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 10-62. - Specific standards. 
(1)  In all areas identified as numbered and unnumbered A zones and AE zones, where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in article IV, section 10-61(2), the following provisions are required: 
(a)  Residential construction. New construction or substantial-improvement of any residential structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above base flood elevation. 
[*In all unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones, the FEMA, Region VII office recommends elevating to one foot above the base flood elevation to accommodate floodway conditions when the floodplain is fully developed.] 
(b)  Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial-improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the base flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator as set forth in article III, section 10-43(9). 
[*The FEMA, Region VII office recommends elevating to one foot above the base flood elevation to qualify for flood insurance rates based upon floodproofing.] 
(c)  Require, for all new construction and substantial-improvements that fully enclosed areas below lowest floor used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement and that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided; and 
2.  The bottom of all opening shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 10-63. - Manufactured homes. 
(1)  All manufactured homes to be placed within all unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones, on the community's FIRM shall be required to be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. 
(2)  Require manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within unnumbered or numbered A zones and AE zones, on the community's FIRM on sites: 
(a)  Outside of manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(b)  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(c)  In an expansion to and existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
(d)  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial-damage as the result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely attached to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(3)  Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within all unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones, on the community's FIRM, that are not subject to the provisions of article IV, section 10-63(2) of this chapter, be elevated so that either: 
(a)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at one foot above the base flood level; or 
(b)  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely attached to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
[*In all unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones, the FEMA, Region VII office recommends elevating to one foot above the base flood elevation to accommodate floodway conditions when the floodplain is fully developed.] 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 10-64. - Floodway. 
    Located within areas of special flood hazard established in article II, section 10-21 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters that carry debris and potential projectiles, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  The community shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point. 
(2)  The community shall prohibit any encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial-improvements, and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  If article IV, section 10-64(2) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial-improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article IV. 
(4)  In unnumbered A zones, the community shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available from federal, state, or other sources as set forth in article IV, section 10-61(2). 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 10-65. - Recreational vehicles. 
(1)  Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within all unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones on the community's FIRM either: 
(a)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, 
(b)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use*; or 
(c)  Meet the permitting, elevation, and the anchoring requirements for manufactured homes of this chapter. 
*A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Secs. 10-66-10-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 10-81. - Establishment of appeal board. 
    The board of adjustment as established by the City of Ballwin shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the floodplain management requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 10-82. - Responsibility of appeal board. 
    Where an application for a floodplain development permit or request for a variance from the floodplain management regulations is denied by the building inspector/plans examiner, the applicant may apply for such floodplain development permit or variance directly to the board of adjustment, as defined in article V, section 10-81. 
    The board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the building inspector/plans examiner in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 10-83. - Further appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the St. Louis County Circuit Court as provided in RSMo 89.110. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 10-84. - Floodplain management variance criteria. 
    In passing upon such applications for variances, the board of adjustment shall consider all technical data and evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the following criteria: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flood damage; 
(2)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(6)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flood damage, for the proposed use; 
(7)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters, if applicable, expected at the site; and, 
(11)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems; streets; and bridges. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 10-85. - Conditions for approving floodplain management variances. 
(1)  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial-improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (2) through (6) below have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(2)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the state inventory of historic places, or local inventory of historic places upon determination provided the proposed activity will not preclude the structures continued historic designation. 
(3)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(4)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(5)  Variances shall only be issued upon (a) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (b) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (c) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(6)  A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage and (2) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 10-86. - Conditions for approving variances for accessory structures. 
    Any variance granted for an accessory structure shall be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in article V, sections 10-84 and 10-85 of this chapter. 
    In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the threat to public health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any variance issued for accessory structures that are constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed. 
(1)  Use of the accessory structures must be solely for parking and limited storage purposes in zone A only as identified on the community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
(2)  For any new or substantially damaged accessory structures, the exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood elevation, must be built with flood-resistant materials in accordance with article IV, section 10-61(4)(b) of this chapter. 
(3)  The accessory structures must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure in accordance with article IV, section 10-61(4)(a) of this chapter. All of the building's structural components must be capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic, buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces. 
(4)  Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with article IV, section 10-61(4)(d) of this chapter. 
(5)  The accessory structures must meet all National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) opening requirements. The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the 100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters in accordance with article IV, section 10-62(1)(c) of this chapter. 
(6)  The accessory structures must comply with the floodplain management floodway encroachment provisions of article IV, section 10-64(2) of this chapter. No variances may be issued for accessory structures within any designated floodway, if any increase in flood levels would result during the 100-year flood. 
(7)  Equipment, machinery, or other contents must be protected from any flood damage. 
(8)  No disaster relief assistance under any program administered by any Federal agency shall be paid for any repair or restoration costs of the accessory structures. 
(9)  A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage and (2) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this chapter. 
(10)  Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and approved by the community and registered professional engineer or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for construction. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Secs. 10-87-10-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION 

Sec. 10-101. - Generally. 
    Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with granting of variances) shall constitute an infraction. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Ballwin or other appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Secs. 10-102-10-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 10-121. - Generally. 
    The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this ordinance may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or appealed to reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties of interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Ballwin least 20 days shall elapse between the date of this publication and the public hearing. A copy of such amendments will be provided to the Region VII office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The regulations of this chapter are in compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) regulations. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Secs. 10-122-10-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 10-141. - Generally. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    100-year flood. See "base flood." 
    Accessory structure means the same as "appurtenant structure." 
    Actuarial rates. See "risk premium rates." 
    Administrator means the Federal Insurance Administrator. 
    Agency means the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
    Agricultural commodities means agricultural products and livestock. 
    Agricultural structure means any structure used exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of agricultural commodities. 
    Appeal means a request for review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
    Appurtenant structure means a structure that is on the same parcel of property as the principle structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of the structure having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building. See "structure." 
    Chief executive officer or chief elected official means the official of the community who is charged with the authority to implement and administer laws, ordinances, and regulations for that community. 
    Community means any state or area or political subdivision thereof, which has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction. 
    Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, levees, levee systems, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means for insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    Eligible community or participating community means a community for which the Administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance under the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the overflow of inland and/or (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) means an official map of a community on which the Administrator has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the designated regulatory floodway. 
    Flood elevation determination means a determination by the administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards. 
    Flood fringe means the area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but still subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Administrator, where the boundaries of the flood areas having special flood hazards have been designated as (unnumbered or numbered) A zones. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations. 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see "flooding"). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain and grading ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, that provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, or structures and their contents. 
    Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    Floodway encroachment lines means the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state and local floodplain maps. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as bridge openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This term includes only docking facilities and facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is (a) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either (1) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable floodproofing design requirements of this chapter. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Map means the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM), flood insurance rate map (FIRM), or the flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) for a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
    Market value or fair market value means an estimate of what is fair, economic, just and equitable value under normal local market conditions. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the community. 
    (NFIP) means the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
    Participating community also known as an "eligible community," means a community in which the administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance. 
    Person includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including federal, state, and local governments and agencies. 
    Principally above ground means that at least 51 percent of the actual cash value of the structure, less land value, is above ground. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with federal, state, or local floodplain management regulations; or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. 
    Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, equals or exceeds twenty-five percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Risk premium rates means those rates established by the administrator pursuant to individual community studies and investigations which are undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with Section 1307 of the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 and the accepted actuarial principles. "Risk premium rates" include provisions for operating costs and allowances. 
    Special flood hazard area. See "area of special flood hazard." 
    Special hazard area means an area having special flood hazards and shown on an FHBM, FIRM or FBFM as zones (unnumbered or numbered) A and AE. 
    Start of construction includes substantial-improvements, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvements were within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, the installation of streets and/or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, the erection of temporary forms, nor installation on the property of accessory structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial-improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    State coordinating agency means that agency of the state government, or other office designated by the governor of the state or by state statute at the request of the administrator to assist in the implementation of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) in that state. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. "Structure" for insurance purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent site, as well as a manufactured home on a permanent foundation. For the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of construction, alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises. 
    Substantial-damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. The term includes Repetitive Loss buildings (see definition). 
    For the purposes of this definition, "repair" is considered to occur when the first repair or reconstruction of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences. 
    The term does not apply to: 
(a)  Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the code enforcement official and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 
(b)  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure", or 
(c)  Any improvement to a building. 
    Substantial improvement means any combination of reconstruction, alteration, or improvement to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative percentage of improvement equals or exceeds fifty percent of the current market value of the building. For the purposes of this definition, an improvement occurs when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. This term includes structures, which have incurred "repetitive loss" or "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work done. 
    The term does not apply to: 
(a)  Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the code enforcement official and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; 
(b)  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure"; or 
(c)  Any building that has been damaged from any source or is categorized as repetitive loss. 
    ** Recommend development of written and adopted policy and procedure. 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Variance means a grant of relief by the community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. Flood insurance requirements remain in place for any varied use or structure and cannot be varied by the community. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Chapter 11 - GRADING, EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 04-07, § 2, adopted Jan. 26, 2004, repealed the former Ch. 11, §§ 11-1, 11-2, 11-16-11-20, and enacted a new Ch. 11 as set out herein. The former Ch. 11 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1973, §§ 101/2-2-101/2-7; Ord. No. 03-07, § 2, adopted Jan. 27, 2003. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; buildings and structures, ch. 7; flood hazard areas, ch. 10; licenses and business regulations, ch. 14; planning and development, ch. 19; streets and sidewalks, ch. 24; grading around family swimming pool area, § 26-123. 
State Law reference- Mining regulations, RSMo Ch. 293; rights and duties of miners and mine owners, RSMo Ch. 444. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Introduction/purpose. 
(a)  During the construction process, soil is highly vulnerable to erosion by wind and water. Eroded soil endangers water resources by reducing water quality and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other desirable species. Deposits of eroded soil also necessitate maintenance of sewers and ditches and the dredging of lakes. In addition, clearing and grading during construction cause the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat. Construction activities also utilize materials and generate wastes, which if not properly controlled can pollute receiving waters. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to safeguard persons, protect property, and prevent damage to the environment in the city. This article will also promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land in the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-07, § 2, Exh. 1, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 11-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. 
    Best management practices or BMPs: Practices, procedures or a schedule of activities to reduce the amount of sediment and other pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction and land disturbance activities. 
    Clearing: Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover. This includes clear cutting and timber removal even if the stump portion of the vegetation is not removed from the ground. 
    Construction or land disturbance site or site: A parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed. 
    Drainageway: Any channel that conveys surface runoff through a site. 
    Erosion: The wearing away of land surface through the action of wind, water, gravity, or any combination of those forces. 
    Erosion control: Any BMP that prevents or minimizes erosion. 
    Grading: Reshaping the ground surface through relocation, removal and/or placement of manmade or natural materials, including the resulting conditions. 
    Land disturbance activities: Any activity or use of land such as but not limited to clearing, grading, occupancy, transportation or any other action which results in removal or destruction of the natural site vegetation and destruction of or damage to the root zone or otherwise results in leaving the ground surface exposed to soil erosion through the action of wind, water or gravity. 
    Perimeter control: A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin. 
    Phasing: Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the each phase substantially completed before the commencement of the next. 
    Runoff coefficient: The fraction of total rainfall that will appear at the outfalls from a site. 
    Sediment control: Any BMP that prevents eroded sediment from leaving a site. 
    Site disturbance permit: A permit issued by the city authorizing disturbance of the land at a specific site subject to conditions stated in the permit. 
    Stabilization: The use of BMPs that prevent exposed soil from eroding. This may include site improvements, grading and structures for the control of erosion and runoff. 
    Start of construction: The first land-disturbing activity associated with a development, including mobilization, site access, land preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers, or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP): A management plan, the purpose of which is to ensure the design, implementation, management and maintenance of BMPs in order to reduce the amount of sediment and other pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with land disturbance activities, comply with the standards of the city and ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of the applicable state permits, including adherence to the land disturbance program contained in Missouri state issued MS4 NPDES permit. 
    Water course: A natural or artificial channel or body of water, including, but not limited to, lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, ditches and other open conveyances that carry surface runoff water either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 04-07, § 2, Exh. 1, 1-26-04; Ord. No. 11-37, § 1, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 11-3. - Permits. 
(a)  A land disturbance permit must be issue by the City of Ballwin for any land disturbance activity that will disturb 10,000 or more square feet or for any land disturbance activity for and area of any size that the city engineer determines will create an erosion, flooding, or sedimentation hazard. 
(b)  A new or separate land disturbance permit must be issued for any parcel separated and transferred to new ownership from a parcel for which a land disturbance permit was previously issued pursuant to subsection (a) above unless the separated parcel has been purchased for the purpose of building a private residence or structure and the original permittee retains responsibility for the land disturbance activities on the separated parcel. 
(c)  Land Site disturbance permits are not required for the following activities: 
(1)  Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources. 
(2)  Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use and operating on the day of adoption of this ordinance. 
(d)  Each permit application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site, and of any grading or development consulting firm retained by the applicant together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm and shall be accompanied by a filing fee. 
(e)  Each land disturbance permit application shall be accompanied by a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), prepared for the specific site by or under the direction of a professional engineer or landscape architect registered in the state and a statement that any land clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the stormwater pollution prevention plan. 
(f)  The permit applicant will be required to file a surety in the form of a faithful performance bond, letter of credit, or other improvement security acceptable to the city. The land disturbance permit surety bond shall be in the following amounts as determined by the city engineer to cover all costs for the maintenance of improvements, and all engineering and inspection costs necessary to complete any incomplete work or correct any failure on the part of the permittee to repair or maintain improvements installed on the site for such period as is specified within the land disturbance permit. 
Land disturbance activity: 110 percent of the value of the work. 
Nonpublic improvements: Ten percent of the value of the work. 
Public improvements: 110 percent of the value of the work. 
    The surety will be reduced or an amount released equal to the amount of the surety deposited with the Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District (MSD) for work and improvements physically located on the parcel for which the permit is being issued or are exclusively associated with the land disturbance and improvements to the parcel. 
    Land disturbance activities include clearing, grubbing, grading, mining, filling, SWPPP, retaining walls. 
    Nonpublic improvements include site improvements which will not be maintained by a governmental agency or a subdivision association. 
    Public improvements include all physical site improvements constructed within publicly dedicated street rights-of-way and storm and sanitary sewer systems that will be maintained by a public agency. 
(g)  The permit applicant will be required to obtain a land disturbance permit issued by the Missouri Department of Natural Resources for any site where one acre or more of land will be disturbed, before beginning any site work authorized by a city permit. This requirement applies to sites of less than one acre that are part of a larger common plan that will ultimately disturb one acre or more. 
    The permit applicant will also be required to obtain project approval and permits as may be applicable from MoDOT, MSD, St. Louis County and any other governmental agency with jurisdiction in Ballwin and over the land subject to this Ballwin Land Disturbance Permit before Ballwin will issue a land disturbance permit. 
(h)  The following fees shall be due for permits issued hereunder: 
(1)  A one-time permit issue fee of $100.00; 
(2)  An annual grading inspection fee payable on the issuance of the permit and renewable each year thereafter in the initial and annual renewal amounts of $1,200.00 plus an amount derived by multiplying the number of acres comprising the of area covered by the permit times $150.00. 
    In those situations where all grading is completed on or before six months of the date of the permit issuance fee payment, the city shall refund 50 percent of the grading inspection fee to the named person originally applying for the grading permit. Permits are not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 04-07, § 2, Exh. 1, 1-26-04; Ord. No. 05-18, § 1, 3-14-05; Ord. No. 11-37, § 1, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 11-4. - Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). 
(a)  The design requirements in section 11-5 shall be taken into consideration when developing the stormwater pollution prevention plan and the plan shall include the following: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the site owner and the name, address and telephone number of the individual who will be in overall responsible charge of construction/development activities at the site. 
(2)  Site address or location description. 
(3)  A site map showing the outlines of the total project area, the areas to be disturbed, existing land uses, locations and names of surface water bodies, locations of temporary and permanent BMPS and such other information as the city engineer may require. 
(4)  Existing contours at a minimum of two-foot intervals of the site and at least 50 feet onto the adjoining strips of off-site property and proposed contours after completion of the proposed grading and development, based on United States Geological Survey datum, with established elevations at buildings, walks, drives, street and roads; and information on necessary clearing and grubbing, removal of existing structures, excavating, filling, spreading and compacting. 
(5)  A natural resources map identifying soils, forest cover, and resources protected under other chapters of this Code. 
(6)  An estimate of the runoff coefficient of the site based on 100 percent perviousness and the runoff coefficient after the construction addressed in the permit application is completed. 
(7)  Estimated grading, silt control, retaining walls, detention basin outfall and sodding, revegetation, truck and equipment wash down area(s) and other items of work related to grading quantities. 
(8)  Details of the site drainage pattern both before and after major grading activities, along with details of the site drainage system that will be utilized during the grading operation. Calculations shall be provided that will verify that the site drainage system has been designed properly. 
(9)  Construction access to site. 
(10)  Description of BMPs to be utilized to control erosion and sedimentation during the period of land disturbance. 
(11)  Description of BMPs to be utilized to prevent other potential pollutants such as construction wastes, toxic or hazardous substances, petroleum products, pesticides, herbicides, site litter, sanitary wastes and other pollutants from entering the natural drainage ways during the period of construction and land disturbance. 
(12)  Description of BMPs that will be installed during land disturbance to control pollutants in stormwater discharges that will occur after land disturbance activity has been completed. 
(13)  Location of temporary off-street parking, and washdown area and water sources for related vehicles. 
(14)  Sources of off-site borrow material or spoil sites, and all information relative to haul routes, trucks and equipment. Approval of the haul route from the agency having jurisdiction over the road(s) along the haul route. 
(15)  The anticipated sequence of construction and land disturbance activities, including installation of BMPS, removal of temporary BMPs, stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date(s) on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation. 
(16)  All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the objectives of this ordinance throughout all phases of construction and after completion of site development. Depending upon the complexity of the project, the drafting of intermediate plans may be required at the close of each season. 
(17)  Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures. Off-site areas shall be restored with sod of like type as the existing. 
(18)  Provisions for maintenance of erosion, sediment and stormwater management control facilities during the site disturbance phase, including easements. 
(19)  Plans for responding to any loss of contained sediment to include the immediate actions the permittee will take in case of a containment failure. This plan must include documentation of actions and mandatory reporting to the department of public works. 
(20)  Schedules and procedures for routine inspections of any structures provided to prevent pollution of stormwater or to remove pollutants from stormwater and of the site in general to ensure all BMPs are continually implemented and are effective. 
(b)  The permittee shall amend the stormwater pollution prevention plan whenever: 
(1)  Design, operation or maintenance of BMPs is changed; 
(2)  Design of the construction project is changed that could significantly affect the quality of the stormwater discharges; 
(3)  Site operator's inspections indicate deficiencies in the SWPPP or any BMP; 
(4)  Inspections by the city or by the Missouri Department of Natural Resources indicate deficiencies in the SWPPP or any BMP; 
(5)  The SWPPP is determined to be ineffective in significantly minimizing or controlling erosion or excessive sediment deposits in streams or lakes; 
(6)  The SWPPP is determined to be ineffective in preventing pollution of waterways from construction wastes, chemicals, fueling facilities, concrete truck washouts, toxic or hazardous materials, site litter or other substances or wastes likely to have an adverse impact on water quality; 
(7)  Total settleable solids from a stormwater outfall exceeds 0.5 ml/L/hr if the discharge is within the prescribed proximity of a "valuable resource water" as defined by the MDNR; 
(8)  Total settleable solids from a stormwater outfall exceeds 2.5 ml/L/hr for any other outfall; or 
(9)  The city or the Missouri Department of Natural Resources determines violations of water quality standards may occur or have occurred. 
(c)  The permittee shall: 
(1)  Notify all contractors and other entities (including utility crews, city employees, or their agents) who will perform work at the site, of the existence of the SWPPP and what actions or precautions shall be taken while on site to minimize the potential for erosion and the potential for damaging any BMP; 
(2)  Determine the need for and establish training programs to ensure that all site workers have been trained, as a minimum, in erosion control, material handling and storage, and housekeeping; 
(3)  Provide copies of the SWPPP to all parties who are responsible for installation, operation or maintenance of any BMP; and 
(4)  Maintain a current copy of the SWPPP on the site at all times. 
(Ord. No. 04-07, § 2, Exh. 1, 1-26-04; Ord. No. 11-37, § 1, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 11-5. - Design requirements. 
(a)  Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and water course crossings shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
(b)  Cut and fill slopes shall be no greater than 3:1, except as approved by the city engineer to meet other community or environmental objectives. 
(c)  Clearing and grading of natural resources, such as forests and wetlands, shall not be permitted, except when in compliance with all other chapters of this Code. 
(d)  Clearing techniques that retain existing vegetation to the maximum extent practicable shall be used and the time period for disturbed areas to be without vegetative cover shall be minimized to the extent practical, to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
(e)  Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have been stabilized. 
(f)  Phasing shall be required on all sites disturbing greater than ten acres, with the size of each phase to be established at plan review and as approved by the city engineer. 
(g)  Erosion control requirements shall include the following: 
(1)  Soil stabilization shall be completed within five days of clearing or inactivity in construction. 
(2)  If seeding or another vegetative erosion control method is used, it shall become established within two weeks or the department of public works may require the site to be reseeded or a non-vegetative option employed. 
(3)  Techniques shall be employed to ensure stabilization on steep slopes and in drainage ways. 
(4)  Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered at the end of each workday, or perimeter controls must be in place to prevent silt from the stockpile from leaving the site. 
(5)  The entire site must be stabilized, using a heavy mulch layer or another method that does not require germination to control erosion, at the close of the construction season. 
(6)  Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or sediment from the site. 
(7)  Techniques shall be employed to divert upland runoff past disturbed slopes. 
(h)  Sediment control requirements shall include: 
(1)  Settling basins, sediment traps, or tanks and perimeter controls. 
(2)  Settling basins shall be provided for each drainage area with ten or more acres disturbed at one time and shall be sized to contain 0.5 inch of sediment from the drainage area and be able to contain a two-year, 24-hour storm. If the provision of a basin of this size is impractical, other similarly effective BMPs, as evaluated and specified in the SWPPP, shall be provided. 
(3)  Settling basins shall be designed in a manner that allows adaptation to provide long-term storm water management, as required by the department of public works. 
(4)  Settling basins shall have stabilized spillways to minimize the potential for erosion of the spillway or basin embankment. 
(5)  Protection for adjacent properties by the use of a vegetated buffer strip in combination with perimeter controls. 
(i)  Water course protection requirements shall include: 
(1)  Encroachment into or crossings of active water courses/riparian areas and wetlands shall be avoided to the maximum extent practicable. Where applicable, all local, state and federal permits and approvals shall be provided to the department of public works prior to the issuance of a site disturbance permit. 
(2)  Stabilization of any watercourse channels before, during, and after any in-channel work. 
(3)  If a defined watercourse is to be re-aligned or reconfigured, clearing and grubbing activities within 50 feet of the watercourse shall not begin until all materials and equipment necessary to protect the watercourse and complete the work are on site. Once started, work shall be completed as soon as possible. Areas within 50 feet of the watercourse shall be recontoured and revegetated, seeded or otherwise protected within five working days after grading has ceased. 
(4)  All storm water conveyances shall be designed according to the criteria of the Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District (MSD) and the necessary MSD permits obtained. However, the 25-year storm frequency shall be used in computing post development runoff. 
(5)  Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion shall be provided at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels. 
(j)  Construction site access requirements shall include: 
(1)  A temporary access road provided at all sites including a wash-down area with an identified water sources supporting all active sites, 
(2)  Other measures required by department of public works in order to ensure that sediment is not tracked onto public streets by construction vehicles or washed with wash effluent channeled directly into storm drains. 
(k)  Control requirements for construction materials, construction wastes and other wastes generated on site shall include provisions, satisfactory to the department of public works, for: 
(1)  Spill prevention and control facilities for materials such as paint, solvents, petroleum products, chemicals, toxic or hazardous substances, substances regulated under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) or the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), and any wastes generated from the use of such materials and substances, including their containers. Any containment systems employed to meet this requirement shall be constructed of materials compatible with the substances contained and shall be adequate to protect both surface and ground water. 
(2)  Collection and disposal of discarded building materials and other construction site wastes, including those listed in subsection (1) above. 
(3)  Litter control. 
(4)  Control of concrete truck washouts. 
(5)  Assurance that on-site fueling facilities will adhere to applicable federal and state regulations concerning storage and dispensers. 
(6)  Provision of sufficient temporary toilet facilities to serve the number of workers on site. 
(Ord. No. 04-07, § 2, Exh. 1, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 11-6. - Inspections. 
(a)  The department of public works shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the grading, erosion and sediment control plan as approved. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating, and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the city engineer and the city planner shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the work. To obtain inspections, the permittee shall notify the department of public works at least two working days before the following: 
(1)  Start of construction; 
(2)  Installation of sediment and erosion measures; 
(3)  Completion of site clearing; 
(4)  Completion of rough grading; 
(5)  Completion of final grading; 
(6)  Close of the construction season; 
(7)  Completion of final landscaping. 
(b)  The permittee or his/her agent shall make regular inspections of the land disturbance site, including all erosion and sediment and other pollutant control measures, outfalls and off-site receiving waters in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined in the approved SWPPP. Inspections must be scheduled at least once per week and no later than 72 hours after heavy rain. The purpose of such inspections will be to ensure proper installation, operation and maintenance of BMPs and to determine the overall effectiveness of the SWPPP and the need for additional control measures. All inspections shall be documented in written form on weekly reports with copies submitted to the department of public works within 144 hours after the heavy rain. The inspection reports are to include the following minimum information: 
(1)  Inspector's name and signature; 
(2)  Date of inspection; 
(3)  Observations relative to the effectiveness of the BMPs; 
(4)  Actions taken or necessary to correct deficiencies; and 
(5)  A listing of areas where land disturbance operations have permanently or temporarily stopped. 
In addition, the permittee shall notify the site contractor(s) responsible for any deficiencies identified so that deficiencies can be corrected within seven calendar days of the inspection report. 
(c)  The department of public works shall make inspections as deemed necessary to ensure the validity of the reports filed under subsection (b) or to otherwise ensure proper installation, operation and maintenance of storm water BMPs and to determine the overall effectiveness of the SWPPP and the need for additional control measures. 
(Ord. No. 04-07, § 2, Exh. 1, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 11-7. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Stop-work order; revocation of permit. In the event that any person holding a site disturbance permit pursuant to this ordinance violates the terms of the permit or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the city engineer may suspend or revoke the site disturbance permit. 
(b)  Violation and penalties. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this ordinance. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and each day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance is committed, continued, or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 for each offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this chapter, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration. 
(c)  Project closure requirements. Any site development escrows or bonds will be not be fully released to the site operator or permittee until all of the following have been completed: 
(1)  All temporary storm water control BMPs have been removed and the site has been fully stabilized. 
(2)  All permanent storm water control BMPs have been completed. 
(3)  All final inspections/certifications have been completed by each of the government jurisdictions involved in authorizing the project. 
(4)  The on-site and off-site areas have been revegetated whereas the city engineer has determined that erosion is no longer a concern. 
(Ord. No. 04-07, § 2, Exh. 1, 1-26-04) 
Secs. 11-8-11-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURAL GUIDANCE FOR CONSTRUCTION AND LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES AND RELATED STORM WATER CONTROL REQUIREMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 04-09, adopted Feb. 23, 2004, added provisions to the Code, but did not specify manner of inclusion. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been included as Art. II herein. 

Sec. 11-26. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this guidance manual is to provide direction to municipal officials and staff for implementing the provisions of municipal ordinances pertaining to regulation of land disturbance activities and related storm water controls. This guidance will help promote efficient plan reviews and processing of permit applications so as to benefit the community and to ensure compliance with the terms of the City of Ballwin's state issued MS4 NPDES permit. Certain requirements of Section 4.2.4 of the MS4 permit, as referenced below, are addressed within this guidance manual. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, Exh. 1, 2-23-04) 
Sec. 11-27. - General provisions. 
(a)  The department of public works shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of the Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance #04-07 (codified as Article I herein). The department of public works shall review all permit applications submitted pursuant to that ordinance and shall issue permits with such conditions as deemed appropriate to enable compliance with the grading ordinance and other related ordinances. The department shall conduct all required inspections of permitted sites and shall be responsible for initiating enforcement actions when violations are identified. 
(b)  Persons who intend to disturb land within the city, will be reminded, at the time of initial contact with municipal officials, of the need to obtain a separate land disturbance permit from the Missouri Department of Natural Resources for any construction or land disturbance activity that will result in disturbance of one acre or more of land. Persons, intending to disturb such acreage must be informed that site work may not commence until the state permit has been obtained. No municipal permit, for sites of one acre or above, will be issued until a land disturbance permit has been issued by DNR. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, Exh. 1, 2-23-04) 
Sec. 11-28. - Water quality considerations. 
    During review of site plans, storm water pollution prevention plans (SWPPP) and other documents submitted as part of the permit application, department staff shall consider the potential water quality impacts of the project both during the construction/land disturbance phase and after site development is fully complete. Department staff should consider the provisions within the Missouri Water Quality Standards, the Missouri Impaired Waters list (303(d) list), the federal Endangered Species Act, the National Historic Preservation Act and proximity to water bodies identified by MDNR as "valuable resource waters" (see below). To the maximum extent practicable under state and local laws, the department shall include such conditions in permits as are appropriate to prevent or minimize impacts on water quality. Department staff shall solicit comments or advice, when deemed appropriate, from the Missouri Department of Natural Resources, the Missouri Department of Conservation, the Soil and Water Conservation District, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and such other state and national regulatory bodies as may have expertise related to a specific project or area. (See Section 4.2.4.2.4 of the MS4 permit) 
ATTACHMENT TO PROCEDURAL GUIDANCE 
LISTING OF MISSOURI VALUABLE RESOURCE WATERS 
    The Missouri Department of Natural Resources imposes additional requirements in state land disturbance permits for sites from which storm water will discharge to "valuable resource waters." The following table identifies water bodies defined as "valuable resource waters" in MDNR General Permit MO-R109000 and the distances from such water bodies within which additional permit requirements apply: 
VALUABLE RESOURCE WATERS WATER BODY* PERMIT MO-R109000 CONDITIONS APPLY IF DISCHARGES FROM A LAND DISTURBANCE SITE ARE WITHINTHE FOLLOWING DISTANCES FROM THE WATER BODY Losing stream 1,000 feet Outstanding National or State Resource Water 1,000 feet Class L1 lakes or reservoirs used for public drinking water supply 1,000 feet Water body identified as critical habitat for endangered species 1,000 feet Class P stream 100 feet Class L2 reservoir 100 feet Biocriteria reference locations 2 miles upstream Class W (Wetland that meets the criteria in the Corps of Engineers Delineation Manual (January 1987) On site Groundwater Discharge to a sinkhole or other direct conduit to groundwater * See listings in Missouri Water Quality Standards 10 CSR 20-7.031  
(Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, Exh. 1, 2-23-04) 
Sec. 11-29. - Public inquiries/complaints. 
    The department of public works shall maintain a system for recording and tracking inquiries and complaints received from the public regarding proposed and active land disturbance sites within the city. The following information shall be logged, on a standard form, for each inquiry/complaint: 
  Date; 
  Name, address and telephone number of the inquiring/complaining party; 
  Nature of inquiry/complaint, including all pertinent information related thereto; and 
  Follow-up action. If an inspection is performed, all information regarding the date and time, inspector's name, findings and any mitigation or enforcement actions initiated shall be recorded. 
All inquiries or complaints must be logged. However, it is up to the sole discretion of the department of public works, with such consultation with other departments or agencies as may be deemed appropriate, as to whether any follow-up action is deemed appropriate. If no follow-up action is deemed necessary, a short explanation shall be recorded on the standard inquiry form. (See Section 4.2.4.2.5 of the MS4 permit) 
(Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, Exh. 1, 2-23-04) 
Sec. 11-30. - Inspections/reports. 
    The department of public works shall inspect each permitted site at the frequency specified in the sections 11-1 through 11-7 and at such other times as necessary to follow-up on public inquiries/complaints or to follow-up on previously identified deficiencies. The results of all inspections shall be recorded in written reports and maintained in the project file. Inspections shall be carried out in such a way as to determine whether the site operator is complying with all provisions of the City of Ballwin permit. (See Section 4.2.4.2.6 of the MS4 permit) 
(Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, Exh. 1, 2-23-04) 
Sec. 11-31. - Transfer of ownership. 
(a)  Individual lot or lots. City of Ballwin ordinances require a permit, as well as controls for sediment, erosion and other construction site pollutants for disturbed areas of land in excess of one acre disturbed as part of a common plan or sale. That language means the lot(s) when sold to an entity for construction (unless sold to an individual for purposes of building their own private residence) are also subject to ordinance requirements because they are part of the common sale. A current permittee who intends to transfer ownership of a lot or parcel of the overall permitted area is still responsible for the terms of the city permit and the SWPPP and erosion control on that site unless the new owner applies for and receives a separate permit for land disturbance activities. If the current permittee is to retain the permit and responsibility for control of sediment and other pollutants at the site, then the owner should obtain a copy of an individual lot certification (ILC) from the lot owner(s). The ILC should be properly completed and signed and retained with the SWPPP. 
(b)  Entire tract. If the entire tract is sold to a single entity, then the city permit shall be terminated and the new owner shall submit an application for a new permit immediately. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, Exh. 1, 2-23-04) 
Sec. 11-32. - Reference sources. 
    The staff will provide every permit applicant with the following list of reference and guidance documents, which may be employed in development of the SWPPP. For activities requiring state land disturbance permits, the first two documents listed are considered mandatory references for all applicants. 
"Storm Water Management for Construction Activities-Developing Pollution Prevention Plans and Best Management Practices" September 1992 - United State Environmental Protection Agency Office of Water, EPA 832-R-92-005; 
"Protecting Water Quality-A field guide to erosion, sediment and storm water best management practices for development sites in Missouri and Kansas" September 1998-Prepared by the St. Charles County Soil and Water Conservation District, St. Charles, Missouri, the Dam and Reservoir Safety Program, Division of Geology and Land Survey, Missouri Department of Natural Resources, Rolla, Missouri; 
"Urban Conservation Policy Handbook" June 1998-The Mid-America Association of Conservation Districts, The Missouri Department of Natural Resources, The United States Environmental Protection Agency Region VII; 
"Missouri Standards and Specifications for Highway Construction" 1999 or latest edition-Missouri Highways and Transportation Commission; 
"Standard Construction Specifications for Sewers and Drainage Facilities" 2000 or latest edition-Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District; 
"Rules and Regulations and Engineering Design Requirements for Sanitary Sewage and Storm Water Drainage Facilities" February 1997 or latest edition-Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District; 
"Standards Specification for Highway Construction" January 1, 1997 or latest edition-St. Louis County Department of Highways and Traffic; 
"Design Criteria Book for the Preparation of Improvement Plans" March 1, 2000 or latest edition (Storm Water Design 50.10 to 50.60.)-St. Louis County Department of Highways and Traffic; 
Any City of Ballwin specific guidance documents. 
The permit applicant is not limited to the use of these guidance manuals. Other commonly accepted publications may be used for guidance and must be referenced in the SWPPP. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, Exh. 1, 2-23-04) 
Sec. 11-33. - Inspections. 
    The department of public works will conduct inspections of storm water BMPs as follows and at such time the area(s) is(are) accessible: 
(1)  Receipt of notification from the permittee that BMPs are in place; 
(2)  Receipt of a complaint; 
(3)  Heavy rain storm; 
(4)  Receipt of notification from the permittee that the construction season is closing; 
(5)  Receipt of notification from the permittee that the final grading is complete; 
(6)  Completion of the revegetation of the site. 
(See section 11-6 and Section 4.2.4.2.6 of the MS4 permit) 
(Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, Exh. 1, 2-23-04) 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER 

Sec 11-34. - Approval. 
    The City Engineer and the Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District (MSD) shall review, stamp and sign improvement plans bearing the seal and signature of a Missouri licensed engineer setting out the storm and sanitary sewer designs, detention, grading, water quality and related stormwater runoff improvements meeting all standards of design and function currently on record at MSD for all land developments submitted to Ballwin for approval. Compliance with MSD standards shall only be certified by the submittal to Ballwin of plans and specifications bearing MSD's stamp and written approval. 
(Ord. No. 11-21, § 2, 6-13-11) 
Sec. 11-35. - Waiver by board of aldermen. 
    MSD's design standards as required in section 11-34 shall apply to small development proposals that do not meet MSD's threshold for applicability. The City of Ballwin shall request that MSD conduct plan review of such development proposals. However, the board of aldermen shall retain the authority to waive compliance with the MSD standards if it is determined that the proposed facilities are redundant or otherwise unnecessary. 
(Ord. No. 04-07, § 2, Exh. 1, 1-26-04; Ord. No. 11-37, § 1, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 11-36. - Stormwater standards. 
(a)  Any lot, parcel of ground, site or land which is nonconforming to MSD detention and/or water quality standards currently in force upon the date of adoption of this ordinance may continue to be nonconforming to such standards as they may be amended and changed in the future as long as the lot, parcel, site or land improvements in place on the date of adoption of this ordinance are not changed or modified in any way. 
(b)  If any portion of any legally nonconforming lot, parcel, site or land that is developed in a use other than single family residential is physically altered, redeveloped, changed or amended in any way, it shall be brought into compliance with MSD's stormwater detention and water quality standards currently in effect on the date of such change to the lot, parcel, site or land pursuant to section 11-34 as follows: 
(1)  Any lot, parcel, site or land improvement change that impacts or involves in any way up to one-third of the gross area of the nonconforming portion of the lot, parcel, site or land shall include detention and water quality improvements that meet the MSD standards of capacity and size necessary to accommodate a full one-third of the gross area of the lot, parcel, site or land. 
(2)  Any lot, parcel, site or land improvement change that impacts or involves in any way more than one-third of the gross area of the nonconforming portion of the lot, parcel, site or land up to two-thirds of the gross area of the nonconforming portion of lot, parcel, site or land shall include detention and water quality improvements that meet the MSD standards of capacity and size necessary to accommodate a full two-thirds of the gross area of the lot, parcel, site or land. 
(3)  Any lot, parcel, site or land improvement change that impacts or involves in any way more than two-thirds of the gross area of the nonconforming portion of lot, parcel, site or land up to the entire gross area of the nonconforming portion of lot, parcel, site or land shall include detention and water quality improvements that meet the MSD standards of capacity and size necessary to accommodate the entire lot, parcel, site or land. 
(4)  Said improvements shall not be triggered by the replacement or enhancement of landscaping materials within established landscaped areas of a site, purely architectural amendments to an existing building on a site, the placement of an otherwise legal sign upon a site or the change of occupancy of any portion of any building or tenant space within an existing building provided that there are no changes to the site improvements associated with such occupancy change. 
(c)  Because single family residential development has a low percentage of imperviousness, the provisions of this section shall not apply to the redevelopment of any portion of any legally nonconforming lot, parcel, site or land that is developed in a single family residential use if the area being disturbed is less than one acre. 
(Ord. No. 11-21, § 2, 6-13-11) 
Chapter 12 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; animals and fowl, ch. 5; nonconforming use in flood hazard area, § 10-7; housing, ch. 13; licenses and business regulations, ch. 14; conditions of license for auction and estate sales, § 14-293; controlled substances, § 17-61; drug paraphernalia, § 17-81 et seq.; sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 21; solid waste, ch. 23; swimming pools, ch. 26; trailers and recreational vehicles, ch. 28; weeds and vegetation, ch. 29; occupancy permit required, app. A, art. VII, § 1. 
State Law reference- Municipal health regulations, RSMo 79.380. 

Sec. 12-1. - Authority to contract with county for services. 
    The mayor may appoint the county health commissioner as director of public health and sanitation of the city and may contract with the county for the services of such commissioner and the county department of health to perform the duties of the director of public health and sanitation of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 11-5) 
Chapter 13 - HOUSING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; animals and fowl, ch. 5; buildings and structures, ch. 7; building commissioner, § 7-21 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 12; licenses and business regulations, ch. 14; sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 21; trailers and recreational vehicles, ch. 28; weeds and vegetation, ch. 29; occupancy permit required, app. A, art. XVIII, § 1. 
State Law reference- Inadequate and deficient housing, RSMo 441.500 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the housing code of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 12-1) 
Sec. 13-2. - Purpose. 
    The general purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, comfort, morals and the general welfare of the people of the city. These general objectives include, among others, the following specific purposes: 
(1)  To protect the character and stability of residential areas within the city. 
(2)  To provide minimum standards for cooking, heating and sanitary equipment necessary to the health and safety of occupants of buildings. 
(3)  To provide facilities for light and ventilation, necessary to health and safety. 
(4)  To prevent additions or alterations to existing dwellings that would be injurious to the life, health, safety or general welfare of the occupants of such dwellings or neighboring properties. 
(5)  To prevent the overcrowding of dwellings by providing minimum space standards per occupant of each dwelling unit. 
(6)  To provide minimum standards for the maintenance of existing residential buildings and to prohibit the spread of slums and blight. 
(7)  To preserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the city. 
(Code 1973, § 12-2) 
Sec. 13-3. - Conflicting provisions. 
(a)  This chapter establishes minimum standards for dwelling units and accessory buildings and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established for the construction, replacement or repair of buildings except such as are in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Any inconsistency or conflict between the provisions of this chapter or any existing ordinance shall not repeal such provision or ordinance; but the provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative thereto. 
(Code 1973, § 12-3) 
Sec. 13-4. - Conformance to chapter required. 
    Every building or its premises used in whole or in part as a home or residence or as an accessory structure thereof, of a single family or person, and every building used in whole or in part as a home or residence of two or more persons or families, living in separate apartments, shall conform to the requirements of this chapter, irrespective of the class to which such buildings may otherwise belong, and irrespective of when such buildings may have been constructed, altered or repaired. 
(Code 1973, § 12-4) 
Secs. 13-5-13-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INSPECTIONS AND CERTIFICATES 

Sec. 13-21. - Inspection authorized; access. 
    The building commissioner is authorized and directed to make inspections to determine whether dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, accessory structures and premises located within the city conform to the requirements of this chapter. For the purpose of making such inspections, the building commissioner is authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, accessory structures and premises. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, accessory structure and its premises shall give the building commissioner free access thereto at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey. 
(Code 1973, § 12-35) 
Sec. 13-22. - Occupancy permit required; fees. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or for any owner or agent thereof to permit the occupation of any building, or addition thereto, or part thereof, for any purpose until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building commissioner. Every owner, agent or manager of any building, or addition thereto, shall inform the building commissioner whenever any portion of such building or any dwelling unit therein becomes vacant and request an inspection thereof under the provisions of this chapter. The certificate of occupancy so issued shall state that the occupancy complies with all the provisions of this chapter. This section shall not apply to any occupancy in existence on August 23, 1971. 
(b)  There shall be no fee for the occupancy permit required under this section. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statement in his application for an occupancy permit as to the names, ages, relationship or number of occupants who will occupy the premises. 
(Code 1973, § 12-36; Ord. No. 03-17, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 13-23. - Inspections and certificates of compliance. 
    If the inspected premises meet city standards, a certificate of compliance shall be issued. The certificate shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of the last inspection performed. 
(Code 1973, § 12-37) 
Sec. 13-24. - Inspection fees. 
(a)  A fee of $100.00 shall be paid to the city and shall accompany each request for inspection of a single-family dwelling. For the purpose of this section, a dwelling unit occupied as a condominium shall be considered a single-family dwelling. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided, a fee of $30.00 for each inspection shall be paid to the city and shall accompany each request for inspection of a dwelling unit in a multifamily dwelling. 
(c)  A fee of $25.00 shall be charged for each reinspection. This fee shall be paid before another inspection is scheduled. A reinspection fee shall be charged for all inspections after a first reinspection in made. No reinspection fee shall apply for reinspections because of life safety violation in conjunction with a code compliance agreement pursuant to section 13-34. 
(Code 1973, § 12-38; Ord. No. 2710, § 2, 11-23-98; Ord. No. 01-42, § 1, 6-11-01; Ord. No. 03-07, § 2, 1-27-03; Ord. No. 03-17, § 2, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 06-39, § 3, 6-26-06) 
Sec. 13-25. - Procedures for apartment complexes with more than 100 units. 
(a)  To facilitate the scheduling and conduct of inspections in compliance with this chapter, multiple-family complexes with more than 100 rental units under single administrative control may arrange for individual inspections without having to pay for them at the time they are scheduled. These complexes may be billed monthly for inspections conducted during the preceding 30-day period (month). Inspections remaining unpaid for 60 days following the billing will be determined to be delinquent and will be subject to a 11/2 percent per month late fee for each month or fraction thereof that the billing remains unpaid. Complexes which are delinquent in their payments for three consecutive billing periods may, at the discretion of the building commissioner, lose the privilege of monthly billing. 
(b)  To aid new residents and to facilitate compliance with this chapter, multiple-family complexes with more than 100 rentable units may collect the occupancy permit fees on behalf of their new tenants. Such fees will be paid to the city no less often than once per month. 
(Code 1973, § 12-39) 
Sec. 13-26. - Notice of violation. 
    Whenever the building commissioner determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person responsible therefor which shall: 
(1)  Be in writing. 
(2)  Contain a statement of the reason why it is being issued. 
(3)  Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires (30 days' maximum). 
(4)  Contain an outline of remedial action which if taken will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case may require. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent, or on any such occupant, if a copy thereof is: 
a.  Served upon him personally; 
b.  Sent by certified mail to his last known address; or 
c.  Posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice. 
(Code 1973, § 12-40) 
Sec. 13-27. - Designation of dwellings unfit for habitation. 
    The following may be designated as dwellings or dwelling units unfit for human habitation: 
(1)  One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or vermin infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or the public; 
(2)  One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the public; 
(3)  One which because of its general condition or location is unsanitary or otherwise dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public; or 
(4)  One which does not substantially conform to this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 12-41) 
Sec. 13-28. - Placarding. 
    Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the defects set out in this chapter shall be declared unfit for human habitation and shall be so designated and placarded by the building commissioner when the person responsible has failed to correct the condition set forth in a notice issued in accordance with section 13-26. 
(Code 1973, § 12-42) 
Sec. 13-29. - Removal of placards. 
    No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded as such, except as may be provided. 
(Code 1973, § 12-43) 
Sec. 13-30. - Right of appeal. 
    Any person affected by any notice or order relating to the condemning and placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the board of adjustment under the procedure set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 12-44) 
Sec. 13-31. - Vacation of building. 
(a)  Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation, and so designated and placarded by the building commissioner, shall be vacated within a reasonable time as ordered by the building commissioner. 
(b)  No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by, the building commissioner. The building commissioner shall remove such placard whenever the defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. 
(Code 1973, § 12-45) 
Sec. 13-32. - Vacated structures to be made secure. 
    If a structure or part thereof is vacant or unfit for human habitation, occupancy, or use and is not in danger of structural collapse, the building commissioner may post a placard of condemnation on the premises and may order the structure closed up with plywood so as to prevent that structure from becoming a public nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the condemned structure within the time specified in the order, the building commissioner shall cause those premises to be closed up with plywood through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the condemned structure is located and shall thereafter become a lien upon that real estate. In addition, any structure which is ordered to be closed up shall have at least one no-trespassing sign posted in a prominent place on each of its outside walls. All closing up with plywood shall be done in accordance with regulations for such work kept on file in the office of the building commissioner. 
(Code 1973, § 12-46) 
Sec. 13-33. - Remedy of defects. 
(a)  The owner of any building shall have 30 days from the issuance of the notice provided for in section 13-26 to remedy the condition therein specified; provided, however, that the building commissioner may, at his discretion, extend the time for compliance with any such notice and provided further, that no owner shall be held responsible for any condition that is not specifically described in such notice. 
(b)  The failure of any owner to comply with any order of the building commissioner contained in the notice prescribed by section 13-26 within the time specified shall make such owner subject to the penalties provided for such offense. 
(Code 1973, § 12-47) 
Sec. 13-34. - Transfer of ownership. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit upon whom a notice of violation or compliance order has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of the dwelling to another until the provisions of the notice of violation or compliance order have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish to the grantee, lessee or mortgagee a true copy of any notice of violation or compliance order issued by the building commissioner. A transferee, lessee or mortgagee who has received actual or constructive notice of the existence of a notice of violation or compliance order shall be bound by such notice as of the date of the transfer without further service or notice upon him. 
(b)  The owner to whom a dwelling or dwelling unit has been transferred may consent to make repairs which have been required by a notice of violation from the building commissioner, by signing an agreement with the city agreeing to make the repairs required by the violation notice on or before a date as determined by the building commissioner. Upon receipt of such agreement, the building commissioner may issue an occupancy permit to be held by the city until such time as the repairs are completed by the new owner of the dwelling or dwelling unit. The form of this agreement shall contain the following: 
(1)  Identity of the owner. 
(2)  Description and location of the dwelling or dwelling unit. 
(3)  List of all required repairs. 
(4)  The date upon which repairs will be completed. 
(5)  Executed and notarized signatures by both the new owner and the building commissioner. 
(Code 1973, § 12-48) 
Secs. 13-35-13-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MINIMUM STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 13-51. - Compliance with article required. 
    No person shall let or hold out to another for occupancy any dwelling or family unit for the purpose of living therein which is not safe, clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy and which does not comply with the particular requirements of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 12-60) 
Sec. 13-52. - Yards, courts, driveways, vegetation. 
(a)  Every yard, court, vent passageway, driveway and other portion of the lot on which a dwelling stands shall be graded and drained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water on any such surface. Driveways and sidewalks shall be maintained in good repair and free of safety hazards. 
(b)  Yards shall be provided with adequate lawn, ground cover or vegetation, hedges or bushes, equal to at least ten percent of the total lot area. All areas which are not covered by vegetation shall be treated to prevent dust or the blowing or scattering of dust particles into the air. All trees, bushes or vegetation which overhang a public entrance or street corner shall be properly trimmed to avoid obstruction of the view and movements of vehicles and pedestrians. 
(c)  All premises within the city shall be maintained in a manner so as to prevent the accumulation of standing water or other situations that promote or allow the breeding of insects or vermin. All circumstances, facilities or situations that support insect and/or vermin breeding such as allowing the accumulation of untreated water in any manner or container must be removed, drained, altered, maintained or otherwise eliminated by the occupant or the owner of the premises within 72 hours of notification of the condition. For purposes of example only but not for limitation, containers shall include vessels of any kind, tires, swimming pool and boat covers, tarpaulins, vehicles, gutters, ditches, streams, flooded areas, swamps, ponds, abandoned swimming pools, etc. Notification shall be accomplished by personal delivery of a written notice to the owner or occupant, delivery of a written notice by certified mail to the owner or occupant or the posting of the site with the written notice. 
(Code 1973, § 12-61; Ord. No. 03-30, § 1, 6-9-03) 
Sec. 13-53. - Infestation. 
(a)  Each dwelling and all exterior appurtenances on the premises shall be adequately protected against rats, mice, termites and other vermin infestation. Building defects which permit the entrance of rats, mice, termites and other vermin shall be corrected immediately by the owner. Tenants shall be responsible for the elimination of rodents and vermin from that part of the premises under their exclusive control except when more than one unit is infested at the same time and in this instance the owner shall be responsible for elimination of the infestation. 
(b)  The owner or tenant, as provided for in subsection (a), shall be given ten days' notice to abate any rodent, vermin or similar infestation. Such notice to abate an infestation shall be issued by the building commissioner or health commissioner. Such notice shall be deemed issued when it is posted upon the premises having the infestation. 
(c)  Upon the expiration of the ten-day notice, and the failure of the owner and/or tenant to abate the infestation, the city or its designee may enter upon such property or premises and abate the infestation. Any costs incurred by the city in abating this infestation shall be placed as a lien against the property. 
(Code 1973, § 12-62) 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, ch. 5. 
_____
Sec. 13-54. - Required rooms; minimum floor area and least dimensions. 
(a)  Each dwelling unit shall contain the habitable rooms and closets designated in the following table with the minimum floor areas and least dimensions shown: 
Minimum Area in Square Feet Name of Space 1 to 2 Occupants 3 to 5 
Occupants 6 or More Occupants Least Dimension (applied to 90% of required floor area) Living room N.R. 120 150 10' 0? Dining room N.R.  80 100  7' 8? Kitchen 50  50  60 3' 0? clear Bedroom (See note below for requirements) 7' 0? passage Closets (total) 10*  20*  30*  
*Each bedroom must have six square feet of closet space opening into the bedroom. 
Note: Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall have a minimum floor area of 70 square feet; every room occupied for sleeping purposes by two occupants shall have a minimum floor area of 100 square feet; and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by three occupants shall have a minimum floor area of 150 square feet. 
(b)  Every room used as a bedroom shall have access to at least one water closet without passing through another room used as a bedroom. 
(Code 1973, § 12-63) 
Sec. 13-55. - Minimum ceiling height. 
    Habitable rooms shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven feet, four inches, except that in attics or top-half stories, the ceiling height shall be not less than seven feet over not less than one-third of the area when used for sleeping, study or similar activity. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area of the room having a clear ceiling height of five feet or more may be included. 
(Code 1973, § 12-64) 
Sec. 13-56. - Combined living-dining areas. 
    Combined living room-dining room spaces will be construed as meeting the requirements of this article if the total area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is so located that it may function as a combination living room-dining room. 
(Code 1973, § 12-65) 
Sec. 13-57. - Basement dwelling units. 
    No room in any basement in an existing building shall be used for habitable purposes unless such room is being used for habitable purposes on or after August 23, 1971, and the following standards are complied with: 
(1)  The ceiling shall be at least seven feet high. 
(2)  Adequate ventilation must be provided. 
(3)  The floor area shall be waterproof and dampproof. 
(4)  Such room shall be well-drained and dry. 
(5)  A basement habitable room or basement dwelling unit shall meet the other requirements of this chapter and the building code. No basement room shall be used for a bedroom unless there is provided a separate means adaptable or adapted to provide personnel egress from the basement dwelling unit in addition to the main stairway from the ground or first level of the dwelling. 
(Code 1973, § 12-66) 
Cross reference- Buildings and structures, ch. 7. 
Sec. 13-58. - Foundations, exterior walls and roofs. 
(a)  The foundation, exterior walls and exterior roof shall be protected against rodents and shall be kept in sound condition and repair. 
(b)  The foundation elements shall adequately support the building at all points. 
(c)  Every exterior wall shall be free of deterioration, holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, cracked or peeling paint and any other condition which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the exterior spaces of the dwelling. 
(d)  The foundation, exterior walls and roof shall be tight and have no defects which admit rain; and roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rainwater from causing dampness in the walls. 
(e)  All cornices, rustications, quoins, mouldings, belt courses, lintels, sills, oriel windows, pediments and similar projections shall be kept in good repair and free from cracks and defects which make them hazardous and dangerous. 
(Code 1973, § 12-67) 
Sec. 13-59. - Floors, interior walls and ceilings. 
(a)  Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be: 
(1)  Adequately protected against the passage and harborage of vermin and rodents. 
(2)  Kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(3)  Free of holes and cracks. 
(4)  Free of loose, warped, protruding or rotting floorboards. 
(5)  Maintained in a tight weatherproof condition. 
(b)  Every interior wall and ceiling shall be free of loose plaster or other structural material. 
(c)  Plaster, paint and all other surface materials shall be of such character as to be easily cleanable, and shall be reasonably smooth, clean and tight. 
(d)  Every toilet room and bathroom floor surface shall be substantially impervious to water and capable of being maintained easily in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1973, § 12-68) 
Sec. 13-60. - Exterior openings. 
(a)  Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be substantially tight and shall be kept in sound condition and repair. 
(b)  Every window shall be fully supplied with windowpanes which are without cracks or holes and every window sash shall be in good condition and fit reasonably tight within its frame. 
(c)  Windows, other than fixed windows, shall be capable of being easily opened and shall be held in position by window hardware. 
(d)  Every exterior door, door hinge and door latch shall be in good condition; and every exterior door, when closed, shall fit reasonably well within its frame. 
(e)  Every window, door and frame shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall construction as completely to exclude rain and substantially to exclude wind from entering the dwelling. 
(f)  Basement hatchways shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water into the building. 
(Code 1973, § 12-69) 
Sec. 13-61. - Stairways and porches. 
(a)  Every stairway inside or outside of the dwelling and every porch shall be kept in safe condition and sound repair, and every flight of stairs and every porch floor shall be free of deterioration. 
(b)  Every stairwell and every flight of stairs which is more than four risers high shall have rails not less than 21/2 feet high, measured vertically from the nose of the tread to the top of the rail, and every porch which is more than four risers high shall have rails which are firmly fastened not less than 21/2 feet above the floor of the porch. 
(c)  No flight of stairs shall have settled more than one inch out of its intended position or have pulled away from supporting or adjacent structures; nor shall any flight of stairs have rotting, loose or deteriorating supports. 
(d)  The treads shall be ten inches minimum and shall be strong enough to bear a concentrated load of at least 400 pounds without danger of breaking. 
(e)  Every porch shall have a sound floor; and no porch shall have rotting, loose or deteriorating supports. 
(Code 1973, § 12-70) 
Sec. 13-62. - Basements and cellars. 
(a)  Every basement and every cellar shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition, and water shall not be permitted to accumulate or stand on the floor. 
(b)  All sewer connections shall be properly trapped. 
(c)  All cellar and slab drains shall be covered with grating. 
(d)  Junk, rubbish and waste shall not be permitted to accumulate to such an extent as to create fire hazards or to endanger health or safety. 
(Code 1973, § 12-71) 
Sec. 13-63. - Facilities, equipment and chimneys. 
    Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility and every chimney and chimney flue shall be installed, shall function effectively as originally designed and shall be maintained in a safe, sound and sanitary working condition. 
(Code 1973, § 12-72) 
Sec. 13-64. - Accessory structures. 
(a)  Accessory structures shall be functional, shall be maintained in a state of good repair and shall not obstruct light and air of doors and windows of any dwelling unit, or obstruct a safe means of access to any dwelling unit or create fire and safety hazards or provide rat or vermin harborage. 
(b)  All exterior appurtenances or accessory structures which serve no useful purpose and are in a deteriorated condition which are not economically repairable shall be removed. Such structures include porches, terraces, entrance platforms, garages, driveways, carports, walls, fences and miscellaneous sheds. 
(Code 1973, § 12-73) 
Sec. 13-65. - Dual egress for dwelling units occupying third or higher story. 
    All habitable structures of three or more stories with dwelling units occupying the third or higher story shall be provided with two separate usable unobstructed means of egress for each dwelling unit located above the second story. Exit facilities from such dwelling units shall lead to a public thoroughfare, either directly or through a court or yard, and passage to such exits shall not lead through any other dwelling unit or through a space that might reasonably be locked by anyone who is not a member of the household. Dual egress will not be required of structures that are of full fireproof construction as defined in the building code adopted by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 12-74) 
Cross reference- Buildings and structures, ch. 7. 
Sec. 13-66. - Bathrooms. 
    Every dwelling unit shall contain a bathroom which affords privacy to a person within such room and which is equipped with a flush water closet, a tub or shower and a lavatory basin. Every supplied water closet, tub, shower and lavatory basin must be in good repair, free of chips, cracks or other defects which may be a sanitary hazard, and shall be in working condition, properly connected to water and an approved sanitary sewer system. Every dwelling unit with more than seven occupants shall contain additional sanitary facilities at a rate of one water closet and one lavatory for each additional four occupants or fraction thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 12-75) 
Sec. 13-67. - Kitchen sinks. 
    Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good repair, free of chips, cracks or other defects which may be a sanitary hazard, and shall be in working condition, properly connected to a water and sewerage system approved by the building commissioner. 
(Code 1973, § 12-76) 
Cross reference- Sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 21. 
Sec. 13-68. - Natural lighting. 
    All habitable rooms, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be provided with a means of transmitting natural light from the outside complying with the following requirements: 
(1)  The required clear glass area shall not be less than one-tenth of the floor area of such room and not less than ten square feet. The effective area shall be computed at not more than 80 percent of the actual area when a required natural light area: 
a.  Faces a wall or other obstruction at a distance of less than ten feet; or 
b.  Is located below a roof or other obstruction projecting more than four feet from the face of the window or other natural light area and the plane from the head to the outside of such projection forms an angle with the horizontal of less than 45 degrees. 
(2)  Whenever a habitable room has a natural light area opening from the room to an enclosed porch, such area shall not be counted as a light area unless the enclosed porch has a natural light area of not less than three times the required light area opening from the room to the porch. 
(Code 1973, § 12-77) 
Sec. 13-69. - Illumination. 
    A minimum of five footcandles of daylight or artificial illumination shall be required at all times in all public halls. All habitable rooms, passageways and stairways shall be provided with electric fixtures so that they can be adequately lighted at night. 
(Code 1973, § 12-78) 
Sec. 13-70. - Ventilation-Generally. 
    Every habitable room shall have a ventilation system adequate for the purpose for which the room is used. Natural ventilation shall be deemed to be adequate for habitable rooms when the total area openable to the outside air (by means of windows, louvers, monitors or other direct openings excluding doors) is five percent of the floor area of the habitable room, except that when: 
(1)  Any portion of the room is more than 16 feet from a required opening, the aggregate clear area of the openings shall be not less than six percent. 
(2)  A room has openable areas on two or more sides thereof, the total openable area shall be at least four percent of the total floor area of such room. 
(3)  The openable area faces a wall or other obstruction at a distance of less than ten feet, the effective area shall be computed at not more than 80 percent of the actual openable area. 
(4)  The openable area opens onto an enclosed porch, the enclosed porch shall have an openable area of at least three times the total required area of the openings onto such porch. 
(Code 1973, § 12-79) 
Sec. 13-71. - Same-Kitchen with floor area of less than 70 square feet. 
    A kitchen with a floor area of less than 70 square feet may be without either mechanical or natural ventilation if there is an opening of not less than 32 square feet between the kitchen and another room in the same family unit and if the room into which the kitchen opens has the ventilation requirements of section 13-70. 
(Code 1973, § 12-80) 
Sec. 13-72. - Same-Bathrooms. 
    Every toilet room and bathroom shall have adequate ventilation which may be either an openable window with an openable area of five percent of the floor area, mechanical ventilation in compliance with the requirements of sections 13-70 and 13-71, or a gravity vent flue constructed with incombustible material leading to the roof of the building or a combination of any of these. The gravity vent shall be computed at an aggregate clear area of not less than five percent of the floor area of the room with a minimum area of at least 120 square inches. Gravity vents shall be provided with a weather cap, directional vane or rotary-type ventilation on the roof. 
(Code 1973, § 12-81) 
Sec. 13-73. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 00-4, § 1, adopted Jan. 24, 2000, repealed in their entirety the provisions of § 13-73 which pertained to screens and derived from the Code of 1973, § 12-82. 
Sec. 13-74. - Water and sewerage facilities. 
    All fixtures shall be in good repair and in working condition, properly connected to the public water system and to a public or private sewerage system; provided, however, that until such sewer connections are available, septic tanks constructed according to the standards required by the health department, and properly functioning, shall not be construed as in violation of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 12-83) 
Sec. 13-75. - Required water connections. 
    Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower, required under the provisions of this chapter, shall be properly connected with both hot and cold water lines. 
(Code 1973, § 12-84) 
Sec. 13-76. - Water-heating facilities. 
(a)  Every dwelling unit shall have supplied water-heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, are properly connected with the hot water lines required under the provisions of this chapter and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit. Such supplied water-heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this subsection when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating facilities required under the provisions of this chapter are not in operation. 
(b)  Every owner, agent and manager of any apartment house, hotel, roominghouse, flat or other building whatsoever who leases, rents or lets one or more dwelling units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish hot water to the tenants or occupants thereof, shall, and is hereby directed to, provide an adequate amount of water at all times at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Code 1973, § 12-85) 
Sec. 13-77. - Electrical service. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or permit another to occupy any dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, which is not adequately and safely provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  The following shall be considered as absolute minimum requirements. Conditions such as size of the dwelling unit and usage of appliances and equipment within the unit shall be used as the basis for requiring additional electrical work. 
(1)  Every dwelling unit in a single-family or two-family building shall be served by a main service not smaller than 60 ampere, three wire. 
(2)  Every habitable room shall contain not less than two wall or approved floor convenience outlets. 
(3)  Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded type of convenience outlet. 
(4)  Every bathroom, laundry room, furnace room and public hall shall contain not less than one ceiling or wall lighting fixture. 
(5)  Every outlet and fixture shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in a good and safe working condition and shall be connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner. 
(c)  Wherever it is found, in the judgment of the building commissioner, that the electrical system in the building constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the building by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, improper or inadequate grounding of the system, insufficient outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the defects shall be corrected to eliminate the hazard. The building commissioner shall base his findings of hazard on accepted engineering practice standards as listed in the building code of the city. 
(d)  In addition to the hazards established by the building commissioner, the following installations are prohibited and their presence shall be deemed a hazard: 
(1)  Flush or semiflush mounted floor convenience outlets, unless provided with an approved waterproof cover. 
(2)  Extension cords for other than short term, temporary use. 
(3)  Conductor supported pendant switches or conductor supported pendant light fixtures. 
(4)  Loose or hanging wires. 
(5)  Frayed or bare wires. 
(6)  Inadequately grounded, grounded type convenience outlets. 
(Code 1973, § 12-86) 
Cross reference- Buildings and structures, ch. 7. 
Sec. 13-77.1. - Notification by electric company to the city. 
(a)  For any month when there is a change of user of residential (rate 001) or non-residential (rate 043) electric service within the city, Union Electric Company shall notify the building commissioner (or other appropriate official) of the city in writing within seven (7) working days after the end of the month of said changes, indicating the address and apartment or unit number, and the name(s) of electric user(s) per service and address and apartment or unit number in whose name service is connected or billed. 
(b)  Union Electric shall submit annually to the city an invoice for its cost associated with this section. The initial cost of this service shall not exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). Future price increases, if any, will only reflect the actual cost incurred by Union Electric to provide this service. The city shall pay to Union Electric the amount of the invoice within thirty (30) days of receipt. 
(Ord. No. 2308, §§ 1, 2, 4-26-93) 
Sec. 13-78. - Refuse, garbage and rubbish storage. 
    Every dwelling unit shall have adequate refuse, garbage or rubbish storage facilities as required by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 12-87) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 23. 
Sec. 13-79. - Heating facilities. 
(a)  Every dwelling unit shall have heating facilities which are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments within its wall to a temperature of at least 70 degrees Fahrenheit when the outside temperature is zero degrees Fahrenheit. Gas appliances designed primarily for cooking or water heating purposes shall not be considered as heating facilities within the meaning of this section. Portable heating equipment employing flame and the use of liquid fuels does not meet the requirements of this section and is prohibited. The owner must provide the required heating facilities. 
(b)  Every owner, agent and manager of any apartment house, hotel, roominghouse, flat or other building whatsoever who leases, rents or lets one, or more dwelling units on terms, either express or implied, to furnish heat to the tenants or occupants thereof, shall, and is hereby directed to, maintain during the months of October, November, December, January, February, March, April and the first 15 days of May of each year sufficient heat in the rooms so occupied as living quarters to produce a temperature of not less than 70 degrees Fahrenheit during the hours between 6:30 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. of each day, and shall maintain a temperature of not less than 60 degrees Fahrenheit during the other hours of the day. However, when the outside temperature drops below zero degrees Fahrenheit and the heating plant is operating at its full capacity, a minimum inside temperature of 60 degrees Fahrenheit shall be maintained at all times. It shall be the duty of every janitor, fireman or other employee who shall assume or engage in employment to operate the furnace or heating plant of any such apartment house, hotel, roominghouse, flat or other such building to maintain such heat as set out in this section. 
(Code 1973, § 12-88) 
Sec. 13-80. - Garages. 
(a)  Garages located beneath a single-family or multiple-family dwelling shall have walls, partitions, floors and ceilings separating the garage space from the dwelling or dwellings, which shall have at least a one-hour fire resistance rating. 
(b)  Garages attached to a single-family or multiple-family dwelling shall be completely separated from the dwelling area by means of half-inch gypsum board or the equivalent applied to the garage side adjacent the dwelling area. 
(c)  Door opening protectives between the garage and any dwelling area shall be 13/4-inch solid core wood doors or their equivalent. 
(d)  Junk, rubbish, waste and refuse shall not be permitted to accumulate to such an extent as to create fire hazards or to endanger health or safety. 
(e)  Flammable liquids shall not be stored in a garage except in amounts of five gallons or less in a container acceptable for the purpose of safely storing such flammable liquids. 
(Code 1973, § 12-89) 
Sec. 13-81. - Additions or alterations of existing dwellings. 
    All additions or alterations of existing dwellings must be constructed in a workmanlike manner in conformity with applicable codes of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 12-90) 
Sec. 13-82. - Mixed use prohibited in multiple dwelling units located in C-1 district. 
    No occupancy permit shall be issued for buildings containing two or more dwelling units located in the C-1 commercial district where the building is used for any purpose other than as a dwelling unit. 
(Code 1973, § 12-92) 
Sec. 13-83. - Buildings and structures to be numbered. 
    All buildings and structures having post office addresses shall list the street number of such post office address in a font type of sufficient size as to be clearly visible from any street adjacent to the property. In the case of buildings or structures adjacent to more than one street, the number shall be visible from the street to which the post office address corresponds. 
(Code 1973, § 6-6) 
Sec. 13-84. - Commercial buildings and structures to be numbered front and rear. 
    All buildings or structures used for business, commercial, industrial, manufacturing or public purposes having post office addresses shall list the street number of such post office address in a font type of sufficient size (minimum three inches, maximum 12 inches) as to be clearly visible from a street adjacent to the property, and on the rear of the building on the right edge of the building when facing the rear of the building and not less than six feet nor more than eight feet above the ground level. 
(Code 1973, § 6-7) 
Sec. 13-85. - Smoke detectors required. 
(a)  The owner of a structure, building, area, room or combination of rooms occupied by persons for sleeping or living purposes shall install, test, and maintain smoke detector devices, which detect visible or invisible particles of combustion and shall be either the ionization or photoelectric type, in accordance with the instructions of the manufacturer or seller of the smoke detector. Smoke detectors shall bear the label of a national recognized standards testing laboratory that indicates that the device meets or exceeds applicable standard of Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. or the National Fire Protection Association. 
(b)  Every newly constructed dwelling place and all existing dwellings in the city shall have smoke detecting devices installed by their owner on or before December 1, 1986, and thereafter install or replace as necessary. If the dwelling is leased or rented by the owner to another, the owner shall install the necessary smoke detector or detectors and shall provide to each tenant written instructions regarding maintenance and testing of the smoke detector. 
(Code 1973, § 6-8) 
Sec. 13-86. - Storage of fuel powered vehicles and equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any property owner, tenant, agent, occupant or other person, partnership or corporation to store, keep or allow to be stored or kept any fuel driven vehicle or equipment within the occupied portion of any dwelling unit including attics, basements, crawl spaces and other unheated spaces, but accepting therefrom garages, carports and other spaces specifically intended for the storage of such vehicles and equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2437, § 1, 4-10-95) 
Sec. 13-87. - Storage of fuel and flammable liquids. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any property owner, tenant, agent, occupant or other person, partnership or corporation to store, keep or allow to be stored or kept any fuel or flammable liquid in the occupied portion of any dwelling unit including attics, basements, crawl spaces and other unheated spaces, but excepting therefrom garages, carports and other spaces specifically intended for the storage of fuel driven vehicles except in individual containers of one gallon or less intended for the storage of such materials and in total quantities in such individual containers of not more than 20 gallons. 
(b)  Tanks designed and installed for the storage of fuel oil, located in basements, which serve to supply a properly installed and functioning fuel oil furnace, are specifically exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2437, § 1, 4-10-95) 
Secs. 13-88-13-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FAIR HOUSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Unlawful housing practices, RSMo 213.040. 

Sec. 13-101. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and cited as the fair housing code of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 12-101) 
Sec. 13-102. - Discrimination in sale or rental of housing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person: 
(1)  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to a person because of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, age, ancestry, handicap or marital status. 
(2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, age, ancestry, handicap or marital status. 
(3)  To make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, sex, color, religion, ancestry, handicap or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference limitation or discrimination. 
(4)  To represent to any person because of race, sex, color, religion, ancestry, handicap or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is, in fact, so available. 
(5)  To induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, sex, color, religion, or national origin, age, ancestry, handicap or marital status. 
(Code 1973, § 12-103) 
Sec. 13-103. - Discrimination in financing of housing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part of the making of commercial real estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms and conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the race, sex, color, religion, national origin, age, ancestry, handicap or marital status of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants, of the dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Code 1973, § 12-104) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 213.045. 
Sec. 13-104. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation on account of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, age, ancestry, handicap or marital status. 
(Code 1973, § 12-105) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 213.050. 
Sec. 13-105. - Complaint process. 
    Any persons who claim to have been injured or who will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice may file a complaint with the board of aldermen. The complaint shall be filed within 180 days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. For the purposes of this section, all days of violation with respect to one dwelling shall be taken to mean one occurrence. Complaints shall be in writing and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of the discriminatory practice are based. Upon receipt of such complaint, a copy shall be furnished to the person or persons who allegedly committed or are about to commit the alleged discriminatory housing practice. 
(Code 1973, § 12-106) 
State Law reference- Complaints to commission on human rights, RSMo 213.075. 
Sec. 13-106. - Enforcement. 
    The authority and responsibility for enforcing this article shall be vested with the board of aldermen. It will be the duty of this organization to receive and investigate written complaints, hold hearings, make findings of fact and take such action as it deems appropriate. 
(Code 1973, § 12-107) 
Sec. 13-107. - Punishment of violators. 
    Any person who shall commit a discriminatory housing practice in violation of this article shall upon conviction thereof be punished for each such violation by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00. 
(Code 1973, § 12-108; Ord. No. 03-07, § 2, 1-27-03) 
Chapter 14 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; department of administration, § 2-221; alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; amusements, ch. 4; animals and fowl, ch. 5; buildings and structures, ch. 7; explosives, ch. 9; grading, mining, filling and clearing, ch. 11; health and sanitation, ch. 12; housing, ch. 13; commercial vehicles prohibited on certain streets, § 15-486; planning and development, ch. 19; signs, ch. 22; advertising sign business license required, § 22-101; renewal of advertising sign business license, § 22-105; garbage and refuse collectors, § 23-21 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 25; swimming pools, ch. 26; taxation, ch. 27; trailers and recreational vehicles, ch. 28. 
State Law reference- Municipal taxing powers, RSMo 71.610 et seq.; regulation, licensing and taxing of businesses and occupations, RSMo 94.230, 94.270. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Vending of merchandise not to obstruct streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to vend or distribute merchandise or materials from a vehicle, stand, or otherwise within the limits of any highway, road or street in the city, except under such license, conditions and regulations as may be prescribed by ordinances; however, in no instance shall such vending be permitted or authorized where the same causes stopping, standing or parking in or upon the roadway, or where such vending causes traffic confusion and interferes with the free and unhindered mobile progression of traffic. 
(Code 1973, § 13-1) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 24. 
Sec. 14-2. - Hawkers and peddlers generally. 
(a)  No person shall display, sell, offer to sell or advertise for sale by any means whatsoever any goods, wares, merchandise, refreshments or foodstuffs upon the streets and highways within the city between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of the following day unless permitted to do so by this Code. 
(b)  No person shall operate, cause to be operated, use or cause to be used any vehicle upon the streets and highways within the city for the purpose of displaying, selling, offering to sell or advertising for sale by any means whatsoever any goods, merchandise, wares, refreshments and foodstuffs between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person engaged in the delivery of goods, wares, merchandise or other articles or things in the regular course of business to the premises of persons ordering or entitled to receive the same. 
(Code 1973, § 13-2) 
Sec. 14-3. - Permit application-Fees. 
(a)  Permit application. Each person desiring to act as a solicitor within the city limits, except for a canvasser or handbiller that is not soliciting donations of money, shall apply for a permit for such activity on a form provided by the city before undertaking such activity, shall produce an official photographic identification card such as a driver's permit, state identification card, passport or other identification card (issued by a government within the United States) and complete an application containing the following: 
(1)  Full name of the applicant, including any nickname or alias used during the past ten years. 
(2)  Date and place of birth and (if available) the Social Security number of such person. 
(3)  The current permanent and local address (if any), home telephone number and cellular phone number of the applicant. 
(4)  A brief description of the proposed soliciting activity. (Copies of the literature to be distributed may be included as part of this description at the option of the applicant.) 
(5)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor (excluding minor traffic offenses) and, if so, the nature of the offense, the penalty imposed and when and where the conviction or convictions occurred. 
(6)  The make, model, year, color, identification number, proof of insurance and State permit plate number of each motor vehicle which shall be used in the applicant's proposed activity. 
(7)  A statement by the applicant as to whether or not a solicitation permit for such person has been denied or revoked by any other governmental entity and, if so, the name of each governmental entity denying or revoking said permit, the reason for each denial or revocation and the date(s) of same. 
(8)  A statement as to the duration of the intended soliciting. 
(9)  If funds are to be solicited: 
a.  The name, phone number and permanent address of the organization or person who can provide a prospective donor with more information about the use of such funds. 
b.  The name, address and phone number of the organizations or persons for whom solicitors receive donations or profits. 
(10)  The application shall be signed and the applicant shall certify that all statements are true to the best of his/her knowledge and the applicant's signature shall be notarized. 
(b)  Fees. 
(1)  Fees. Solicitors shall pay a fee of $25.00 for the first day to cover the cost of preparing the plastic permit card, then $20.00 per person per day that such soliciting is authorized to be carried on within the city limits. 
(2)  Exempt from fees. All nonprofit and charitable organizations recognized as such by the Internal Revenue Service, the Better Business Bureau of St. Louis or any other recognized charitable screening organization and all professions listed in RSMo 71.620 shall be exempt from the terms of this Subsection regarding fees only. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 2, 2-28-11; Ord. No. 12-01, § 1, 1-9-12; Ord. No. 12-06, § 2, 1-23-12) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 11-09, § 2, adopted February 28, 2011, repealed former §§ 14-3-14-6 relative to solicitation, peddling or hawking on private property and replaced §§ 14-3-14-6 to read as herein set out. The provisions of former §§ 14-3-14-6 derived from Ord. No. 2396, § I, 7-25-94; Ord. No. 2529, § 1, 6-24-96; Ord. No. 99-03, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 02-43, § 1, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 7-14-08. 
Sec. 14-4. - Investigation of applicant. 
    During the period of time following the application for a license to solicit, the chief of police shall supervise an investigation as to the truth and accuracy of the information contained on the application as required in section 14-3 herein to determine whether or not the applicant is entitled to the license as herein above stated. The chief of police may require the applicant to obtain a Missouri State Highway Patrol criminal history records check. If the chief of police has not completed his/her investigation within seven business days, the license will nonetheless be issued by the city, subject however, to revocation upon completion of such investigation. Such a revocation may be implemented without hearing and shall have the same effect as a denial. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 2, 2-28-11; Ord. No. 12-01, § 1, 1-9-12; Ord. No. 12-06, § 2, 1-23-12; Ord. No. 13-31, § 1, 8-19-13) 
Note- See editor's note to § 14-3. 
Sec. 14-5. - Issuance of permit. 
    Five business days after the application is submitted to the city or sooner if reasonably possible, the requested permit shall be issued unless: 
(1)  The application is incomplete. 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted of any felony or any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, trespassing or any offense against the person or property of another within the past seven years. 
(3)  If any statement upon the application is false, unless the applicant can demonstrate that the falsehood was the result of excusable neglect. 
(4)  If the particular individual for whom a permit is requested, has or has had a previous permit revoked in this or any other governmental entity for cause which could be grounds for denial or revocation under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 2, 2-28-11; Ord. No. 12-01, § 1, 1-9-12; Ord. No. 12-06, § 2, 1-23-12) 
Note- See editor's note to § 14-3. 
Sec. 14-6. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  No solicitor, peddler, hawker, canvasser or handbiller shall enter upon any private property where the property is clearly posted by a sign visible and legible from the right-of-way, public or private, indicating a prohibition against soliciting, peddling, hawking, canvassing or handbilling at said property. It shall be sufficient for such sign to contain the words "no solicitors" in letters of at least two inches in height. 
(b)  If any solicitor, peddler, hawker, canvasser or handbiller shall enter any private property, which property is not posted by a sign, as provided in subsection (a) above, but where they are notified by means of a sign or sticker placed upon any door or entranceway leading into the residence or commercial unit at which guests or customers would normally enter the residence or commercial unit, which sign or sticker contains letters of not less than one-fourth inch in height and contains the words "no solicitors" and which is visible to any solicitor, peddler, hawker, canvasser or handbiller then the solicitor, peddler, hawker, canvasser or handbiller shall forthwith remove himself/herself from the property without disturbing the persons living therein. A prohibition against any soliciting activity shall be interpreted as a prohibition against any soliciting, peddling, hawking, canvassing or handbilling activities, unless otherwise stated therein. 
(c)  Handbills shall only be left at the front entrance of a residence or commercial unit, unless the premises does not have a front entrance or it is obvious that the front entrance is not used, in which case the handbill shall be left at such entrance as is most obviously used as a guest or customer entrance. No handbiller shall throw, deposit, place, scatter or distribute any handbill upon any private premises, including private premises open to the public and including on any automobile or other motor vehicle on such premises, in any other manner besides that described in the preceding sentence unless authorized in writing by the property owner or legal occupant to do so. No handbiller shall distribute, deposit or place any handbill in or on an automobile or other motor vehicle that is parked on any street or in any public place unless authorized in writing by the owner or operator of the vehicle. No handbiller shall affix any handbill to any tree, lamppost, or utility pole. 
(d)  Even though a solicitor obtains the consent of the manager or owner to solicit in a multi-tenant dwelling, building or development, the solicitor shall not solicit from any tenant therein whose property is posted in the manner provided in subsection (b) above. For the purpose of this paragraph, a "multi-tenant dwelling or building" shall be any building containing two or more units within said building. A "multi-tenant development" shall be construed as two or more multi-tenant structures owned or managed by the same person(s), firm or corporation. 
(e)  Any solicitor or canvasser shall use the front entrance of the residence or commercial unit, unless the residence or commercial unit does not have a front entrance or it is obvious that the front entrance is not used, in which case the solicitor or canvasser shall use such entrance as is most obviously used as a guest or customer entrance to the residence or dwelling unit, but no solicitor or canvasser shall go from door to door at a location in an attempt to avoid a "no solicitation" notice. 
(f)  No solicitor, peddler or hawker shall remove any yard sign, door or entrance sign or sticker which is placed there by a resident, owner or tenant as a notice that such owner or tenant does not invite or allow soliciting, peddling, hawking or canvassing. 
(g)  Any solicitor, peddler or hawker who shall violate any of the provisions of this Section and any Subsections hereof shall commit a trespass on such property and upon conviction thereof shall be penalized as hereafter provided by the ordinances of the city. 
(h)  The above provisions shall not apply to any solicitor, peddler, hawker, canvasser or handbiller who shall have received an invitation from the property owner of a residence or tenant of a residence or dwelling unit prior to entering upon any property for purposes of soliciting, peddling, hawking, canvassing or handbilling. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 2, 2-28-11; Ord. No. 11-38, § 1, 9-12-11; Ord. No. 12-01, § 1, 1-9-12; Ord. No. 12-06, § 2, 1-23-12) 
Note- See editor's note to § 14-3. 
Sec. 14-6A. - Time limits. 
    No solicitor shall solicit, canvass or distribute handbills within the corporate limits of the city except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and one-half hour after the time designated as sunset published for that date in the St. Louis Post-Dispatch or 7:30 p.m., whichever is earlier. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 2, 2-28-11; Ord. No. 12-01, § 1, 1-9-12; Ord. No. 12-06, § 2, 1-23-12) 
Note- See editor's note to § 14-3. 
Sec. 14-6B. - Possession and display of permit. 
(a)  No solicitor, peddler, hawker, canvasser or handbiller, except for a canvasser or handbiller that is not soliciting donations of money, shall solicit within the corporate limits of the city without having in their possession a copy of a valid city solicitor's permit, said permit shall be worn on the outer clothing of the individual as so to be reasonably visible to any person. Any solicitor shall also have in his/her possession an official photographic identification card as described in section 14-3(a). and shall produce said solicitor's permit and identification upon request by a police officer. 
(b)  No solicitor holding such a permit or an agent, member or representative of the same shall advertise, represent or hold out in any manner that such permit is an endorsement of the holder by the city. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 2, 2-28-11; Ord. No. 12-01, § 1, 1-9-12; Ord. No. 12-06, § 2, 1-23-12) 
Note- See editor's note to § 14-3. 
Sec. 14-7. - Length of noneligibility after revocation. 
    No person, firm, partnership, association or corporation or church, or any combination of the same whose permit as an itinerant merchant or solicitor has been revoked pursuant to the provisions of this section shall thereafter be eligible for licensure as an itinerant merchant or solicitor in the city for a period of one year from and after the date of such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2396, § I, 7-25-94) 
Note- See editor's note to § 14-3. 
Sec. 14-8. - Private watchmen, etc.; county license required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to act, serve or be employed as a watchman, guard, security person, armored car guard or private investigator in the city without having first been licensed by the county. 
(Code 1973, § 13-151) 
Sec. 14-9. - Tax increment financing (TIF) application fee. 
    Proposals for tax increment financing submitted to the city shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable licensing fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for the administrative costs associated with investigation of the tax increment financing proposal and a fully completed application form. 
(Ord. No. 2585, § 1, 3-24-97) 
Secs. 14-10-14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMERCIAL LICENSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-26. - City to be notified of sale or lease. 
    Any merchant, business or occupation as defined in section 1-2 who shall sell or lease any portion of his stand, store or place of business to another whose gross receipts will not be included in the return of the lessor shall report the fact of such sale or lease together with the name and address of the purchaser or lessee in writing to the city. Such report shall be made within five days after such purchaser or lessee has taken possession and shall include a general description of all goods, commodities or ware-dispensing devices installed in the premises by such purchaser or lessee. 
(Code 1973, § 13-14) 
Sec. 14-27. - Corporate officers responsible for provisions of article. 
    Any act or duty required or authorized to be performed under the provisions of this article by any corporation shall, in addition, be the responsibility of the president of such corporation and of any other person duly authorized by such corporation to perform such act or duty; and such president or other authorized person shall be personally subject to all the penalties provided for the violation of such applicable provisions of this article as may relate to such acts or duties. 
(Code 1973, § 13-16) 
Sec. 14-28. - Exceptions to provisions of article. 
    The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to any nonprofit organization, association or establishment; nor to any business, occupation, pursuit, profession or trade which the city may be prohibited by law from licensing or regulating. 
(Code 1973, § 13-17) 
Sec. 14-29. - Violations; penalties. 
    All taxes and fees provided for in this chapter shall be deemed delinquent if not paid on the date due and payable and in addition to such payment, the following penalties shall be imposed: 
(a)  In case of failure to file any required return on or before the date prescribed therefor, determined with regard to any extension of time for making a return, unless it is shown that such failure is due to reasonable cause and not the result of willful neglect, evasion or fraudulent intent, there shall be added to the amount required to be shown as tax on such return five percent of the amount of such tax if the failure is not for more than one month, with an additional five percent for each additional month or fraction thereof during which such failure continues, not exceeding 25 percent in the aggregate, except that when the gross sales tax exceeds $250.00 in any one month, requiring the taxpayer to file a monthly return, there shall be no late penalty assessed for the first month in which the return is due. For purposes of this section, the amount of tax required to be shown on the return shall be reduced by the amount of any part of the tax which is paid on or before the date prescribed for payment of the tax. 
(b)  In case of failure to pay the full amount of tax required by this Code on or before the date prescribed therefor, determined with regard to any extension of time for payment, unless it is shown that such failure is due to reasonable cause and not the result of willful neglect, evasion or fraudulent intent, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to five percent of the deficiency. If additions to tax are assessed under authority of this subsection, additions to tax may not be assessed under authority of subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  In the case of failure to pay the full amount of tax required by this Code on or before the date prescribed therefor, determined with regard to any extension of time for payment, due to negligence or intentional disregard of rules and regulations, but without intent to defraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to five percent of the deficiency. The city shall, upon request by a taxpayer, apprise the taxpayer of the factual basis for the finding of negligence, or the specific rules or regulations disregarded if the city assesses a penalty under this subsection. Rules or regulations which have been determined to be inconsistent with the laws of this state, by either the courts of this state or the administrative hearing commission, may not be cited as the basis for an addition to tax under this section. If additions to tax are assessed under authority of this subsection, additions to tax may not be assessed by the city under authority of subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Except in cases of fraud or evasion, if a person neglects or refuses to make a return and payment as required by this Code, the city shall make an estimate based upon any information in his possession or that may come into his possession of the amount of the gross receipts of the delinquent for the period in respect to which he failed to make return and payment, and upon the basis of said estimated amount compute and assess the tax payable by the delinquent; such estimate may be reconstructed for that period of time for which the tax may be collected as prescribed by law. 
(e)  Promptly thereafter, the city shall give to the delinquent taxpayer written notice of such estimated assessment, the notice to be served personally or by certified or registered mail at his or its last known address. 
(f)  In addition to any other penalties imposed by law or ordinance, any person who fails to comply with or who violates any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment for each offense or violation; and each day such failure to comply or such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1973, § 13-18; Ord. No. 03-07, § 2, 1-27-03; Ord. No. 13-22, § 1, 5-13-13) 
Secs. 14-30-14-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSING REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-46. - Licenses required. 
    No merchant, business or occupation as defined in section 1-2 shall do or offer to do business in the city without first having made application for, procured and paid for a license to do so as required by this article. 
(Code 1973, § 13-25) 
Sec. 14-47. - Payment of other obligations prerequisite to license. 
    No license shall be issued to any merchant, business or occupation until all financial obligations, including personal property taxes, other license fees, permit fees or inspection fees required to have been paid by such merchant, business or occupation to the city, have been paid. Additionally, if any such licensee is required to maintain a business or professional license issued by the State of Missouri, the licensee shall demonstrate proof of issuance of that state license when applying for a business license from the City of Ballwin and at all times thereafter while operating pursuant to a business license issued by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 13-26; Ord. No. 07-25, § 1, 9-24-07) 
Sec. 14-48. - Insurance required of peddlers of candy, ice cream, etc., using motor vehicles; inspection of vehicles. 
    No license shall be issued under the provisions of this article to any peddler, hawker, huckster or itinerant merchant utilizing a motor vehicle in the sale or offering for sale of candy, soda, ice cream or other frozen confections until such peddler, hawker, huckster or itinerant merchant has deposited with the city clerk evidence that he has secured, paid for and has in effect a policy of public liability insurance with a coverage of not less than $50,000.00 for injury to any one person and of not less than $100,000.00 for injuries arising out of any one incident and until each such motor vehicle operated by or on behalf of such peddler, hawker, huckster or itinerant merchant has been inspected by a member of the police department and found to be in good condition with all safety appliances operative. 
(Code 1973, § 13-27) 
Sec. 14-49. - Bond required of persons operating certain amusements. 
    No license shall be issued under the provisions of this article to any person coming within the definition of a merchant, business or occupation whose business includes, entails or consists of the operation or running or conduct of amusement rides such as merry-go-rounds, Ferris wheels, octopuses, scramblers, tilt-a-whirls and other amusement rides, until such person has deposited with the city clerk evidence that he has secured, paid for and has in effect a policy of public liability insurance with a coverage of not less than $100,000.00 for injury to any one person and of not less than $300,000.00 for injuries arising out of any one incident. 
(Code 1973, § 13-28) 
Sec. 14-50. - Licensees and applicants to keep records; inspection. 
    Each merchant, business or occupation in the city required to pay a license fee based on gross receipts shall keep proper books of account or record and shall enter therein in ink an account of all the gross receipts of such merchant, business or occupation. The records shall always be open to inspection by the city clerk or the city collector or their deputies or agents or any certified public accountant employed by the city for the purpose of auditing or examining the books or records of any licensee or any applicant for any license for the purpose of determining the truthfulness or accuracy of any statements made by the applicant in his application for the license or in the payment of the license tax provided for by this article. 
(Code 1973, § 13-29) 
Sec. 14-51. - Filing of copy of state sales tax return. 
    Each licensee or applicant for a license required by this article who was required to file a sales tax return with the state shall upon demand by the city clerk or the city collector or their duly authorized deputies or agents file with the city clerk, city collector or their duly authorized deputies or agents, a verified copy of any Missouri sales tax return made by such licensee or applicant within a period of three years preceding such demand. Refusal or failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be deemed cause for revocation of any license previously issued or for refusal to grant any license applied for. 
(Code 1973, § 13-30) 
Sec. 14-52. - Form of license; where filed; signing of license. 
    All licenses and applications for licenses shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the city clerk who shall receive such applications and issue such licenses; except, however, as may be otherwise provided by ordinance. No license shall be valid for any purpose unless it has been signed by the mayor and the city clerk and shall have the corporate seal of the city affixed thereto. 
(Code 1973, § 13-31) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 94.230. 
Sec. 14-53. - License period. 
(a)  The period for which commercial licenses shall be issued is April 1 through March 31. 
(b)  All new licenses issued within 60 days prior to April 1 will be valid until the end of the license period following that April 1. 
(Ord. No. 06-52, § 3, 8-28-06) 
Sec. 14-54. - Display of license. 
    Each license granted by the city shall be carefully preserved and shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business authorized to be conducted by the license or, in the case of amusement devices, the license therefor shall be affixed in a prominent place on the front of each amusement device. 
(Code 1973, § 13-33) 
Sec. 14-55. - Copy of license. 
    Any person licensed under the provisions of this article, wanting to obtain a copy of the license issued to such licensee, may obtain a copy upon payment of the sum of $5.00. 
(Code 1973, § 13-34; Ord. No. 2224, § 1, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 14-56. - Separate license required for each place of business; change of address. 
    Every merchant, business or occupation shall procure a separate license for each stand, store or place of business conducted, operated or maintained by such merchant, business or occupation for which a license is required; and each and every merchant, business or occupation shall notify the city of any change of address within seven days of such change. 
(Code 1973, § 13-35) 
Sec. 14-57. - Nontransferability. 
    No license issued under this article shall be assigned or transferred. 
(Code 1973, § 13-36) 
Sec. 14-58. - More than one business at same address. 
    Whenever any applicant for a license, under the provisions of this article, is engaged in more than one occupation or business at the same address, each business shall obtain a separate license. 
(Code 1973, § 13-37) 
Sec. 14-59. - Issuance to two or more persons. 
    A license may be issued to two or more persons engaged in any joint enterprise or joint venture the same as to a single person and for the same fee, except as may be otherwise specifically provided for. 
(Code 1973, § 13-38) 
Sec. 14-60. - False statements. 
    No person shall make a false statement in his application for any license of a merchant, business or occupation as to his gross annual business or annual gross receipts; or as to any other condition or factor upon which the license fee or the granting of the license is or shall be based. 
(Code 1973, § 13-39) 
Sec. 14-61. - Statement required when tax based on annual gross receipts. 
    Each person for whom a license tax is provided for by this article, the amount of which license tax is to be computed upon the annual gross receipts of such person, shall furnish the city prior to April 1 of each year a correct statement in writing of the amount of his annual gross receipts, which statement shall not be made public nor used by the city except for the purpose of establishing a correct basis for fixing and collecting the amount of the license tax and except for the purpose of prosecuting violations of this article. All books and accounts showing such annual gross receipts shall be open to the inspection of the city officials charged with the duty of issuing the license required by this article and collecting the fee for the same, and the issuance of any such license may be withheld until all the requirements have been fulfilled. Such statement shall be verified by the affidavit of the merchant, business or occupation or officer thereof making it, if residing within the city; or, if not a resident, then by some credible person duly authorized to do so. 
(Code 1973, § 13-40; Ord. No. 06-52, § 3, 8-28-06) 
Sec. 14-62. - Revocation. 
(a)  Any license issued by the city under the provisions of this article may be revoked for any of the following reasons, in addition to any other reason specified in this article: 
(1)  Any failure to comply with, or any violation of any provisions of this article by any licensee. 
(2)  Violation of the terms and conditions upon which the license was issued. 
(3)  Violation of any ordinance of the city regulating the business, activity or thing licensed. 
(4)  Failure of the licensee to pay any tax or obligation due to the city. 
(5)  Illegal or improper issuance of the license. 
(6)  Any misrepresentation or false statement in the application for such license. 
(7)  Causing, maintaining or assisting in the cause or maintenance of a nuisance, whether public or private. 
(b)  Revocation of any license shall be in addition to any other penalty or penalties prescribed in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 13-41) 
Secs. 14-63-14-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FEES 

Sec. 14-76. - Determination. 
(a)  Every business or occupation as defined in section 1-2 in the city, except as otherwise provided, shall pay within 15 days after the beginning of each license year an annual license fee in the sum of the flat fee specified in this article, except that any business or occupation not specified in this article or any ordinance of the city, shall pay an annual license fee of $50.00; and none of the license fees shall be prorated for less than a full year. Such fees shall be due and payable at the time of commencing of operations or business in the city by any business or occupation and thereafter within 15 days after the beginning of each license year. 
(b)  Any merchant, business or occupation commencing operations or business in the city during any license year shall pay at the time of such commencement a license fee based on estimated gross receipts for the remainder of the calendar year, which shall be filed by such merchant, business or occupation at or before the time of commencement of operations or business, and such merchant, business or occupation shall, within 15 days after the end of such fractional license year, file an estimated return for the ensuing license year and pay at that time a license fee based on such estimates; provided, however, that within one month after the end of each calendar year of estimated gross receipts, such merchant, business or occupation shall file a statement of actual gross receipts and shall pay an additional tax, if any, based on such actual gross receipts; provided, however, that any payment of a license fee based on estimated gross receipts which shall be in excess of the amount due to the city shall be refunded if it has not been deducted with the license fee for the ensuing year. 
(Code 1973, § 13-49; Ord. No. 06-52, § 3, 8-28-06) 
Sec. 14-77. - When due. 
    All license fees, except as may be otherwise provided for by this article, shall be due and payable on or by the 15th day of the first month of the license year. 
(Code 1973, § 13-50) 
Sec. 14-78. - Determination of license fees. 
(a)  A retail sales business, except as may be otherwise provided, shall pay to the city a minimum annual gross receipts license fee of $100.00, or an annual gross receipts license fee of $1.00 for each $1,000.00 of annual gross receipts or fraction thereof, whichever is larger. 
(b)  All other business or occupations, except as may be otherwise provided, shall pay to the city a minimum license fee of $100.00, or a fee of $0.10 for each square foot of floor space utilized by such business, whichever amount is greater. 
(c)  All businesses or persons doing work for hire within the city limits and not having a business office or location within the city shall pay an annual flat fee license fee of $50.00. 
(Code 1973, § 13-51; Ord. No. 2225, § 1, 12-9-91; Ord. No. 03-66, § 1, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 03-67, § 1, 11-24-03) 
Secs. 14-79, 14-80. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2225, adopted December 9, 1991, repealed § 14-79, pertaining to business and occupation tax generally, and derived from Code 1973, §§ 13-52 and 14-80, pertaining to schedule. These sections have been reserved at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 14-81. - Dramshops and sales of intoxicating liquor prohibited. 
    The provisions of this article shall not be construed to authorize any person to conduct or operate a dramshop, tippling house or tavern, nor to sell intoxicating liquor, beer, malt liquor or nonintoxicating beer, and the same shall only be lawful or authorized if sold, commenced or operated in conformity with applicable laws of the state and ordinances of the city relating to such establishments and such sales. 
(Code 1973, § 13-54) 
Sec. 14-82. - Prorating. 
    For any license fee set forth in section 14-78, licensed for the first time 60 days prior to March 31 of any year, the full yearly amount of the license fee shall be charged; for any such license fee due prior to June 30 of any year, the full yearly amount of the license fee shall be charged; for any such license fee at the first time due in any succeeding quarter, the license fee shall be prorated to include the quarter paid and the remainder of the license year. 
(Ord. No. 2420, § 1, 1-9-95; Ord. No. 2530, § 2, 7-8-96) 
Secs. 14-83-14-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MANUFACTURERS' LICENSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-101. - City clerk to be notified of sale or lease. 
    Any manufacturer who shall lease or sell any portion of his premises or place of business to another whose employees will not be included in any statement of the lessor to the city shall report the fact of such sale or lease together with the name and address of the purchaser or lessee in writing to the city clerk. Such report shall be made within five days after such purchaser or lessee has taken possession and shall include a general description of the operations of such purchaser or lessee. 
(Code 1973, § 13-67) 
Sec. 14-102. - Corporate officers responsible for provisions of article. 
    Any act or duty required or authorized to be performed under the provisions of this article by any corporation shall, in addition, be the responsibility of the president of such corporation and of any other person duly authorized by such corporation to perform such act or duty; and such president or other authorized person shall be personally subject to all penalties provided for violation of such applicable provisions of this article as may relate to such acts or duties. 
(Code 1973, § 13-69) 
Sec. 14-103. - Exemption for nonprofit organizations. 
    The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to any nonprofit organization, association or establishment. 
(Code 1973, § 13-70) 
Secs. 14-104-14-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSING REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-121. - License required. 
    No manufacturer shall do or offer to do business in the city without first having made application for, procured and paid for a license to do so as required by and in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 13-78) 
Sec. 14-122. - Payment of other obligations prerequisite to license. 
    No license shall be issued to any manufacturer until all financial obligations, including personal property taxes, other license fees, permit fees or inspection fees required to have been paid by such manufacturer to the city, have been paid. 
(Code 1973, § 13-79) 
Sec. 14-123. - Licensee and applicant to keep records; inspection. 
    Each manufacturer in the city shall keep a proper and complete record of his employees, including the payroll account, which records shall always be open to inspection by the city clerk or the city collector or his deputies or agents or any certified public accountant employed by the city for the purpose of auditing or examining the books or records of any licensee or any applicant for any license for the purpose of determining the truthfulness or accuracy of any statements made by the applicant in his application for the license or in the payment of the license tax provided for by this article. 
(Code 1973, § 13-80) 
Sec. 14-124. - Form of license, where filed; signing of license. 
    All licenses and applications for licenses shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the city clerk, who shall receive such applications and issue such licenses, except as may be otherwise provided by ordinance. No license shall be valid for any purpose unless it has been signed by the mayor and the city clerk and shall have the corporate seal of the city affixed thereto. 
(Code 1973, § 13-81) 
Sec. 14-125. - Display of license. 
    Each license granted by the city shall be carefully preserved and shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business authorized to be conducted by the license. 
(Code 1973, § 13-83) 
Sec. 14-126. - Copy of license. 
    Any person licensed under the provisions of this article, wanting to obtain a copy of the license issued to such licensee, may obtain a copy upon payment of the sum of $5.00. 
(Code 1973, § 13-84; Ord. No. 2224, § 2, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 14-127. - Separate license required for each place of business; change of address. 
    Every manufacturer shall procure a separate license for each place of business conducted, operated or maintained by such manufacturer for which a license is required; and each and every manufacturer shall notify the city clerk of any change of address within seven days of such change. 
(Code 1973, § 13-85) 
Sec. 14-128. - Nontransferability. 
    No license issued under this article shall be assigned or transferred. 
(Code 1973, § 13-86) 
Sec. 14-129. - Issuance to two or more persons. 
    A license may be issued to two or more persons engaged in any joint enterprise or joint venture the same as to a single person and for the same fee, except as may be otherwise specifically provided for by ordinance. 
(Code 1973, § 13-87) 
Sec. 14-130. - False statements. 
    No person shall make a false statement in his application for a manufacturer's license as to the number of his employees or as to any other condition or factor upon which the license fee or the granting of the license is or shall be based. 
(Code 1973, § 13-88) 
Sec. 14-131. - Revocation. 
(a)  Any license issued by the city under the provisions of this article may be revoked for any of the following reasons, in addition to any other reason specified in this article: 
(1)  Any failure to comply with, or any violation of, any provisions of this article by any licensee. 
(2)  Violation of the terms and conditions upon which the license was issued. 
(3)  Violation of any ordinance of the city regulating the business, activity or thing licensed. 
(4)  Failure of the licensee to pay any tax or obligation due to the city. 
(5)  Illegal or improper issuance of the license. 
(6)  Any misrepresentation or false statement in the application for such license. 
(7)  Causing, maintaining or assisting in the cause or maintenance of a nuisance, whether public or private. 
(b)  Revocation of any license shall be in addition to any other penalty prescribed in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 13-90) 
Secs. 14-132-14-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FEES 

Sec. 14-146. - Determination of manufacturers license fee. 
    All manufacturers shall pay to the city an annual manufacturers license fee of $0.05 per square foot of gross floor area of building space for all facilities, whether used for manufacturing purposes or not, located within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 13-98; Ord. No. 2226, § 1, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 14-147. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2226, adopted December 9, 1991, deleted § 14-147, derived from Code 1973, § 13-99, in its entirety. This section has been reserved at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 14-148. - Prorating. 
    For any manufacturer licensed for the first time prior to July 1 of any year, the full yearly amount of the license fee shall be charged; for any manufacturer licensed for the first time on July 1 or thereafter and prior to October 1, one-half of the yearly amount of the license fee shall be charged; and for any manufacturer licensed for the first time on or after October 1 of any year, one-fourth of the yearly amount of the license fee shall be charged. 
(Code 1973, § 13-100) 
Sec. 14-149. - When due. 
    All license fees, except as may be otherwise provided for by this article, shall be due and payable at the time of the commencing of operations or business in the city by any manufacturer and thereafter within 15 days after the beginning of each license year. 
(Code 1973, § 13-101) 
Sec. 14-150. - Noncompliance or violation. 
(a)  In addition to any other penalties imposed by law or ordinance, any person who fails to comply with or who violates any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment for each offense or violation; and each day such failure to comply or such violation continues shall be deemed a separate office. 
(b)  Delinquent taxes and fees under this article shall be subject to the penalties as provided for by other ordinances of the city, now or hereinafter enacted, relating to penalties upon delinquent taxes and fees, including, but not limited to section 14-29. 
(Ord. No. 13-22, § 2, 5-13-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-22, § 2, adopted May 13, 2013, repealed the former § 14-150, and enacted a new § 14-150 as set out herein. The former § 14-150 pertained to violations; penalties and derived from § 13-71 of the 1973 Code; Ord. No. 03-07, § 2, 1-27-03. 
Secs. 14-151-14-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VENDING MACHINES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2444, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 22, 1995, deleted §§ 14-666-14-172 in their entirety and adopted a new § 14-166. Formerly such sections pertained to information contained in application for license; fee; expiration date; exemptions; display of license, name and address of licensee; impoundment of machine or device not displaying license, name and address of owner; sale of machine or device; disposition of proceeds of sale; owner may claim before sale and derived from §§ 13-114-13-120 of the 1973 Code and Ord. No. 2227, § 1, 12-9-91. 

Sec. 14-166. - Sales. 
    Any person who sells any goods, wares, merchandise, personal property of any description, food, drinks or confections from, through or by the use of any vending machine shall not be required to obtain a license from or pay a license taxed to the city for such vending machine. Automatic teller machines (ATMs), or devices which enable a user to obtain cash with or without a corresponding transaction fee or other charge are not vending machines for selling "goods, wares, merchandise, personal property of any description, food, drinks or confections" under this section. Nothing in this section shall relieve such person from obtaining other licenses as may be required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2444, § 2, 5-22-95; Ord. No. 2664, § 1, 2-9-98) 
Secs. 14-167-14-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UTILITIES GROSS RECEIPTS TAX 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 14-191-14-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TELEPHONE 

Sec. 14-206. - Tax levied. 
    Unless otherwise prohibited by relevant state or federal statutes, every person, now or hereafter engaged in the business of furnishing telephone or communication services in the city, shall pay to the city as a license or occupational tax, an amount equal to 3.38 percent, which rate is revenue neutral to the city, of the gross receipts derived from such business within the city. 
    To the extent required by law, the city administrator of the city is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate and publish the revenue neutral rates to be applied in the City of Ballwin for bills to be rendered on or after July 1, 2006, based on the rate information supplied by the Director of Revenue of the State of Missouri. 
    Effective July 1, 2006, to the extent required by law, notwithstanding the provisions of any municipal business license tax (as defined in RSMo 92.077 RSMo) ordinance, this tax shall be based solely and exclusively on those gross receipts of telecommunications companies (being any company doing business in the State of Missouri that provides telecommunications service) for the retail sale of communications services which are subject to taxation under RSMo 144.010 and 144.020. 
    To the extent required or permitted by law, for bills rendered on and after July 1, 2006, the tax rate shall be seven percent or the revenue neutral rates as promulgated and published herein, whichever is lower. 
    To the extent required by law, for bills rendered on and after July 1, 2007 the tax rate shall be adjusted based on information promulgated and published by the Director of the Department of Revenue for the State of Missouri pursuant to RSMo 92.086. The city shall notify the director of the department of revenue in writing within 30 days of any change in the tax rate to the extent required by RSMo 92.086. 
(Code 1973, § 13-184; Ord. No. 2501, § 1, 2-12-96; Ord. No. 00-6, § 1, 2-14-00; Ord. No. 06-26, § 1, 5-8-06; Ord. No. 08-22, § 1, 7-14-08) 
Sec. 14-206.1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the term "gross receipts" means the aggregate amount of sales and charges, exclusive of sales and charges for the commodities or services relative to the business of supplying telephone or communication services for compensation in the city during the period, less credits, refunds, sales taxes, and uncollectible accounts actually charged off during the period. 
    Effective July 1, 2006, the extent required by RSMo 92.083, as used in this article: (a) the term "gross receipts" shall be construed to mean all receipts from the retail sale of telecommunications service taxable under RSMo 144.020, and from any retail customer now and hereafter exempt from state sales tax; and (b) the terms "telephone service", "telecommunications service", "telecommunications", "local exchange service", "local exchange telephone transmission service", "exchange telephone service", "communication services" and similar terms shall be construed to mean telecommunications service as defined in RSMo 92.077, which as of the date of adoption hereof provides that "telecommunications service" has the same meaning as such term is defined in RSMo 144.010, which in turn as of the date of adoption hereof provides that "telecommunications service" means the transmission of information by wire, radio, optical cable, coaxial cable, electronic impulses, or other similar means, further provides that as used in this definition, "information" means knowledge or intelligence represented by any form of writing, signs, signals, pictures, sounds, or any other symbols, and further provides that "telecommunications service" does not include the following is such services are separately stated on the customer's bill or on records of the seller maintained in the ordinary course of business: 
(1)  Access to the Internet, access to interactive computer services or electronic publishing services, except the amount paid for the telecommunications service used to provide such access; 
(2)  Answering services and one-way paging services; 
(3)  Private mobile radio services which are not two-way commercial mobile radio services such as wireless telephone, personal communications services or enhanced specialized mobile radio services as defined pursuant to federal law; or 
(4)  Cable or satellite television or music services. 
    The phrase "to the extent required by law" shall mean that the action is required or permitted by state law in order for the city to continue to receive municipal telecommunications tax revenues under this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-26, § 1, 5-8-06) 
Sec. 14-207. - Payment of license tax prerequisite to doing business; penalty for failure to do so. 
    Any person who engages in the business of furnishing exchange telephone service in the city without first paying the license tax, as provided for in this division, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the penalties provided for in section 1-6. 
(Code 1973, § 13-185) 
Sec. 14-208. - Statement of gross receipts required; payment of tax; credit for service rendered city. 
    All persons engaged in the businesses described in section 14-206 in the city are hereby required to file with the finance director a sworn statement showing the gross receipts of such business within the city. For the business transacted and the gross receipts each month, a statement shall be due and filed by the law day of the following month. At the same time the statement is required to be filed, payment of the tax due on the gross receipts reported in the statement shall be made to the City of Ballwin at the rate set forth in section 14-206. The payment shall be a license to operate for the month immediately succeeding the month in which the payment is made. 
    Effective July 1, 2006, to the extent required by law the director of the Department of Revenue for the State of Missouri shall collect, administer, and distribute telecommunications business license tax revenues in accordance with the provisions of RSMo 92.074 and 92.098 and returns filed by telecommunications companies with the director and tax payments made by such companies to the director pursuant to such statutes shall take the place of the statements and payments described above. 
(Code 1973, § 13-186; Ord. No. 06-26, § 1, 5-8-06) 
Sec. 14-208.1. - Tax to be in lieu of other occupation taxes. 
    The tax required to be paid under this article shall be in lieu of any other occupation tax required of any person engaged in any of the businesses described in chapter 14 of this Code. Except as otherwise required by RSMo 92.074 to 92.098, nothing contained in this article shall be construed to exempt any person to which this article is applicable from payment to the city of any taxes, other than occupation license taxes, levied by the city upon such person or the real or personal property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 06-26, § 1, 5-8-06) 
Sec. 14-209. - Investigation of gross receipts statement. 
    The finance director and such other persons may be designated by the board of Aldermen from time to time, is and are hereby authorized to investigate the correctness and accuracy of any statement filed under the provisions of section 14-208, and for that purpose shall have access to all reasonable times to the books, documents, papers and records of any person filing such statement. Effective July 1, 2006, any audit of a telecommunications company for purposes of RSMo 92.074 to 92.098 shall be conducted pursuant to such statutes and any rules promulgated thereunder. 
(Code 1973, § 13-187; Ord. No. 06-26, § 1, 5-8-06) 
Sec. 14-210. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed three months or by both such fine and imprisonment. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or is committed. 
(b)  Delinquent taxes under this article shall be subject to the penalties as provided for by other ordinances of the city, nor or hereafter enacted, relating to the penalties upon delinquent taxes. 
(c)  To the extent required by law, unless specifically stated otherwise in RSMo 92.074 to 92.098 RSMo., taxpayer remedies, enforcement mechanisms, tax refunds, tax protests, assessments, and all other procedures regarding the tax imposed by this article shall be the same as those provided in RSMo ch. 144. 
(Code 1973, § 13-188; Ord. No. 03-07, § 2, 1-27-03; Ord. No. 06-26, § 1, 5-8-06) 
Sec. 14-211. - Noncompliance or violation. 
(a)  In addition to any other penalties imposed by law or ordinance, any person who fails to comply with or who violates any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment for each offense or violation; and each day such failure to comply or such violation continues shall be deemed a separate office. 
(b)  Delinquent taxes and fees under this article shall be subject to the penalties as provided for by other ordinances of the city, now or hereinafter enacted, relating to penalties upon delinquent taxes and fees, including, but not limited to section 14-29. 
(Ord. No. 13-22, § 2, 5-13-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-22, § 2, adopted May 13, 2013, repealed the former § 14-211, and enacted a new § 14-211 as set out herein. The former § 14-211 pertained to delinquency penalty and derived from § 13-189 of the 1973 Code. 
Sec. 14-212. - Effect on other taxes. 
    Nothing contained in this division shall be construed to exempt any person to which this division is applicable from the payment to the city of the tax which the city levies upon the real or personal property belonging to any such person. 
(Code 1973, § 13-190) 
Sec. 14-213. - Temporary wire changes. 
    All persons engaging in the business of furnishing exchange telephone service in the city, on the request of any person, shall remove, raise or lower its wires temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting such raising or lowering of wires, and payment in advance may be required. Not less than 48 hours' advance notice shall be given to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(Code 1973, § 13-191) 
Sec. 14-214. - Trimming of foliage. 
    The right is hereby granted to all persons engaging in the business of furnishing exchange telephone service in the city to trim trees, brush or hedges upon and overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the city, so as to prevent such foliage from coming in contact with telephone wires and cables. All of the trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of any city official to whom such duties have been or may be delegated by the board of aldermen. 
(Code 1973, § 13-192) 
Sec. 14-215. - Construction. 
    To the extent required by law, in all respects this article shall be interpreted, construed and applied consistent with the requirements of RSMo 92.074 to 92.098. 
(Ord. No. 06-26, § 1, 5-8-06) 
Secs. 14-216-14-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GAS OR GAS SERVICES 

Sec. 14-231. - Tax levied. 
    Every person now or hereafter engaged in the business of supplying or furnishing gas or gas service or power for compensation for any purpose in the city shall pay to the city as a license or occupational tax seven percent of the gross receipts derived from such business within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 13-199; Ord. No. 2501, § 1, 2-12-96; Ord. No. 08-22, § 1, 7-14-08) 
State Law reference- Authorization to maintain the current tax rate on gross receipts for natural gas service, RSMo 393.275(2). 
Sec. 14-232. - Statement of gross receipts required; tax to be paid when statement filed. 
    Every person now or hereafter engaged in the business of supplying gas or gas service or power in the city shall file or cause to be filed with the city clerk a monthly sworn statement of the gross receipts derived from the operation of such business for that month. Such sworn statement shall be filed with the city clerk within 45 days after the close of each such monthly period, and the tax prescribed by this division shall be paid at the time of filing such statement. 
(Code 1973, § 13-200) 
Sec. 14-233. - Authority to investigate statements of gross receipts. 
    The city clerk and such other persons as may be designated by the board of aldermen from time to time are hereby authorized to investigate the correctness and accuracy of the statements filed under this division and for that purpose shall have access at all reasonable times to the books, documents, papers and records of any person making such a statement in order to ascertain the accuracy thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 13-201) 
Sec. 14-234. - Effect on other taxes. 
    Nothing contained in this division shall be construed to exempt any person to which this division is applicable from the payment to the city of the tax which the city levies upon the real or personal property belonging to such person. 
(Code 1973, § 13-202) 
Sec. 14-235. - Noncompliance or violation. 
(a)  In addition to any other penalties imposed by law or ordinance, any person who fails to comply with or who violates any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment for each offense or violation; and each day such failure to comply or such violation continues shall be deemed a separate office. 
(b)  Delinquent taxes and fees under this article shall be subject to the penalties as provided for by other ordinances of the city, now or hereinafter enacted, relating to penalties upon delinquent taxes and fees, including, but not limited to section 14-29. 
(Ord. No. 13-22, § 2, 5-13-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-22, § 2, adopted May 13, 2013, repealed the former § 14-235, and enacted a new § 14-235 as set out herein. The former § 14-235 pertained to delinquency penalty and derived from § 13-203 of the 1973 Code. 
Secs. 14-236-14-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ELECTRICITY OR ELECTRICAL SERVICES 

Sec. 14-251. - Tax levied. 
    Every person now or hereafter engaged in the business of supplying or furnishing electricity or electrical service, or power for compensation for any purpose in the city, shall pay to the city as a license or occupational tax seven percent of the gross receipts derived from such business within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 13-210; Ord. No. 2501, § 1, 2-12-96; Ord. No. 08-22, § 1, 7-14-08) 
Sec. 14-252. - Statement of gross receipts required; taxes to accompany statement. 
    Every person now or hereafter engaged in the business of supplying electricity or electrical service or power in the city shall file or cause to be filed with the city clerk a monthly sworn statement of the gross receipts derived from the operation of such business for that month. Such sworn statement shall be filed with the city clerk within 45 days after the close of each such monthly period, and the tax prescribed by this division shall be paid at the time of filing such statement. 
(Code 1973, § 13-211) 
Sec. 14-253. - Authority to investigate statements of gross receipts. 
    The city clerk and such other persons as may be designated by the board of aldermen from time to time are hereby authorized to investigate the correctness and accuracy of the statements filed under this division and for that purpose shall have access at all reasonable times to the books, documents, papers and records of any person making such a statement in order to ascertain the accuracy. 
(Code 1973, § 13-212) 
Sec. 14-254. - Noncompliance or violation. 
(a)  In addition to any other penalties imposed by law or ordinance, any person who fails to comply with or who violates any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment for each offense or violation; and each day such failure to comply or such violation continues shall be deemed a separate office. 
(b)  Delinquent taxes and fees under this article shall be subject to the penalties as provided for by other ordinances of the city, now or hereinafter enacted, relating to penalties upon delinquent taxes and fees, including, but not limited to section 14-29. 
(Ord. No. 13-22, § 2, 5-13-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-22, § 2, adopted May 13, 2013, repealed the former § 14-254, and enacted a new § 14-254 as set out herein. The former § 14-254 pertained to delinquency penalty and derived from § 13-213 of the 1973 Code. 
Sec. 14-255. - Effect on other taxes. 
    Nothing contained in this division shall be construed to exempt any person to which this division is applicable from the payment to the city of the tax which the city levies upon the real or personal property belonging to such person. 
(Code 1973, § 13-214) 
Sec. 14-256. - No automatic adjustments. 
    Pursuant to RSMo 393.275, and any and all other applicable authority, the city shall maintain the tax rate of its business license taxes on the gross receipts of electric utilities without reduction notwithstanding any periodic fluctuations in the tariffs of such utility corporations or any notice thereof including, but not limited to, notice sent under RSMo 393.275. 
(Ord. No. 11-40, § 1, 9-12-11) 
Secs. 14-257-14-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - WATER AND WATER SERVICE 

Sec. 14-271. - Tax levied. 
    Every person now or hereafter engaged in the business of supplying or furnishing water or water service for compensation for any purpose in the city shall pay to the city as a license or occupational tax seven percent of the gross receipts derived from such business within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 13-221; Ord. No. 2501, § 1, 2-12-96; Ord. No. 08-22, § 1, 7-14-08) 
Sec. 14-272. - Statement of gross receipts required; tax to accompany statement. 
    Every person now or hereafter engaged in the business of supplying water or water service for compensation in the city shall file or cause to be filed with the city clerk a quarterly sworn statement of the gross receipts derived from the operation of such business for that quarter, the applicable tax rate and the amount remitted. Such sworn statement shall be filed with the city clerk within 45 days after the close of each such quarterly period, and the tax prescribed by this division shall be paid at the time of filing such statement. 
(Code 1973, § 13-222; Ord. No. 09-02, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 14-273. - Authority to investigate statements of gross receipts. 
    The city clerk and such other persons as may be designated by the board of aldermen from time to time are hereby authorized to investigate the correctness and accuracy of the statements filed under this division and for that purpose shall have access at all reasonable times to the books, documents, papers and records of any person making such a statement in order to ascertain the accuracy thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 13-223) 
Sec. 14-274. - Noncompliance or violation. 
(a)  In addition to any other penalties imposed by law or ordinance, any person who fails to comply with or who violates any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment for each offense or violation; and each day such failure to comply or such violation continues shall be deemed a separate office. 
(b)  Delinquent taxes and fees under this article shall be subject to the penalties as provided for by other ordinances of the city, now or hereinafter enacted, relating to penalties upon delinquent taxes and fees, including, but not limited to section 14-29. 
(Ord. No. 13-22, § 2, 5-13-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-22, § 2, adopted May 13, 2013, repealed the former § 14-274, and enacted a new § 14-274 as set out herein. The former § 14-274 pertained to delinquency penalty and derived from § 13-224 of the 1973 Code. 
Sec. 14-275. - Effect on other taxes. 
    Nothing contained in this division shall be construed to exempt any person to which this division is applicable from the payment to the city of the tax which the city levies upon the real or personal property belonging to such person. 
(Code 1973, § 13-225) 
Secs. 14-276-14-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - AUCTION, ESTATE AND OTHER PERSONAL PROPERTY SALES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 06-06, § 1, adopted Jan. 23, 2006, amended the Code by changing the title of Art. VI from "Auction and Estate Sales" to "Auction, Estate and Other Personal Property Sales". 
State Law reference- Licensing of auctioneers, RSMo 71.620. 

Sec. 14-291. - License required. 
(a)  The owner or lessee of real property located in a residential district of the city designated as R-1A, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or MXD shall not conduct or allow to be conducted on his real property any auction or estate sale unless the property owner has applied to and obtained from the city a license to conduct such auction or sale of merchandise at least 48 hours before the auction or sale of merchandise is held. 
(b)  The provisions of this section are not to be applied to the legal conduct of garage sales. For the purpose of this section, (i) an estate sale means the sale of personnel property in conjunction with the death or incapacity of the owner, or other sale promoted as an estate sale, (ii) an auction means the sale of property to the highest bidder and (iii) a garage sale is the resale of unwanted personnel and household items from a garage or yard and promoted as a garage sale. 
(Code 1973, § 13-300; Ord. No. 06-40, § 1, 6-26-06) 
Cross reference- Zoning, app. A. 
Sec. 14-292. - Application for license. 
    The owner or lessee of real property shall apply to the city for a license to hold an auction at least 48 hours before the auction or sale of merchandise is held. The application for license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and residential address of property owner. 
(2)  Address of location where auction or sale of merchandise is to be held. 
(3)  The date and hours of the auction or sale of merchandise. 
(4)  The number of auctions or sales of merchandise that occurred at this location during the previous 12 months. 
(5)  Estimate of number of persons expected to attend. 
(6)  The number of onsite parking places available at the property. 
(7)  The signature of the property owner or lessee requesting the license. 
Upon payment of a fee of $50.00 to the city, the clerk shall issue a license to the property owner, provided that no auction or sale of merchandise had been made at this property location during the previous 30 days nor if there have been two or more auctions or sale of merchandise at this location during the previous 12 months, and in either situation the license shall not be issued. 
(Code 1973, § 13-310; Ord. No. 03-02, § 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 7-14-08) 
Sec. 14-293. - Conditions of license. 
    The license to conduct an auction or sale of merchandise shall contain the following conditions: 
(1)  The auction or sale of merchandise shall be held only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on the date specified in the application for license. 
(2)  No sound amplification equipment is to be used except in a fully enclosed building. 
(3)  The license is to be conspicuously posted on the property where it may be viewed from the street. 
(Code 1973, § 13-220; Ord. No. 06-40, § 2, 6-26-06; Ord. No. 16-10, § 1, 2-22-16) 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 12; police, ch. 20. 
Sec. 14-294. - Penalty. 
    Any person who conducts or permits the conduct of an auction or sale of merchandise on his real property without obtaining a license shall upon being found guilty be fined $50.00 for the first offense and $200.00 for each subsequent violation. Each day of sale shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1973, § 13-230) 
Sec. 14-295. - Sale and display of personal property in residential districts. 
    Personal property sales and the outdoor display of such items, by way of example and not of limitation, as automobiles, household appliances and yard equipment, for example, are permitted in residential zoning districts under the provisions of this section. Not more than one item (or one associated group of items, i.e., a table and associated chairs, for example) shall be displayed for sale per residential lot. In no instance shall the display be placed in the public right of way or in easements. The sale period of for personal property shall not exceed 30 days per calendar year, whether counted consecutively or in individual days or unless due cause for an extension of time can be demonstrated. For good cause shown, one 30-day extension may be granted. Successive sales of similar personal property, even if occurring with the allowed time period, is not permitted. That is to say, successive sales of different automobiles, tractors, or lawn mowers, for example, are prohibited. This section does not apply to the legal conduct of garage sales. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 2, 1-23-06) 
Secs. 14-296-14-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BASIC CABLE TELEVISION RATES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- At the discretion of the editor, §§ 1-14 of Ord. No. 2378, adopted May 9, 1994, has been codified as herein set out in §§ 14-341-14-354. Said provisions did not expressly amend the Code. 
Cross reference- Cable communications, ch. 7.5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 14-321-14-340. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGULATION OF RATES 

Sec. 14-341. - Filing and review of rates. 
(a)  Filings by cable operators. 
(1)  Filings; when made. Within 30 days after the initial date of regulation of its basic service tier under this article (or June 15, 1994, if later), a cable operator must file its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment, a full description of the services available in the basic service tier, and all forms prescribed by the FCC to establish initial regulated rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment, unless the cable system is eligible for streamlined rate reductions under FCC regulations and implements the required reduction and provides written notice thereof in accordance with FCC regulations. In addition, after initial regulated rates have been established to change regulated rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment, a cable operator must file 30 days before the proposed effective date of the change any proposed new schedule of rates, related description of the services available in the basic service tier, all forms prescribed by the FCC, and proof of customer notice as required by the FCC. Rate changes include decreases, including annual reductions due to decreases in external costs and quarterly reductions due to decreases in programming costs resulting from deletion of a channel or channels from the basic service tier. 
(2)  Filings; where made. Every rate filing must be submitted to the cable coordinator (hereinafter "coordinator") designated by the city. A rate filing shall be considered filed for review on the date all required forms (correctly completed) and supporting materials and all required copies are submitted to the coordinator. If a filing is incomplete, the coordinator may require the cable operator to supplement the filing and all time deadlines regarding the city's review of the filing shall be suspended. 
(3)  Filings; cover letter and copies. 
a.  Every rate filing must be accompanied by a covering letter which states whether the filing concerns existing rates, proposes a rate increase, or proposes a rate decrease. The covering letter must also identify any elections the cable operator is making regarding applicable FCC regulations. The covering letter must state whether the cable operator claims any of the information it has submitted is proprietary. The covering letter must also contain a brief, narrative description of any proposed changes in rates or in service, including the precise amount of any rate change and an explanation of the cause thereof, and the identification of any added or deleted channels. 
b.  An original and 15 copies of each rate filing (including all supporting materials) must be submitted. 
(4)  Filings; standard of review. 
a.  Basic service tier rates. 
1.  Permitted changes prior to May 15, 1994. For service prior to May 15, 1994, the permitted per channel charge shall be, at the election of the cable operator made at the time it files the prescribed forms, either: (i) a charge determined pursuant to a cost-of-service proceeding in accordance with FCC regulations; or (ii) the charge specified by the applicable FCC regulations. Any changes to charges effective prior to May 15, 1994, shall be evaluated in accordance with FCC regulations. 
2.  Permitted charges as of May 15, 1994. As of May 15, 1994, the permitted charge for the basic service tier shall be, at the election of the cable operator made at the time it files the prescribed forms to establish initial regulated rates, either: (i) a rate determined pursuant to a cost-of-service showing in accordance with FCC regulations; (ii) the full reduction rate as defined by the FCC; (iii) the transition rate as defined by the FCC, if the system is eligible for transition relief under FCC regulations; or (iv) a rate based on streamlined rate reduction as defined by the FCC, if the system is eligible to implement such a rate reduction under FCC regulations and implements the required reduction and provides written notice thereof in accordance with FCC regulations. The transition rate shall be adjusted within 30 days after a determination by the city that the rate in effect on March 31, 1994, was different than that permitted under FCC regulations, and any applicable refunds will be made in accordance with this article and FCC regulations. The transition rate or rate based on streamlined rate reduction shall be subject to change as authorized by the FCC or as requested by the cable operator in accordance with this article and FCC regulations. 
3.  Permitted charges after May 15, 1994. After May 15, 1994, the permitted charge for the basic service tier shall be, at the election of the cable operator made at the time it files the prescribed forms, either: (i) a rate determined pursuant to a cost-of-service showing; or (ii) a rate determined by application of the FCC's price cap regulations to the permitted rate as of May 15, 1994. 
b.  Basic service equipment and installation rates. Rates for equipment and installations used to receive basic service shall not exceed charges based on actual costs in accordance with FCC regulations. Rates for customer equipment and installation and additional connections shall be unbundled. Equipment charges may include a properly allocated portion of franchise fees. Monthly usage charges for additional television receivers are not permitted. A cable operator may sell equipment to subscribers at prices which recover costs. A cable operator may sell equipment service contracts for equipment sold to subscribers, in accordance with FCC regulations. Promotional offerings are acceptable, so long as they are reasonable in scope, not unreasonably discriminatory, and are not subsidized by cost recovery through increases in equipment cost elements or increases in programming service rates above the maximum level prescribed by FCC regulations. 
c.  Charges for customer changes. Charges to customer changes in service tiers effected solely by coded entry on a computer terminal or similarly simple methods shall be a nominal amount not exceeding actual costs, except on approval by the city and advance notice to subscribers, the cable operator may establish a higher charge for changes by subscribers changing service tiers more than two times in a 12-month period. Other charges for customer changes in service tiers or equipment shall be based on actual cost. Downgrade charges that are the same as or less than reasonable upgrade charges are reasonable. For 30 days after notice of retiering or rate increases, customer shall be able to change service tiers at no additional charge. 
d.  Burden of proof. The cable operator has the burden of proving its charges are in accordance with this article and FCC regulations. 
(b)  Initial city action on filing. After receiving a rate filing, the following steps will be taken. 
(1)  Notice published; public comments received. The city promptly shall publish a notice to the public that a filing has been received. The notice shall state that the filing is available for public review, except for those parts withheld as proprietary, and shall state reasonable time(s) and place(s) for such review. The notice shall state that interested parties may comment on the filing and shall establish the time and manner in which interested parties may submit their comments in light of the date by which the city must act upon the filing. 
(2)  Coordinator recommendations. The coordinator shall submit recommendations for action to the board of aldermen within ten days of receipt of a filing and shall give contemporaneous notice thereof to cable operator and the public. 
(3)  Cable operator response. A cable operator shall be given an opportunity to respond to public comments and coordinator recommendations regarding its filing. The coordinator's recommendations shall establish the time and manner in which the cable operator must submit its comments in light of the date by which the city must act upon the filing. 
(4)  Order issues. Within 30 days of the date of the filing, the board of aldermen shall issue a written order, which may be in any lawful form. The order shall approve the proposed rates in whole or in part; deny the proposed rates in whole or in part; or state that additional time is required to review the filing because the city is unable to determine, based on the material submitted by the cable operator, that the rates are in accordance with FCC regulations. An order stating additional time is required shall permit the cable operator to cure any deficiency in its filing by submitting a supplementary filing as provided in section (c). If the city disapproves the proposed rates, it may order a reduction or prescribe rates where necessary to bring rates into compliance with this article and FCC regulations. 
(5)  Effective date of filing. Unless the board of aldermen disapproves the filing or issues an order stating that additional time is required to review the filing within 30 days after the filing date, initial rates will remain effective or proposed rates will become effective. Unless the order or a subsequent order states otherwise, if the city decides more time is required to review the filing, the filing will remain subject to disapproval until after, and no proposed change will go into effect any earlier than, the time for further action by the city provided in section (c)(6) has passed. If the city takes no action within the time provided in section (c)(6), initial rates shall remain in effect or proposed rates shall take effect, subject to refund if applicable. 
(6)  Order released and notice published. Notice of the rate order shall be given to the cable operator. A public notice shall be published stating that the order has issued and is available for review at specified, reasonable time(s) and place(s). 
(c)  Further review after tolling order. If the city issues a tolling order stating that additional time is required to review a filing, then the following steps shall be taken. 
(1)  Supplementary filing submitted. The cable operator shall submit a supplementary filing within 20 days from the date the tolling order issues, containing corrections, if any, to its filing and any additional information necessary to support the proposed rate, including information the city directs the cable operator to include in the supplementary filing. Supplementary filings must be filed in accordance with section (a)(2). 
(2)  Notice published; public comments received. The city shall publish a notice to the public that interested parties may submit additional comments. The notice shall be published after the date scheduled for submission of any supplementary filing. The notice shall state that any supplementary filing or additional information provided by the cable operator will be available for public review at specified reasonable time(s) and place(s), except for those parts withheld as proprietary. The notice shall establish the time and manner in which interested parties must submit their comments in light of the date by which the city must take further action. 
(3)  Coordinator recommendations. The coordinator shall submit any further recommendations to the board of aldermen within 20 days from receipt of the cable operator's supplementary filing and shall give notice of the recommendations to the cable operator and the public. 
(4)  Cable operator response. The cable operator shall be given an opportunity to respond to public comments and the coordinator's recommendations regarding its filing. The coordinator's recommendations shall establish the time and manner in which the cable operator must submit its comments in light of the date by which the city must act upon the filing. 
(5)  Order issues. The board of aldermen shall issue a written order, which may be in any lawful form, approving the proposed rate in whole or in part; denying the proposed rate in whole or in part; or allowing the rate to go into effect in whole or in part, subject to refund, pending further investigation. If the city disapproves the proposed rate, it may order a reduction or prescribe rates where necessary to bring rates into compliance with this article and FCC regulations. If the board of aldermen issues an order allowing the rates to go into effect subject to refund, it shall also direct the cable operator to keep an accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the rate in issue and on whose behalf such amounts were paid. 
(6)  Time for order. The order specified in section (c)(5) shall be issued within 90 days after the tolling order for any filing not involving cost-of-service showings. The order shall be issued within 150 days of the tolling order for any filing involving cost-of-service showings. 
(7)  Order released and notice published. Notice of the rate order shall be given to the cable operator. A public notice shall be published stating that the order has issued and is available for review at specified, reasonable time(s) and place(s). 
(8)  Effect of order for further investigation. If the rate order provides for further investigation, the city shall provide for appropriate additional opportunities for comment by interested parties and the cable operator. Notice of any subsequent rate order completing the investigation shall be given to the cable operator. A public notice shall be published stating that the order has issued and is available for review at specified reasonable time(s) and place(s). 
(9)  Effect of failure to file. If a cable operator fails to file its initial schedule of rates and related materials by the deadline established in section (a)(1), the city shall hold the cable operator in default and proceed to make a determination as to the reasonableness of the cable operator's rates and order appropriate relief without the participation of the cable operator. 
(d)  Remedies and refunds. 
(1)  Orders. The city may order reductions or prescribe rates as provided by this article and FCC regulations. The city may order the cable operator to make refunds including interest, in accordance with FCC regulations. 
(2)  Time for implementing. A cable operator must implement remedial requirements, including prospective rate reductions and refunds, within 60 days after the city issues an order mandating a remedy. The relief must be effective as of the date the order issues. 
(3)  Filing confirming implementation. Within 60 days of the date an order mandating a remedy is issued, a cable operator must file a certification, signed by an authorized representative, stating: whether the cable operator has complied fully with all provisions of the order; describing in detail the precise measures taken to implement the order; and showing how any reductions or results (including interest) were calculated and made. 
(4)  Deferral. Refund liability will be deferred if required by FCC regulations. 
(5)  Small systems. Small systems shall be regulated in accordance with FCC regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 1, 5-9-94) 
Sec. 14-342. - Miscellaneous provisions generally applicable to rate orders and proceedings. 
(a)  Rate orders must be written. Any rate order shall be in writing, and shall explain the basis for the city's decision. 
(b)  Notice to and comment by cable operator. Before prescribing a rate or ordering a reduction or a refund to subscribers, the city shall ensure the cable operator has had notice and opportunity to comment on the proposed rate, reduction or refunds. 
(c)  Any lawful action permitted. The city may take any steps that it is not prohibited from taking by federal or state law to protect the public interest as part of any rate order or by any other means. By way of illustration and not limitation, it may require refunds, set rates, and impose forfeitures and penalties directly or through its delegated representatives, and enforce refund orders. 
(d)  Orders subject to revision. Every order approving or setting a rate shall be subject to revision to the extent permitted under applicable laws and regulations, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(e)  Public information. All filings, comments, recommendations, responses, and orders shall be available for public inspection except to the extent proprietary material is withheld. Inspection can be made upon request to the coordinator. All such materials regarding a particular filing will be made a part of the record before the board of aldermen acts thereon. 
(f)  No discrimination. No cable operator shall discriminate among subscribers or potential subscribers to cable service. The city shall not prohibit a cable operator from offering reasonable discounts to senior citizens or to economically disadvantaged groups as defined by the FCC, so long as such discounts are offered equally to all subscribers in the franchise area who qualify as a member of the category or reasonable subcategory. 
(g)  "A la carte" offerings. In reviewing a basic service rate filing, the city may make an initial decision addressing whether a collective offering of "a la carte" channels will be treated as unregulated service or a regulated tier. Such decision must be made within the first 30 days established for review of basic service rates, or within 60 days thereafter if a tolling order issues. The city shall provide notice of its decision to the cable operator and the public within seven days of making the decision. Such an initial decision shall toll the time periods within which the city must decide upon rate filings until seven days after the FCC decides any interlocutory appeal or, if no appeal is taken, until seven days after the expiration of the time for filing an interlocutory appeal. Alternatively, the city may reserve its decision until it issues its final decision on the rate filing. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 2, 5-9-94) 
Sec. 14-343. - Information requests. 
(a)  Duty to respond. A cable operator and any other entity that has records of revenues or expenses that are or may be allocated to the cable operator's system must respond to requests for information from the city. A cable operator is responsible for ensuring that such other entity responds to the city's requests. 
(b)  Time for response. Complete responses to information requests must be submitted by reasonable deadlines established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 3, 5-9-94) 
Sec. 14-344. - Other duties of cable operator. 
(a)  Cable operator must maintain books and records. It is each cable operator's responsibility to keep books and records of account so that it can comply fully with this article and any city order issued hereunder, as well as FCC regulations. 
(b)  Filings must be complete. It is each cable operator's duty to submit as complete a filing as possible, and knowingly withholding information or making a filing that is incomplete under applicable law shall be treated as a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 4, 5-9-94) 
Sec. 14-345. - Duties of cable coordinator. 
    The coordinator shall be responsible for administering the provisions of this article. Without limitation and by way of illustration, the coordinator shall: 
(1)  Providing notices. Ensure notices are given to the public and each cable operator as required herein and by FCC regulations. The cable operator can be provided notice by publication, mail, fax or any other reasonable means. The public can be provided notice by publication, posting or any other reasonable means. 
(2)  Submitting information requests. Submit requests for information to the cable operator and establish deadlines for response to them, as provided in section 14-324. Requests can be provided to the cable operator by mail, fax or any other reasonable means. 
(3)  Waiving requirements. For good cause, waive any provision herein or extend any deadline for filing or response except as to such matters as are mandatory under FCC regulations. 
(4)  Ruling on confidentiality requests. Rule on any request for confidentiality. 
(5)  Preparing recommendations. Prepare recommendations to the board of aldermen. If the recommendation is that any proposed rate be rejected in whole or in part, the coordinator shall, to the extent possible, propose a rate and explain the basis for the recommendation (it may propose that rates remain at existing levels); recommend whether and on what basis refunds should issue; and notify the cable operator of its recommendation at the time it is submitted to the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 5, 5-9-94) 
Sec. 14-346. - Joint regulation. 
    To the extent permitted by law, the city may conduct cable regulation pursuant to this article jointly with other municipalities in St. Louis County, Missouri, served by the same cable operator, including, but not limited to, joint certification, acting through a common coordinator, holding joint proceedings, providing joint notices, conducting joint reviews of filings. The board of aldermen shall retain the final authority to make determinations hereunder and shall issue separate orders. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 6, 5-9-94) 
Sec. 14-347. - Penalties and forfeitures. 
(a)  Except as prohibited by federal or state law, a cable operator which violates this article or any city order issued hereunder directed specifically to the cable operator shall be subject to penalties and forfeitures under the municipal code or, if applicable, the city's cable ordinance. 
(b)  Charging or filing for approval of a rate that is later determined to be unreasonable is not in and of itself an evasion of federal or local rate regulation, and does not provide a basis for assessing penalties or forfeitures. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 7, 5-9-94) 
Sec. 14-348. - Proprietary information. 
(a)  Requests for protection of proprietary information. If this article, or any request for information made pursuant hereto, requires the production of proprietary information, a cable operator must produce the information. However, at the time the allegedly proprietary information is submitted, a cable operator may request that specific, identified portions of its response be treated as confidential and withheld from public disclosure. The request must state the reason why the information should be treated as proprietary and the facts that support those reasons. Requests for confidential treatment, or for inspection of proprietary information, will be reviewed and decided by the coordinator in accordance with applicable FCC regulations and applicable state and local law. 
(b)  Identification of proprietary information. Information that the cable operator claims is proprietary must be clearly identified as such by the cable operator. If it is part of a larger submission, such as a rate filing, the proprietary information must be segregated from the remainder of the submission. It must also be clearly marked so that the city may determine where the proprietary information belongs within and how it relates to the remainder of the submission. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 8, 5-9-94) 
Sec. 14-349. - Petition for change in regulatory status. 
    Any cable operator may petition for a change in regulatory status based on development of effective competition, and the city shall consider such a petition in accordance with FCC regulations. The cable operator must file an original and 15 copies of the petition with the coordinator. If there are multiple cable operators providing locally-regulated service within the city, each operator must file a separate petition and receive a separate decision from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 9, 5-9-94) 
Sec. 14-350. - Itemization of bills. 
    A cable operator shall itemize its bills so that the charges for basic service, equipment and installation are separately stated. A cable operator may, but is not required to, identify as a separate line item on each regular bill of each subscriber, in accordance with FCC regulations: (1) the amount of the total bill assessed as a franchise fee and the identity of the franchising authority to which the fee is paid; (2) the amount of the total bill assessed to satisfy any requirements imposed on the cable operator by the franchise agreement to support public, educational or governmental channels or the use of such channels; and (3) the amount of any other fee, tax, assessment or charge of any kind imposed by any governmental authority on the transaction between operator and the subscriber. In order for a governmental fee or assessment to be separately identified under this subsection, it must be directly imposed by a governmental body on a transaction between a subscriber and an operator. The charge identified on the subscriber's bill as the total charge for cable service shall include all itemized fees and costs. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 10, 5-9-94) 
Sec. 14-351. - Late charges. 
    A cable operator shall not impose a late charge upon any subscriber who pays for service within 15 days after the end of the month in which the service was provided. Late charges shall not exceed 0.75 percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 11, 5-9-94) 
Sec. 14-352. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
    All prior ordinances or resolutions or parts thereof in conflict herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 12, 5-9-94) 
Sec. 14-353. - Severability. 
    If any clause, section, other part or application of this article is held by any agency or court of competent jurisdiction to be preempted, unenforceable, unconstitutional or invalid, it shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions or applications of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 13, 5-9-94) 
Sec. 14-354. - Effective date. 
    This article shall be effective upon passage and approval as provided by law and upon FCC certification or recertification of the city, alone or jointly with other franchising authorities, to regulate basic service tier rates and associated equipment and notification to the cable operator(s) providing service within the city by certified mail, return receipt requested, of such certification or recertification and the adoption of this article. Rate regulation under this article may be stayed by the FCC pending the outcome of a proceeding on a petition for reconsideration of the certification of the city, subject to any applicable refunds. This article shall remain in effect pending the outcome of a proceeding on a petition for revocation of certification, absent grant of a stay by the FCC. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 14, 5-9-94) 
Secs. 14-355-14-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RIGHTS-OF-WAY USAGE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 00-46, § 1, adopted September 11, 2000 and Ord. No. 00-52, §§ 1, 2, adopted October 9, 2000 added a new article VIII to this chapter of which said article comprises §§ 14-801-14-805. Since the gap between the final section of article VII of this chapter (§ 14-354) and the first section of article VIII seemed too vast, the editor of supplement no. 8 has chosen to renumber §§ 14-801-14-805 as 14-501-14-505. 

Sec. 14-501. - Background. 
    Consistent with state and federal law, the city is in the process of considering the developing telecommunications and cable ordinances related to the management, coordination and use of the rights-of-way to provide cable telecommunications and other services. The city has joined the St. Louis County Municipal League Rights-of-Way Consortium to assist it in developing appropriate regulations and agreements in an expeditious manner. In order to allow applicants to commence the application process pending a final development and adoption by the city of the telecommunications and cable ordinances, the city has approved the process set forth in this article VIII. 
(Ord. No. 00-46, § 1, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 00-52, §§ 1, 2, 10-9-00) 
Sec. 14-502. - Application procedure and application fee. 
    An application for use of the right-of-way shall require the following payment or payments; 
  Communications application fee: $5000.00. 
  Cable franchise application fee: $20,000.00. 
    The above fees shall be non-refundable. In addition to the fee set forth above, an applicant shall complete the application form attached to Ord. No. 00-52 and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 00-46, § 1, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 00-52, §§ 1, 2, 10-9-00) 
Sec. 14-503. - Rights-of-way rental fee. 
    Assuming the application set forth in section 14-502 is approved by the board of aldermen, an applicant receiving approval of use of the rights-of-way shall pay an annual fee of 
(1)  $8,500.00 per year, payable in monthly installments from the date of application approval; or 
(2)  The amount of the gross receipts tax due on the operations of the applicant, whichever amount is more. 
(Ord. No. 00-46, § 1, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 00-52, §§ 1, 2, 10-9-00) 
Sec. 14-504. - Termination of rights granted under application. 
    The rights granted under any application set forth in this article VIII shall terminate automatically if 
(1)  The public service commission no longer regulates rates of the company; and/or 
(2)  The utility tax or gross receipts tax imposed on operation of the applicant is found not to apply to those operations, for any reason. 
(Ord. No. 00-46, § 1, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 00-52, §§ 1, 2, 10-9-00) 
Sec. 14-505. - Termination of this article. 
    This article shall terminate automatically upon the passage of telecommunications and cable ordinances related to the management, coordination and use of rights-of-way as finally adopted by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 00-46, § 1, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 00-52, §§ 1, 2, 10-9-00) 
Secs. 14-506-14-600. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS AND ADULT SERVICE PROVIDERS 

Sec. 14-601. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited and in which coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images involving specific sexual activities or specific anatomical areas to persons in booths or viewing rooms. 
    Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment that offers for sale or rent any of the following as one of its principal business purposes: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions or slides or other visual representations that depict or describe specific sexual activities or specific anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specific sexual activities. 
    Adult live entertainment establishment means an establishment that features either: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or 
(2)  Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specific anatomical areas or specific sexual activities. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment in which for any form of consideration films, motion pictures, video, cassettes, slides or other similar photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specific sexual activities or specific anatomical areas are predominantly shown. 
    Adult oriented business means adult arcades, adult bookstores or adult video stores, cabarets, adult live entertainment establishments, adult motion picture theaters, adult theaters, massage establishments that offer adult service or nude model studios. 
    Adult oriented business manager or "manager" means a person on the premises of an adult oriented business who is authorized to exercise overall operational control of the business. 
    Adult service means dancing, serving food or beverages, modeling, posing, wrestling, singing, reading, talking, listening or other performances or activities conducted for any consideration in an adult oriented business by a person who is nude or seminude during all or part of the time that the person is providing the service. 
    Adult service business means a business establishment or premises where any adult service is provided to patrons in the regular course of business. 
    Adult service provider or "provider" means any person who provides an adult service. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment that predominantly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or who engage in live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specific anatomical areas or specific sexual activities. 
    Booth means a partitioned area, in which coin or token operated video machines, projectors or other electronically or mechanically controlled devices are used in the regular course of business to produce still or moving picture images characterized by depiction of specific sexual activities or specific anatomical areas. 
    Cabaret means an adult oriented business licensed to provide alcoholic beverages pursuant to chapter 3 of this Code. 
    Chief of police means the chief of police of the city or the chief of police's designee. 
    City administrator means the administrator of the City of Ballwin or the administrator's designee. 
    Employee means any person hired, engaged or authorized to perform any service on the premises of an adult service business, including an adult service provider, whether denominated as an employee, independent contractor or otherwise. 
    Enterprise means a corporation, association, labor union or other legal entity, as provided in Revised Statutes of Missouri. 
    License means the license required by this article as a condition to conducting an adult oriented business. 
    Licensee means a person or enterprise holding an adult oriented business license issued under this article, including those persons required to provide information under section 14-605 herein. 
    Manager's station means a permanently designated area marked accordingly within an adult oriented business where an adult oriented business manager is located in the normal course of operations. 
    Massage establishment means an establishment in which a person, firm, association or corporation engages in or permits massage activities, including any method of pressure on, friction against, stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical apparatus or electrical apparatus or appliance. This definition shall not apply to: 
(1)  Physicians and surgeons licensed by the state board of registration for the healing arts; 
(2)  Dentists licensed by the Missouri dental board who confine their practice strictly to dentistry; 
(3)  Optometrists licensed by the state board of optometry who confine their practice strictly to optometry, as defined in RSMo 336.010; 
(4)  Nurses licensed by the state board of nursing who confine their practice strictly to nursing; 
(5)  Chiropractors licensed by the state board of chiropractic examiners who confine themselves strictly to the practice of chiropractic, as defined in RSMo 331.010; 
(6)  Podiatrists licensed by the state board of chiropody or podiatry who confine their practice strictly to that of a podiatrist, as defined in RSMo 330.010; 
(7)  Professional physical therapists licensed by the state board of registration for the healing arts who confine their practice strictly to professional physical therapy, as defined in RSMo 334.500; 
(8)  Coaches and physical education instructors in the performance of their duties; 
(9)  Apprentice athletic trainers who confine themselves strictly to their duties as defined in RSMo 334.700 to 334.725. 
(10)  Athletic trainers from other nations, states, or territories performing their duties for their respective teams or organizations if they restrict their duties only to their teams or organizations and only during the course of their teams' or organizations' stay in this the city. 
    Nude model studio means a place in which a person who appears in a state of nudity or who displays specific anatomical areas is observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted by other persons who pay money or other consideration. Nude model studio does not include a proprietary school that is licensed by the State of Missouri or a college, community college or university that is supported entirely or in part by taxation, a private college or university that maintains or operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, community college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation, or a structure to which the following apply: 
(1)  A sign is not visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising appears indicating that a nude person is available for viewing; and 
(2)  A student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class in order to participate; and 
(3)  No more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at any time. 
    Nude, nudity or state of nudity means any of the following: 
(1)  The appearance of a human anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human anus, genitals or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
    Patron means a person invited or permitted to enter and remain upon the premises of an adult oriented business, whether or not for consideration. 
    Permit means the permit required by this article to engage in the activities of an adult service provider or an adult oriented business manager. 
    Principal business purposes means that a commercial establishment derives 50 percent or more of its gross income from the sale or rental of items listed in subsections (1) and (2) of the definitions in this section of "adult bookstore" or "adult video store". 
    Seminude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, as well as portions of the body that are covered by supporting straps or devices. 
    A specific anatomical area means any of the following: 
(1)  A human anus, genitals, pubic region or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola that is less than completely and opaquely covered. 
(2)  Male genitals in a discernible turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    A specific sexual activity means any of the following: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy. 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of the human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breast. 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities under subsection (1) through (3) above, of specific sexual activities. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-602. - Purpose. 
    The principal purpose of this article is to establish licensing procedures and regulations for adult oriented businesses and facilities, and their employees, within the City of Ballwin. The procedures and regulations contained herein are designed to accommodate these types of businesses and facilities while still recognizing the need to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Ballwin. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-603. - Administration. 
(a)  The administration of this article, including the duty of prescribing forms, is vested in the administrator, except as otherwise specifically provided. The chief of police shall render such assistance in the administration and enforcement of this article as may be requested by the administrator. 
(b)  License or permit applications made pursuant to this article shall be submitted to the administrator who shall grant, deny, suspend or revoke licenses or permits in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a period of one year from date of issuance. 
(d)  Permits issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a period of three years from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-604. - Adult oriented facilities business license required. 
(a)  A person or enterprise may not conduct an adult oriented business without first obtaining an adult oriented business license pursuant to this article. The license shall state the name of the license holder, the name, address and phone number of the licensed premises, and the dates of issuance and expiration of the license. 
(b)  An adult oriented business for which a license has been issued pursuant to this article may conduct business only under the name or designation specified in the license. 
(c)  A licensee shall conduct business only at the address shown on the license. Each additional place of business shall require a separate license. 
(d)  An adult oriented business license shall be displayed on the premises in such a manner as to be readily visible to patrons. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-605. - Application for adult oriented business license. 
(a)  An applicant for an adult oriented business license shall file at the office of the administrator an application, signed under oath by the applicant and notarized, accompanied by the fee required under section 14-620. An applicant or other person whose fingerprints and photograph are required under subsection (c) may, at their option, be photographed and fingerprinted at the Ballwin Police Station or other law enforcement agency. An application shall be deemed complete when the administrator has received the required fees, all information required in subsection (c), fingerprints of the applicant and a photograph of the applicant's face, and, in the case of a corporation or other business organization, a photograph and fingerprints of all persons for whom information is required under subsection (c) below. The purpose for obtaining these fingerprints and photographs is to obtain a state and federal records check. The chief of police is authorized to exchange this information with the Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
(b)  Fingerprints and photograph, if not taken at the Ballwin Police Station, shall be taken by a law enforcement agency and accompanied by a notarized verification by that agency. If the applicant requests that fingerprints and photograph be taken at the Ballwin Police Station, such fingerprints and photograph shall be completed by the chief of police within ten working days of the request. Any such fingerprints or photograph not completed by the chief of police within ten working days of the request and appearance at the Ballwin Police Station for that purpose within such time frame shall be deemed to have been completed and received by the administrator for purposes of the application. 
(c)  The application shall include the information called for in subsections (1) through (10). If the applicant is an enterprise, it shall designate an officer or partner as applicant. In such case, in addition to the information required in subsections (1) through (10) for the applicant, the application shall include the State and date of formation of the organization and the information called for in subsections (2) through (7) of this section with respect to each officer, administrator, general partner, and all other persons with authority to participate directly and regularly in management of the business, provided that, such information need not be provided with respect to attorneys, accountants and other persons whose primary function is to provide professional advice and assistance to the licensee. 
(1)  The name, business location, business mailing address and phone number of the proposed adult oriented business establishment. 
(2)  The applicant's full true name and other names, aliases or stage names used in the preceding five years. 
(3)  The applicant's current residential mailing address and telephone number. 
(4)  Written proof of age of the applicant, in the form of a birth certificate, current driver's license with picture, or other picture identification document issued by a governmental agency. 
(5)  The issuing jurisdiction and the effective dates of any license or permit relating to an adult oriented business or adult service, whether any such license or permit has been revoked or suspended within the past two years, and, if so, the reason or reasons therefore. 
(6)  All criminal charges, complaints or indictments in the preceding three years which resulted in a conviction or a plea of guilty or no contest for an "organized crime and fraud" offense, a "prostitution" offense, a "drug offense," or a "sexual offense" under the Revised Statutes of the State of Missouri, or for conduct in another jurisdiction which if committed outside of the State of Missouri would constitute an offense under the Revised Statutes of Missouri for the offenses generally enumerated in this subsection. 
(7)  The applicant's fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant's face. 
(8)  The name and address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process. 
(9)  The names of the adult oriented business manager(s) who will have actual supervisory authority over the operations of the business. 
(10)  An accurate, to scale, but not necessarily professionally drawn, site plan and floor plan of the business premises and, in an application for an adult service business license, also clearly indicating the location of one or more manager's stations. 
(d)  The information provided pursuant to subsections (c)(5) and (6) above shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail to the administrator within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(e)  As requested by the administrator, the chief of police shall investigate and confirm information supplied by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-606. - Adult oriented business manager permit. 
(a)  A person may not serve as an adult oriented business manager unless the person has first secured an adult oriented business manager permit under this section. 
(b)  Application for an adult oriented business manager permit shall be made in the same manner as application for an adult business license, except that the applicant need provide only the information called for in subsections 14-605(c)(2) through (7). 
(c)  The purpose for obtaining the applicant's fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant's face is to obtain a state and federal records check. The chief of police is authorized to exchange this information with the federal bureau of investigation. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-607. - Adult service provider permit. 
(a)  A person may not work as an adult service provider unless the person has first obtained an adult service provider permit under this section. 
(b)  Application for an adult service provider permit shall be made in the same manner as an application for an adult oriented business license, except that the applicant need provide only the information called for in subsections 14-605(c)(2) through (7). 
(c)  The purpose for obtaining the applicant's fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant's face is to obtain a state and federal records check. The chief of police is authorized to exchange this information with the federal bureau of investigation. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-608. - Confidentiality. 
    The information provided by an applicant in connection with the application for a license or permit under this article shall be maintained in confidence by the administrator. Because of the fees, fees established for licenses and permits in this article are based on the estimated cost of implementation and not paid in whole or part by public funds, the records maintain by the city under this article are determined not to be subject to the public record laws of the State of Missouri. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-609. - Grant or denial of license or permit. 
(a)  Within 45 days after receipt of a complete application for an adult oriented business license, the administrator shall mail to the applicant a license or a notice of intent to deny. If the administrator fails to do so, the license shall be deemed granted. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application for an adult oriented business manager permit or an adult service provider permit, including all information required by subsection 14-606(b) and 14-607(b), payment of the required fees and completion of photograph and fingerprinting requirements of section 14-605, the administrator shall issue to the applicant a temporary permit. Within 30 days after issuance of a temporary permit, the administrator shall mail to the applicant a regular permit or a notice of intent to deny. If the administrator fails to do so, the permit shall be deemed granted. 
(c)  The issuance of any license, permit or temporary permit does not waive any right of the city to revoke, deny or suspend for any defect, omission or misrepresentation in the application. 
(d)  The administrator shall grant the license or permanent permit to an applicant who has completed all requirements for application, unless the administrator finds any of the following conditions noted below. For purposes of this subsection, a person required to submit information pursuant to subsection 14-605(c) shall be deemed an applicant. 
(1)  The application is incomplete or contains a misrepresentation, false statement or omission. 
(2)  The applicant has failed to comply with applicable zoning or other land use ordinances of the city relating to the business or activity to be carried out under the license or permit. 
(3)  The applicant is delinquent in payment of any taxes, fees or other payments due in connection with the business or activity to be carried out under the license or permit. 
(4)  The applicant is not at least 18 years of age. 
(5)  The applicant, or other person required to provide information under subsection 14-605(c), in the past three years has been convicted, or plead guilty or no contest with respect to a felony violation or two misdemeanor violations of one or more offenses in the categories stated in subsection 14-605(c). 
(6)  Within the past two years, a license or permit under this article held by an applicant, or other person required to provide information pursuant to subsection 14-605(c), has been revoked, or a similar license in another jurisdiction has been revoked on the basis of conduct which would be a ground for revocation of a license or permit issued under this section if committed in the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-610. - Non-transferability. 
    Licenses and permits issued under this article are nontransferable. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-611. - Adult service provider or manager work identification card. 
    The administrator shall provide a work identification card to all adult service providers and adult oriented business managers. 
    The card shall contain a photograph of the permittee, the number of the permit issued to that permittee and the date of expiration of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-612. - Adult service business; operating requirements. 
(a)  A person employed or acting as an adult service provider or manager shall have a valid permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. A permit or a certified copy thereof for each manager or provider shall be maintained on the premises in the custody of the manager at all times during which a person is serving as a provider or manager on the premises. Such permits shall be produced by the manager for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or other authorized city official. 
(b)  An adult service business shall maintain a daily log of all persons providing adult services on the premises. The log shall cover the preceding 12-month period and shall be available for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or other authorized city official during regular business hours. 
(c)  A person below the age of 18 years may not observe or provide an adult service. 
(d)  A person may not provide an adult service in an adult service business except upon a stage elevated at least 18 inches above floor level. All parts of the stage, or a clearly designated area thereof within which the adult service is provided, shall be a distance of at least three feet from all parts of a clearly designated area in which patrons may be present. The stage or designated area thereof shall be separated from the area in which patrons may be located by a barrier or railing the top of which is at least three feet above floor level. A provider or patron may not extend any part of his or her body over or beyond the barrier or railing. 
(e)  An adult service provider, in the course of providing an adult service, may not perform a specific sexual activity. 
(f)  Adult services may not be provided between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday or between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday. 
(g)  An adult service may not be provided in any location which is not visible by direct line of sight at all times from a manager's station located in a portion of the premises which is accessible to patrons of the adult service business. 
(h)  An adult service provider shall wear his or her adult service provider work identification card at all times while on the premises except while providing an adult service. The card shall be affixed to clothing on the front of the person and above waist level so that the picture and permit number are clearly visible to patrons. 
(i)  An adult oriented business manager shall be on the premises of an adult service business at all times during which any adult service is provided on the premises. The manager shall wear his or her identification card in the manner described in subsection (h) above. 
(j)  An employee may not knowingly or intentionally touch the breast, buttocks or genitals of a patron, nor may a patron knowingly or intentionally touch the breast, buttocks or genitals of an employee. 
(k)  A sign, in a form to be prescribed by the administrator summarizing the provisions of subsection (c), (d), (j) and (l) herein, shall be posted near the entrance of an adult service business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. 
(l)  A patron may not place any money on the person or in or on the costume of an adult service provider while the adult service provider is nude or seminude. 
(m)  A manager or licensee may not knowingly permit or tolerate a violation of any provision of this section. 
(n)  With respect to a cabaret, the requirements of this section shall apply to the extent that they are not in conflict with specific statutory or valid regulatory requirements applicable to persons licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-613. - Adult arcades; operating requirements. 
(a)  An adult arcade shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle, as measured at the floor level. 
(b)  Each booth or viewing room shall either: (a) be configured in such a way that allows persons patrolling the area outside the booth or viewing room to observe from outside the booth or viewing room the activities of any occupant in the interior of the booth or viewing room, or (b) if not so configured, be equipped with a mirror or other device which allows persons patrolling the area outside the booth or viewing room to observe from outside the booth or viewing room the activities of any occupant in the interior of the booth or viewing room. 
(c)  An adult oriented business manager shall be on the premises of an adult arcade at all times that the arcade is open for business. The manager shall wear his or her identification card in the manner described in section 14-611. 
(d)  A patron may not engage in specific sexual activities on the premises of an adult arcade. 
(e)  A booth or viewing room shall not have any hole or aperture in any wall separating that booth or viewing room from another. 
(f)  A manager or licensee may not knowingly permit or tolerate a violation of any provision of this section. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-614. - Inspection of premises and records. 
    The manager shall permit law enforcement officers or other authorized city officials to inspect the premises upon request during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-615. - Suspension of license or permit. 
    The administrator shall suspend a license or permit for a period of ten days if the licensee or permittee is convicted of violating a provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-616. - Revocation of license or permit. 
    The administrator shall revoke a license or permit issued pursuant to this article if the licensee or permittee: 
(1)  Is convicted of three or more violations of this article in any 12-month period. 
(2)  Is convicted or pleads guilty or no contest to an offense stated in section 605(c). 
(3)  Is determined to have filed inaccurate information required under section 609(d) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-617. - Procedures for denial, revocation, non-renewal or suspension; appeal. 
    If the administrator determines that grounds exist for denial, suspension or revocation of a license or permit under this article, he/she shall notify the applicant, licensee or permittee (respondent) in writing of his/her intent to deny, suspend or revoke, including a summary of the grounds therefore. The notification shall be by certified mail to the address on file with the administrator. Within ten working days of receipt of such notice, the respondent may provide to the administrator in writing a response which shall include a statement of reasons why the license or permit should not be denied, suspended or revoked and may include a request for a hearing. If a response is not received by the administrator in the time stated, the notification shall be the final administrative action of denial, suspension or revocation and notice of such will be sent to the permittee or licensee within five working days after the expiration of the period for submitting a response. Within five working days after receipt of a response, the administrator shall either withdraw the intent to deny, suspend or revoke, and send notification of the withdrawal to the respondent in writing by certified mail, or shall schedule a hearing before a hearing officer and send notification to the respondent in writing by certified mail of the date, time and place of the hearing. If the administrator fails to send a timely notification either withdrawing the intent or scheduling a hearing, the intent to deny, suspend or revoke shall be deemed withdrawn. The hearing, if requested, shall be scheduled not less than 15 nor more than 30 working days after receipt by the administrator of the request for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner. The respondent may be represented by counsel. If respondent is represented by counsel, attorneys' fees shall be at the expense of respondent. The rules of evidence shall not apply. Respondent shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the denial, suspension or revocation was arbitrary or capricious and an abuse of discretion. The hearing officer shall render a written decision within five working days after completion of the hearing and shall mail a copy of the decision by certified mail to the address of the respondent on file with the administrator. If more than 45 days elapse between receipt by the administrator of a request for a hearing and mailing by the hearing officer of a final decision to the respondent, a decision in favor of the applicant, licensee or permit-tee shall be deemed to have been rendered. In the case of an intent to revoke, suspend or non-renew a license or permit, or to deny a regular permit, the permittee or licensee may continue to function under the license or permit pending receipt of the final decision of the hearing officer. The decision shall be final at the end of five working days after it is mailed and shall constitute final administrative action. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-618. - Judicial appeal. 
    Final administrative action to deny, revoke or non-renew a license or permit may be appealed to the St. Louis Circuit Court by any special action, writ or other available procedure within 35 days after receipt of written notice of the decision. The city shall consent to expedited hearing and disposition. If a permittee or licensee pursues a judicial appeal from a final administrative action, that permittee or licensee may continue to function under the license or permit pending completion of judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-619. - License and permit renewal. 
(a)  A license or permit may be renewed by filing an application for renewal in writing with the administrator. The application shall contain the information required to be submitted with an original application, including fingerprints and a photograph, provided, that, a renewal application need not contain any other information that has been provided in a previous application and has not changed since the time of the most recent application. An application for license renewal shall be received by the administrator not less than 45 days before the expiration of the license. An application for permit renewal shall be received by the administrator before expiration of the permit. 
(b)  The administrator may deny an application for renewal for the reasons and in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 14-609. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-620. - Fees. 
(a)  An original application for an adult oriented business license shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee in the amount of $500.00 and by a license fee in the amount of $500.00. The license fee will be refunded if the license is denied. An application for renewal shall be accompanied by the amount of the license fee. 
(b)  An application for issuance or renewal of an adult service provider permit shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee of $100.00. 
(c)  An application for issuance or renewal of an adult oriented business manager permit shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee of $150.00. 
(d)  A duplicate or certified copy of a license, permit or identification card shall be issued by the administrator upon payment of a fee of $10.00. 
(e)  An applicant also shall be required to pay, to the law enforcement agency which provides the applicant with fingerprinting or photography services, the standard fee, if any, charged by that agency for each set of fingerprints and the photograph required to be provided under section 14-605. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-621. - Other regulations. 
    A license or permit required by this article is in addition to any other licenses or permits required by the city, county or the state to engage in the business or occupation. Persons engaging in activities described in this article shall comply with all other ordinances and laws, including the city zoning ordinance, as may be required, to engage in a business or profession. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-622. - Penalty. 
(a)  Violation of any requirement or prohibition stated in this article is a Class 2 Misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than $500.00 and/or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days. With respect to a violation that is continuous in nature, each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to other penalties, an adult oriented business that operates without a valid license shall constitute a public nuisance that may be abated in a manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 14-623. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all persons engaging in the activities described herein, whether or not such activities were commenced prior to the effective date of this article. Persons so engaged as of the effective date of this article shall be in full compliance with this article, including receipt of any required license or permit, within 180 days after the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 1-23-06) 
Chapter 15 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; alcoholic beverage control, ch. 3; animals and fowl, ch. 5; traffic in parks, § 18-27; bicycles, skateboards and roller skates in parks, § 18-28; vehicles on golf course, § 18-64; operating vehicles for collection of garbage and refuse, § 23-59; streets and sidewalks, ch. 24; traffic circulation in mixed use development districts, app. A, art. XIIA, § 8. 
State Law reference- Model traffic ordinance, RSMo Ch. 300; registration and licensing of motor vehicles, RSMo Ch. 301; drivers' and chauffeurs' licenses, RSMo Ch. 302; motor vehicle financial responsibility, RSMo Ch. 303; traffic regulations, RSMo Ch. 304; municipal traffic regulations, RSMo 304.120; general penalty for violation of traffic regulation statutes, RSMo 304.570; vehicle equipment, RSMo Ch. 307. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the traffic code and may be referred to as such when being amended. 
(Code 1973, § 14-1) 
Sec. 15-2. - Conformance to law required of public employees. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, the state, the county or the city and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or state law. 
(Code 1973, § 14-3) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.095. 
Sec. 15-3. - Persons propelling pushcarts or riding animals to obey traffic regulations. 
    Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1973, § 14-4) 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, ch. 5. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.085. 
Sec. 15-4. - Authorized emergency vehicles; exceptions from certain requirements; duties of drivers. 
(a)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call, when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, subject to the conditions stated in this section. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
(3)  Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property. 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing the direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
(c)  The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle, while in motion, sounds an audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Code 1973, § 14-5) 
Cross reference- Police, ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.100. 
Sec. 15-5. - Use of toy vehicles. 
(a)  No person upon roller skates, or riding in, on or by means of any coaster, two-wheel motorized scooter and/or scooter on which the rider normally stands, skateboard, toy vehicles or similar devices, shall go upon any highway, road or street, except while crossing such highway, road or street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing, such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. 
(b)  No person shall operate a skateboard in a private driveway, on a private lot or on private property without the express consent of the owner or other person in lawful charge of such driveway, parking lot or property. 
(c)  No one shall operate any motorized vehicle or other toy vehicle capable of exceeding five mph on any sidewalk within the City of Ballwin. This section shall not apply to motorized wheelchairs. 
(Code 1973, § 14-6; Ord. No. 01-49, § 1, 7-23-01; Ord. No. 01-63, § 1, 10-8-01; Ord. No. 14-01, § 2, 1-13-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.090. 
Sec. 15-6. - Operation of motor vehicle without proper license prohibited; motorcycles; special license; protective headgear. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for by law, it shall be unlawful for any person, except those expressly exempted by section 15-8, to: 
(1)  Operate any vehicle upon any highway in the city unless they have a valid intermediate driver's license or driver's license. 
(2)  Operate a motorcycle or motortricycle upon any highway of this state unless such person has a valid license that shows he has successfully passed an examination for the operation of a motorcycle or motortricycle as prescribed by the director. The director may indicate such upon a valid license issued to such person, or shall issue a license restricting the applicant to the operation of a motorcycle or motortricycle if the actual demonstration, required by RSMo 302.173, is conducted on such vehicle. 
(3)  Authorize or knowingly permit a motorcycle or motortricycle owned by him or under his control to be driven upon any highway by any person whose license does not indicate that the person has passed the examination for the operation of a motorcycle or motortricycle or has been issued an instruction permit therefor. 
(4)  Operate a motor vehicle with an instruction permit or license issued to another person. 
(5)  Operating a motor vehicle with an intermediate driver license between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless accompanied by a person described in subsection 1 of RSMo 302.130 except the licensee may operate a motor vehicle without being accompanied if the travel is to or from a school or educational program or activity, a regular place of employment or in an emergency situation as defined by state regulations. Each intermediate driver license shall be restricted by requiring that the driver and all passengers in the licensee's vehicle wear safety belts at all times. 
(6)  For the first six months after issuance of the intermediate driver's license, the holder of the license shall not operate a motor vehicle with more than one passenger who is under the age of 19 who is not a member of the holder's immediate family. As used in this subsection, an intermediate driver's license holder's immediate family shall include brothers, sisters, stepbrothers or stepsisters of the driver, including adopted or foster children residing in the same household of the intermediate driver's license holder. After the expiration of the first six months, the holder of an intermediate driver's license shall not operate a motor vehicle with more than three passengers who are under 19 years of age and who are not members of the holder's immediate family. The passenger restrictions of this subsection shall not be applicable to any intermediate driver's license holder who is operating a motor vehicle being used in agricultural work-related activities. 
(7)  Operate any vehicle upon any highway in the city while the operator's license or driving privilege is cancelled, suspended or revoked. A person commits the crime of driving while revoked if such person operates a motor vehicle on a highway when such person's license or driving privilege has been cancelled, suspended, or revoked under the laws of this state or any other state and acts with criminal negligence with respect to knowledge of the fact that such person's driving privilege has been cancelled, suspended, or revoked. Any person convicted of driving while revoked is guilty of a misdemeanor. A first violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $300.00. A second or third violation of this section shall be punishable by imprisonment for a term not to exceed one year and/or a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(b)  Every person operating or riding as a passenger on any motorcycle or motortricycle, as defined in RSMo 301.010, upon any highway of this city shall wear protective headgear at all times the vehicle is in motion. The protective headgear shall meet reasonable standards and specifications established by the state director of revenue acting directly or through his authorized officers and agents. 
(Code 1973, § 14-7(a); Ord. No. 01-48, § 1, 7-23-01; Ord. No. 06-56, § 1, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 12-46, § 1, 12-10-12) 
State Law reference- Operation of vehicle without proper license prohibited, RSMo 302.020. 
Sec. 15-7. - When chauffeur's license required. 
    Any person operating a school bus, carrying more than ten pupils, shall be required to procure a chauffeur's license. 
(Code 1973, § 14-7(b); Ord. No. 14-01, § 2, 1-13-14) 
Sec. 15-8. - Exemptions from license law. 
    The following persons are exempt from license under this article: 
(1)  Any person while operating any farm tractor or implement of husbandry temporarily operated or moved on a highway. 
(2)  A nonresident who is at least 16 years of age and who has in his immediate possession a valid license issued to him in his home state or country. 
(3)  A nonresident who is at least 18 years of age and who has in his immediate possession a valid license issued to him in his home state or country which allows such person to operate a motor vehicle in the transportation of persons or property as classified in RSMo 302.015. 
(4)  Convicted offenders of the department of corrections who have not been convicted of a motor vehicle felony as follows: driving while intoxicated; failing to stop after an accident and disclosing his identity; or driving a motor vehicle without the owner's consent may operate state-owned trucks for the benefit of the correctional facilities, provided that such offender shall be accompanied by a correctional officer or other staff person in such truck. 
(Code 1973, § 14-7(c)) 
Sec. 15-9. - Violation of license restrictions. 
    Any person who operates a motor vehicle in any manner in violation of the restrictions imposed in a restricted license issued to him shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 14-7(d)) 
Sec. 15-10. - Children forbidden to operate motor vehicle. 
    No person shall cause or knowingly permit his child or ward under the age of 16 years to drive a motor vehicle upon any highway when such minor is not authorized by law or in violation of any of the provisions of RSMo 302.010 through 302.260. 
(Code 1973, § 14-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 302.250. 
Sec. 15-11. - Operation by unlicensed person prohibited. 
    No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by him or under his control to be driven upon any street or highway by any person who is not authorized to do so under the laws of the state. 
(Code 1973, § 14-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 302.260. 
Sec. 15-12. - Operation of motorcycle by unauthorized person prohibited. 
    No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a motorcycle or other two- or three-wheeled self-propelled vehicle owned by him or under his control to be driven upon any street or highway by any person whose operator's license does not indicate that the person has passed the examination for the operation of a motorcycle or has been issued an instruction permit therefor. 
(Code 1973, § 14-10) 
Sec. 15-13. - Operation with another's license prohibited. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle with an instruction permit, operator's or chauffeur's license issued to another. 
(Code 1973, § 14-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 302.220. 
Sec. 15-14. - State license plate to be displayed; tab and inspection certificate; transfer. 
(a)  No motor vehicle or trailer shall be operated or parked on any of the streets of the city unless it shall have displayed thereon the license plate or set of license plates issued by the director of revenue of the state or his equivalent of another state. Each such plate shall be securely fastened to the motor vehicle in a manner so that all parts thereof shall be plainly visible and reasonably clean and so that the reflective qualities thereof are not impaired. License plates shall be fastened to all motor vehicles except trucks, tractors, truck tractors or truck-tractors licensed in excess of 12,000 pounds on the front and rear of such vehicles not less than eight nor more than 48 inches above the ground, with the letters and numbers thereon right side up. The license plates on trailers, motorcycles, motortricycles and motorscooters shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicles, with the letters and numbers thereon right side up. The license plate on trucks, tractors, truck tractors or truck-tractors licensed in excess of 12,000 pounds shall be displayed on the front of such vehicles not less than eight nor more than 48 inches above the ground, with the letters and numbers thereon right side up. 
(b)  The vehicle owner to whom a tab or set of tabs is issued by the state director of revenue shall affix and display such tab or tabs on the license plate as designated by the state department of revenue, no more than one per plate. 
(c)  The certificate of inspection and approval as required by RSMo 307.350 shall be displayed upon every motor vehicle or trailer as prescribed by the regulations issued by the superintendent of the state highway patrol. 
(d)  Upon the transfer of ownership of any motor vehicle or trailer, the certificate of registration and the right to use the numbered/personalized plates shall expire and the numbered/personalized plates shall be removed by the owner at the time of the transfer of possession. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the person to whom such numbered/personalized plates were originally issued to have the same in his possession whether in use or not. Upon the sale of a motor vehicle or trailer by a dealer, a buyer who has made application for registration, by mail or otherwise, may operate the same for a period of 15 days after taking possession thereof, if during such period the motor vehicle or trailer shall have attached thereto, in the manner required by RSMo 302.130, number plates issued to the dealer. Upon application and presentation of satisfactory evidence that the buyer has applied for registration, a dealer may furnish such number plates to the buyer for such temporary use. In such event, the dealer shall require the buyer to deposit the sum of $10.50 to be returned to the buyer upon return of the number plates as a guarantee that the buyer will return to the dealer such number plates within 15 days. The state director of revenue may issue a temporary permit authorizing the operation of a motor vehicle or trailer by a buyer on a continuous trip from the place of purchase to the buyer's residence. Upon the issuance of such permit, an appropriate placard evidencing the issuance thereof shall be displayed on the vehicle. 
(Code 1973, § 14-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 301.130(7), (8), 301.140. 
Sec. 15-15. - Riding bicycles, sleds, roller skates by attaching to another vehicle prohibited. 
    No person riding upon any bicycle, motorized bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Code 1973, § 14-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.350. 
Sec. 15-16. - Financial responsibility required. 
(a)  No owner of a motor vehicle registered in this state, or required to be registered in this state, shall operate, register or maintain registration of a motor vehicle, or permit another person to operate such vehicle, unless the owner maintains the financial responsibility which conforms to the requirements of the laws of this state. No nonresident shall operate or permit another person to operate in this state a motor vehicle registered to such nonresident unless the nonresident maintains the financial responsibility which conforms to the requirements of the laws of the nonresident's state of residence. Furthermore, no person shall operate a motor vehicle owned by another with the knowledge that the owner has not maintained financial responsibility unless such person has financial responsibility which covers the person's operation of the other's vehicle; however, no owner or nonresident shall be in violation of this subsection if he or she fails to maintain financial responsibility on a motor vehicle which is inoperable or being stored and not in operation. 
(b)  A motor vehicle owner shall maintain the owner's financial responsibility in a manner provided for in RSMo 303.160, or with a motor vehicle liability policy which conforms to the requirements of the laws of this state. A nonresident motor vehicle owner shall maintain the owner's financial responsibility which conforms to the requirements of the laws of the nonresident's state of residence. 
(c)  When operating a motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the city, the operator of shall exhibit proof of financial responsibility on the demand of any peace officer, commercial vehicle enforcement officer or commercial vehicle inspector who lawfully stops such operator or investigates an accident while that officer or inspector is engaged in the performance of the officer's or inspector's duties. If proof is provided by means of an insurance identification card, such insurance identification card may be produced in either paper or electronic format. Acceptable electronic forms include display of electronic images on a cellular phone or any other type of portable electronic device. The insurance identification card shall include all of the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the insurer; 
(2)  The name of the named insured; 
(3)  The policy number; 
(4)  The effective dates of the policy, including month, day and year; 
(5)  A description of the insured motor vehicle, including year and make or at least five digits of the vehicle identification number or the word "fleet" if the insurance policy covers five or more motor vehicles; 
(6)  The statement "This card must be carried in the insured motor vehicle for production upon demand" prominently displayed on the card. 
(d)  Failure to have the required insurance or produce evidence of the same shall result, upon conviction, a minimum fine of $100.00 and up to the fine of $1,000.00 and/or 90 days in jail. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 1-13-14) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, adopted January 13, 2014, amended § 15-16 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 15-16, pertained to motor vehicle insurance required. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Sec. 15-17. - Prohibited uses of license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to display or to permit to be displayed, or to have in its possession, any license knowing the same to be fictitious or to have been canceled, suspended, revoked, disqualified or altered; to lend to or knowingly permit the use of by another any license issued to the person so lending or permitting the use thereof; to display or to represent as one's own any license not issued to the person so displaying the same, or fail or refuse to surrender to the clerk of the municipal court, or to surrender any license which has been suspended, canceled, disqualified or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2683, § 1, 6-8-98) 
Secs. 15-18-15-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-31. - Duty of police officers to enforce regulations. 
    It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city or such officers as are duly and lawfully assigned by the chief of police to enforce all the traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 14-25) 
Cross reference- Police, ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.075. 
Sec. 15-32. - Authority to direct traffic by hand or voice. 
    Any police officer of the city or such officers of the police reserve force of the city as are duly and lawfully assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with the traffic laws; provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, such officers of the police department or police reserve force may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Code 1973, § 14-26) 
Cross reference- Emergency management, ch. 8. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.075. 
Sec. 15-33. - Authority for members of fire departments from other municipalities to assist in traffic control at fires and accident scenes. 
    Officers of any city, town or village fire department or fire protection district having the status of a political subdivision pursuant to the statutes of the state, when at the scene of a fire or accident, may direct or assist the law enforcement officers in directing traffic at such scene or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1973, § 14-27) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.075. 
Sec. 15-34. - Obedience to police officers and fire department officials. 
    No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer or fire department official authorized by law to direct, control or regulate traffic. 
(Code 1973, § 14-28) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.080. 
Secs. 15-35-15-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic violations bureau, RSMo 300.555 et seq. 

Sec. 15-51. - Authority to establish traffic violations bureau and appoint clerk. 
(a)  The municipal court of the city is hereby authorized and directed to establish a traffic violations bureau as defined in rule 37.50 of the supreme court of the state. 
(b)  The municipal court of the city is also directed to appoint by order a violations clerk for the traffic violations bureau and by order designate the traffic offenses within the authority of the violations clerk, subject to the powers and limitations contained in such rule 37.50 of the supreme court of the state. 
(Code 1973, § 14-36) 
Sec. 15-52. - Traffic violations bureau to keep records. 
    The traffic violations bureau shall keep records and submit to the judges hearing violations of municipal ordinances summarized monthly reports of all notices issued and arrests made for violations of the traffic laws and ordinances in the city and of all the fines collected by the traffic violations bureau or the court, and of the final disposition or present status of every case of violation of the provisions of such laws and ordinances. Such records shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the totals of each. Such records shall be public records. 
(Code 1973, § 14-38) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.565. 
Sec. 15-53. - Additional duties generally. 
    The traffic violations bureau shall follow such procedures as may be prescribed by this chapter or other ordinances of the city or as may be required by any laws of the state. 
(Code 1973, § 14-39) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.570. 
Secs. 15-54-15-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EQUIPMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-71. - Horns required; sirens, whistles prohibited. 
    Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with an adequate horn for warning. It shall be unlawful to drive a motor vehicle to which is attached a gong, bell, whistle or siren, or to sound such device in any street. This section does not apply to authorized emergency vehicles, required backup alarms or licensed confectionaries. 
(Code 1973, § 14-81) 
Sec. 15-72. - Muffler cutouts. 
    Muffler cutouts shall not be used and no vehicle shall be driven in such manner or condition that excessive and unnecessary noises shall be made by its machinery, motor, signaling device, or other parts, or by any improperly loaded cargo. The motors of all motor vehicles shall be fitted with properly attached mufflers of such capacity or construction as to quiet the maximum possible exhaust noise as completely as is done in modern gas engine passenger motor vehicles. Any cutout or opening in the exhaust pipe between the motor and the muffler on any motor vehicle shall be completely closed and disconnected from its operating lever, and shall be so arranged that it cannot automatically open, or be opened or operated while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1973, § 14-82) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.170. 
Sec. 15-73. - Obstructions to vision of driver; tinted glass, etc. 
    Except as provided herein, no person shall operate any motor vehicle registered in the State of Missouri on any public highway or street of the state with any manufactured vision-reducing material applied to any portion of the motor vehicle's windshield, sidewings, or windows located immediately to the left and right of the driver which reduces visibility from within or without the motor vehicle. This section shall not prohibit labels, stickers, decalcomania, or informational signs on motor vehicles or the application of tinted or solar screening material to recreational vehicles as defined in RSMo 700.010, provided that such material does not interfere with the driver's normal view of the road. This section shall not prohibit factory installed tinted glass, the equivalent replacement thereof or tinting material applied to the upper portion of the motor vehicle's windshield which is normally tinted by the manufacturer of motor vehicle safety glass. Any person may operate a motor vehicle with a front sidewing vent or window that has a sun screening device, in conjunction with safety glazing material, that has a light transmission of 35 percent or more plus or minus three percent and a luminous reflectance of 35 percent or less plus or minus three percent. 
(Ord. No. 01-60, § 1, 9-10-01) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.173. 
Sec. 15-74. - School bus markings. 
    Every bus used for the transportation of schoolchildren shall bear upon the front and rear thereof a plainly visible sign containing the words "school bus" in letters not less than eight inches in height. Each bus shall have lettered on the rear in plain and distinct type the following: "State Law: Stop while bus is loading and unloading." 
(Code 1973, § 14-83) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.050. 
Sec. 15-75. - School buses to have signaling devices. 
    Each school bus shall be equipped with a mechanical and electrical signaling device, approved by the state board of education, which will display a signal plainly visible from the front and rear and indicating intention to stop. 
(Code 1973, § 14-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.050. 
Sec. 15-76. - Vehicles with raised front or rear; operation on roadways prohibited. 
    No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon any highway, roadway or alleyway when the body has been altered in such a manner that the front or rear of the vehicle is raised at an angle so as to obstruct the vision of the operator to the front or to the rear of the vehicle. 
Sec. 15-77. - Restriction on numbered and lettered plates. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle or trailer on which there is displayed on the front or rear thereof any other plate, tag or placard bearing any numbers/letters except the plate furnished by the state director of revenue or the placard authorized by state law, and the official license tag of a municipality, if any; nor shall there be displayed on any motor vehicle or trailer, a placard, sign or tag bearing the words "license lost," "license applied for" or words of similar import, as a substitute for such number plates or such placard. 
(Code 1973, § 14-85) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 301.320. 
Sec. 15-78. - Studded tires prohibited. 
    No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon any road or highway of this city between April 1 and November 1 while the motor vehicle is equipped with tires containing metal or carbide studs. 
(Code 1973, § 14-86) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.171. 
Secs. 15-79-15-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LAMPS 

Sec. 15-91. - Generally. 
(a)  (1)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any highway, road, street or alley in the city during the period from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, unless such vehicle shall display at least two lighted lamps on the front, one on each side, having a light source of equal power, which shall project either white or yellow light. 
(2)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any highway, road, street or alley in the city without lighted lamps when existing weather conditions require usage of the motor vehicle's windshield wipers and/or during periods of reduced visibility caused, for example, by fog, snow or similar adverse weather conditions. 
(3)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any highway, road, street or alley in the city without white lighted lamps that illuminate when the motor vehicle is placed in reverse. Such illuminated lamps shall be prohibited except when backing. 
(b)  Every person driving a motor vehicle equipped with multiple-beam road-lighting equipment, during the times when lighted lamps are required, shall use a distribution of light or composite beam, directed high enough and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements and limitations: Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle within 500 feet or is within 300 feet to the rear of another vehicle traveling in the same direction, such driver shall use a distribution of light or composite beam so aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the other driver, and in no case shall the high intensity portion which is projected into the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle be aimed higher than the center of the lamp from which it comes at a distance of 25 feet ahead, and in no case higher than a level of 42 inches above the level upon which the vehicle stands at a distance of 75 feet ahead. 
(c)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any highway, road, street or alley in the city during the period from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, unless such vehicle shall display two lighted lamps on the rear, which shall display a red light visible from the rear for a distance of at least 500 feet. Either such rear lamps or a separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration marker and render it clearly legible from a distance of 50 feet to the rear. When the rear registration marker is illuminated by an electric lamp other than the required rear lamps, all such lamps shall be turned on or off only by the same control switch at all times. 
(Code 1973, § 14-78; Ord. No. 05-22, § 1, 4-25-05; Ord. No. 14-01, § 2, 1-13-14) 
Sec. 15-92. - Limitations on total of lamps lighted at one time. 
    At the times when lighted lamps are required, at least two lighted lamps shall be displayed, one on each side of the front of every motor vehicle except a motorcycle and except a motor-drawn vehicle, except when such vehicle is parked subject to the provisions governing lights on parked vehicles, RSMo 307.110. Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlamps as in this article required is also equipped with an auxiliary lamp or a spotlamp or any other lamp on the front thereof projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not more than a total of four of any such lamps on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at any one time when upon a roadway. 
Sec. 15-93. - Colors of various lamps. 
(a)  Headlamps, when lighted, shall exhibit lights substantially white in color. 
(b)  Auxiliary lamps, cowl lamps and spotlamps, when lighted, shall exhibit lights substantially white, yellow or amber in color. 
(c)  No person shall drive or move any vehicle or equipment except a school bus when used for school purposes or an emergency vehicle upon any street or highway with any lamp or device thereon displaying a red light visible from directly in front thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 14-80) 
Secs. 15-94-15-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-111. - Duty to drive with care. 
    Every person operating a motor vehicle on the streets, alleys and highways of the city shall operate and drive the same in a careful and prudent manner, and in the exercise of the highest degree of care at a rate of speed so as not to endanger property of another or the life or limb of any person, taking into consideration the time of day, the amount of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the condition of the street or the highway, the atmospheric conditions and the location with reference to intersecting streets or highways, curves, residences or schools. 
(Code 1973, § 14-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.010. 
Sec. 15-112. - Alcoholic beverages in motor vehicles prohibited. 
(a)  Restriction. No person shall knowingly transport in any motor vehicle operated on a public highway, street, road or alley any alcoholic beverage except: 
(1)  In the original container which shall not have been opened; and 
(2)  The seal upon which shall not have been broken and from which the original cap or cork shall not have been removed; 
unless the open container is in the rear trunk or compartment or in a locked compartment or container within the motor vehicle and not accessible to the driver of or any other person in such motor vehicle while it is being operated. In the case of a pickup truck, station wagon, hatchback or other similar vehicle, the rear most storage area shall not be considered accessible to the driver or any other person. 
(b)  Consuming in vehicles. No driver of a motor vehicle shall allow any alcoholic beverage to be consumed in a motor vehicle operated on a public highway, street, road or alley; nor shall any person consume any alcoholic beverage while in a moving motor vehicle. 
(c)  Chartered vehicles. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the otherwise legal consumption of an alcoholic beverage by passengers riding in a private- or public-owned transit authority that has been chartered and is not being utilized for conveyance of the general public, but the driver of such motor vehicle may not possess, have ready access to or consume any alcoholic beverage while the motor vehicle is operated on a public highway, street, road or alley. 
(d)  Recreational motor vehicles. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the otherwise legal consumption of an alcoholic beverage by passengers riding in the living quarters of a recreational motor vehicle. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent any motor vehicle from being registered as a commercial motor vehicle if it could otherwise be so registered. 
(Code 1973, § 14-97; Ord. No. 14-01, § 2, 1-13-14; Ord. No. 17-02, § 2, 2-13-17) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 3. 
Sec. 15-113. - Driving while intoxicated. 
    A person commits the offense of "driving while intoxicated" if he/she operates a vehicle or vessel, or manipulates any water skis while in an intoxicated or drugged condition. No person convicted of or pleading guilty to the offense of driving while intoxicated shall be granted a suspended imposition of sentence for such offense, unless such person shall be placed on probation for a minimum of two years. 
(Code 1973, § 14-97.1; Ord. No. 17-02, § 2, 2-13-17) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 3. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 577.010. 
Sec. 15-114. - Driving with excessive blood alcohol content. 
(a)  No person shall drive a noncommercial motor vehicle when the person has eight-hundredths of one percent or more by weight of alcohol in his blood. As used in this section, percent by weight of alcohol in the blood shall be based upon grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood and may be shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood, breath, saliva or urine. For the purposes of determining the alcoholic content of a person's blood under this section, the tests shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of RSMo 577.020-577.041. A noncommercial motor vehicle means any motor vehicle not included within the definition of "commercial motor vehicle" set forth below. 
(b)  No person shall operate a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol concentration in his blood, breath, urine or saliva of four-one hundredths of one percent or more. For the purposes of determining the alcoholic content of a person's blood under this section, the tests shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of RSMo 577.020-577.041. As used in this section, the term "commercial motor vehicle" shall mean a motor vehicle designed or used to transport passengers or property if: 
(1)  The vehicle has a gross combination weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds inclusive of a towed unit which has a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 or more pounds; 
(2)  The vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds; 
(3)  The vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds; or 
(4)  The vehicle is transporting the hazardous materials as defined in RSMo 302.7000. 
(Code 1973, § 14-97.2; Ord. No. 2249, art. I, 5-11-92; Ord. No. 01-59, § 1, 9-10-01; Ord. No. 14-01, § 2, 1-13-14; Ord. No. 17-02, § 2, 2-13-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 577.012. 
Sec. 15-115. - Penalties for convictions for violating sections 15-113 and 15-114. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating the provisions of section 15-113 or 15-114 shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  Driving while intoxicated is for the first offense, a class B misdemeanor. No person convicted of or pleading guilty to the offense of driving while intoxicated shall be granted a suspended imposition of sentence for such offense, unless such person shall be placed on probation for a minimum of two years. 
(2)  For the first offense, driving with excessive blood alcohol content is a class C misdemeanor. 
(b)  Evidence of prior convictions shall be heard and determined by the municipal judge, out of the hearing of a jury prior to the submission of the case to any jury, and the court shall enter its findings thereon. 
(Code 1973, § 14-97.3; Ord. No. 17-02, § 2, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 15-116. - Chemical tests for alcohol content, consent implied, administered, when, how, videotaping of chemical or field sobriety test admissible evidence. 
(a)  Any person who operates a vehicle or vessel upon the public highways of this state shall be deemed to have given consent to, subject to the provisions of RSMo 577.020 through 577.041, to a chemical test or tests of his breath, blood, saliva or urine for the purpose of determining the alcohol or drug content of his breath, blood, saliva or urine for the purpose of determining the alcohol or drug content of the person's blood pursuant to the following circumstances: 
(1)  If the person is arrested for any offense arising out of acts which the arresting officer had reasonable grounds to believe were committed while the person was operating a vehicle or vessel while in an intoxicated condition; 
(2)  If the person is under the age of 21, has been stopped by a law enforcement officer, and the law enforcement officer has reasonable grounds to believe that such person was operating a vehicle or vessel with a blood alcohol content of two-hundredths of one percent or more by weight; 
(3)  If the person is under the age of 21, has been stopped by a law enforcement officer, and the law enforcement officer has reasonable grounds to believe that such person has committed a violation of the traffic laws of the state or any political subdivision of the state, and such officer has reasonable grounds to believe, after making such stop, that such person has a blood alcohol content by weight of two-hundredths of one percent or greater; 
(4)  If the person is under the age of 21, has been stopped at a sobriety checkpoint or roadblock, and the law enforcement officer has reasonable grounds to believe that such person has a blood alcohol content by weight of two-hundredths of one percent or greater; 
(5)  If the person, while operating a vehicle, has been involved in a collision or accident which resulted in a fatality or a readily apparent serious physical injury as defined in RSMo 556.061, or has been arrested as evidenced by the issuance of a uniform traffic ticket for the violation of any state law or county or municipal ordinance with the exception of equipment violations contained in RSMo. Chs. 306 and 307, or similar provisions contained in county or municipal ordinances. 
The test shall be administered at the direction of the arresting law enforcement officer whenever the person has been arrested for the offense. 
(b)  The implied consent to submit to the chemical tests listed in subsection (a) of this section shall be limited to not more than two such tests arising from the same stop, detention, arrest, incident or charge. 
(c)  Chemical analysis of the person's breath, blood, saliva, or urine to be considered valid under the provisions of RSMo 577.020 through 577.041 shall be performed according to methods approved by the State Department of Health and Senior Services by licensed medical personnel or by a person possessing a valid permit issued by the State Department of Health and Senior Services for this purpose. 
(d)  The state division of health shall approve satisfactory techniques, devices, equipment, or methods to be considered valid under the provisions of RSMo 577.020 through 577.041 and shall establish standards to ascertain the qualifications and competence of individuals to conduct analyses and to issue permits which shall be subject to termination or revocation by the state division of health. 
(e)  The person tested may have a physician, or a qualified technician, chemist, registered nurse, or other qualified person of his own choosing and at his expense administer a test in addition to any administered at the direction of a law enforcement officer. The failure or inability to obtain an additional test by a person shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the test taken at the direction of a law enforcement officer. 
(f)  Upon the request of the person who is tested, full information concerning the test shall be made available to such person. Full information is limited to the following: 
(1)  The type of test administered and the procedures followed; 
(2)  The time of the collection of the blood, breath, saliva or urine sample or urine analyzed; 
(3)  The numerical results of the test indicating the alcohol content of the blood, breath, saliva and urine that was analyzed; 
(4)  The type and status of any permit which was held by the person who performed the test; 
(5)  If the test was administered by means of a breath testing instrument, the date of the most recent maintenance of such instrument. 
Full information does not include manuals, schematics or software of the instrument used to test the person or any other material that is not in the actual possession of the city or state. Additionally, full information does not include information in the possession of the manufacturer of the test instrument. 
(g)  Any person given a chemical test of the person's breath pursuant to subsection (a) of this section or a field sobriety test may be videotaped during any such test at the direction of the law enforcement officer. Any such video recording made during the chemical test pursuant to this subsection or a field sobriety test shall be admissible as evidence for a violation of any municipal ordinance. 
(Code 1973, § 14-98; Ord. No. 17-02, § 2, 2-13-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-02, § 2, adopted Feb. 13, 2017, changed the title of § 15-116 from "Chemical tests for alcohol content of blood" to "Chemical tests for alcohol content, consent implied, administered, when, how, videotaping of chemical or field sobriety test admissible evidence." 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 577.020. 
Sec. 15-117. - Driving while under influence of narcotic drug; penalty. 
(a)  No person who is a habitual user of or under the influence of any narcotic drug or who is under the influence of any other drug to a degree which renders him incapable of operating a motor vehicle shall operate a motor vehicle in the city. The fact that any person charged with violation of this section is or has been entitled to use such drugs under the laws of the state shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this section. 
(b)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 15-115(a)(1). 
(Code 1973, § 14-99; Ord. No. 17-02, § 2, 2-13-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 577.010. 
Sec. 15-117.5. - Ignition interlock devices. 
(a)  It is an offense for a person to knowingly rent, lease or lend a motor vehicle to a person required to use an ignition interlock device on all vehicles operated by the person unless such vehicle is equipped with a functioning, certified ignition interlock device. 
(b)  It is an offense for a person who is required to use an ignition interlock device on all vehicles he or she operates to knowingly fail to notify any other person who rents, leases or loans a motor vehicle to that person of such requirement. 
(c)  It is an offense for any person who is required to use an ignition interlock device on all vehicles her or she operates to knowingly request or solicit any other person to blow into an ignition interlock device or to start a motor vehicle equipped with the device for the purpose of providing the person so restricted with an operable motor vehicle. 
(d)  It is an offense for any person to blow into an ignition interlock device or to start a motor vehicle equipped with the device for the purpose of providing an operable vehicle to a person who is required to use an ignition interlock device on all vehicles her or she operates. 
(e)  It is an offense to tamper with or circumvent the operation of an ignition interlock device. 
(f)  It is an offense to knowingly operate a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a functioning certified ignition interlock device in violation of a court or department of revenue order to use such a device. 
(Ord. No. 17-02, § 3, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 15-118. - Careless and reckless driving. 
(a)  Any person who drives any vehicle or bicycle with a willful and wanton disregard for the safety of persons, property, life, limb or traffic is deemed guilty of careless and reckless driving. 
(b)  Every person who is convicted of careless and reckless driving shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment for a period of not less than one day nor more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1973, § 14-100; Ord. No. 03-07, § 2, 1-27-03) 
Sec. 15-119. - Driving on right of highway. 
    Upon all public roads or highways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety, except as follows: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement. 
(2)  When placing a vehicle in position for and when such vehicle is lawfully making a left turn in compliance with the provisions of RSMo 304.014 through 304.026 or traffic regulations thereunder or of the city. 
(3)  When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair. 
(4)  Upon a roadway designated by local ordinance as a one-way street and marked or signed for one-way traffic. 
(Code 1973, § 14-101; Ord. No. 10-11, § 1, 4-26-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.015. 
Sec. 15-120. - Right-of-way between vehicles. 
    The operator of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection. When two vehicles enter an intersection at the same time, the operator of the vehicle on the left shall yield to the operator on the right. 
(Code 1973, § 14-102) 
Sec. 15-121. - Following too closely. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonably safe and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicle and his ability to stop if necessary and the traffic upon and condition of the roadway. 
(Code 1973, § 14-108) 
State Law reference- Distance at which vehicles must follow, RSMo 304.017. 
Sec. 15-122. - Following fire apparatus prohibited. 
    The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1973, § 14-109) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.300. 
Sec. 15-123. - Crossing fire hose. 
    No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any road, street, alley or private driveway, parking lot or drive-in, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1973, § 14-110) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.305. 
Sec. 15-124. - Passing regulations. 
(a)  The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to the limitations and exceptions hereinafter stated: 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
(2)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(b)  The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn. 
(2)  Upon a city street with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two or more lines of vehicles in each direction. 
(3)  Upon a one-way street. 
(4)  The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under the foregoing conditions when such movement may be made in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the paved or main traveled portion of the roadway. 
(5)  The provisions of this subsection shall not relieve the driver of a slow-moving vehicle from the duty to drive as closely as practicable to the righthand edge of the roadway. 
(c)  Except when a roadway has been divided into three traffic lanes, no vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the centerline of a highway or public road in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. 
(d)  No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(1)  When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve of the highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction. 
(2)  When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct, tunnel or when approaching within 100 feet of or at any intersection or railroad grade crossing. 
(e)  A vehicle shall not be driven in a lane designated or marked as a turning lane except during such time as making or completing a turn. If a turn is made into a turning lane and oncoming traffic precludes existing traffic flow, the operator of the vehicle shall stop until such time as entrance into the traffic lane can be accomplished safely. 
(f)  A vehicle shall not pass another vehicle traveling in the same direction on the left side of the roadway if the traffic lanes are divided and marked by two solid yellow lines. 
(Code 1973, § 14-111; Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 1-11-10; Ord. No. 14-01, § 2, 1-13-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.016. 
Sec. 15-125. - Passing within intersections. 
    No driver of a vehicle proceeding on any two-laned or greater roadway shall overtake and pass another vehicle moving in the same direction within an intersection or change lanes within an intersection. 
(Code 1973, § 14-112; Ord. No. 14-01, § 2, 1-13-14) 
Sec. 15-126. - Limitations on backing vehicles. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1973, § 14-113) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.335. 
Sec. 15-127. - Driving on sidewalks prohibited. 
    No driver of any motor vehicle shall drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1973, § 14-114; Ord. No. 04-25, § 1, 6-14-04) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.330. 
Sec. 15-128. - Driving across freshly painted street markings. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall drive across any freshly painted lines or markings upon any street or highway in the city which are designated by flags or cones. 
(Code 1973, § 14-115) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 24. 
Sec. 15-129. - Damaging streets or public places. 
    No person shall drive, convey or operate upon, over or across any improved public street or highway or other public place in the city any wagon, engine, tractor, truck or vehicle of any kind having on its wheels any clamps, ridges, extensions, projections, bars, bolts, rods, curves, gutters or other contrivances that will cut or mash holes, gashes or crevices into the streets or otherwise tear up, injure or damage such streets or any part thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 14-116) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 24. 
Sec. 15-130. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-11, § 1, adopted February 27, 2012, repealed § 15-130, which pertained to passenger limitations and derived from § 14-117 of the 1973 Code. 
Sec. 15-131. - Riding on motorcycles; additional passenger; requirements. 
(a)  A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the operator. 
(b)  The operator of a motorized bicycle shall ride only astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and shall not permit more than one person to ride thereon at the same time, unless the motorized bicycle is designed to carry more than one person. Any motorized bicycle designed to carry more than one person must be equipped with a passenger seat and footrests for the use of a passenger. 
(c)  No person shall operate or ride as a passenger on any motorcycle unless such person is wearing protective headgear at all times the vehicle is in motion. 
(d)  No person shall operate or ride as a passenger on any motorcycle unless such motorcycle is equipped with a windshield, intact and firmly attached, or unless such operator or passenger is wearing shatterproof goggles or glasses that are shielding the eyes from wind and foreign objects. 
(Code 1973, § 14-119) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.345. 
Sec. 15-132. - Certain vehicles prohibited. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate a vehicle or motor vehicle the gross weight of which, including the load, exceeds the weight indicated upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in schedule J (section 15-485). 
(Code 1973, § 14-120) 
Sec. 15-133. - Commercial vehicles prohibited. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate a commercial motor vehicle, except local trucks making deliveries to residents thereon of goods, wares, merchandise and household deliveries, including household moving trucks, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in schedule K (section 15-486). 
(Code 1973, § 14-121) 
Sec. 15-134. - Dangerously or carelessly loaded vehicles. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle in an overloaded condition or when any part of the load is likely to fall upon and litter the street or cause injury or damage to persons or property; nor shall he permit any part of the load to fall upon and remain on the street; nor shall he drive when any part of the load extends more than 24 inches beyond the vehicle without attaching to such extending part a red flag during the day or a red light at night. 
(Code 1973, § 14-122) 
Sec. 15-135. - Fenders or mud flaps required for truck or tractor trailers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate upon the public highways of this city a truck or truck-tractor trailer, without rear fenders, which is not equipped with mud flaps for the rear wheels. If mud flaps are used, they shall be wide enough to cover the full tread width of the tire or tires being protected; shall be so installed that they extend from the underside of the vehicle body in a vertical plane behind the rear wheels to within eight inches of the ground; and shall be constructed of a rigid material or a flexible material which is of a sufficiently rigid character to provide adequate protection when the vehicle is in motion. No provisions of this section shall apply to a motor vehicle in transit and in process of delivery equipped with temporary mud flaps. 
(Code 1973, § 14-123) 
Sec. 15-136. - Motor-propelled vehicles prohibited on common land of subdivisions and on private property without consent. 
(a)  No person shall operate any motor-propelled vehicle on the common land of any subdivision, nor park any motor vehicle on the unpaved part of the common land of any subdivision, without the consent of the trustees of the common land or if there are no such trustees, without the consent of the owners or other persons designated by the owners to be in control of the common land. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor-propelled vehicle on or upon the yard or lawn of any real property of another person in the city without the permission of the owner or person in control of the property. 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, ch. 25. 
Sec. 15-137. - Seat safety belts standard equipment; exception; penalty. 
(a)  No four-wheeled passenger motor vehicle other than motorbuses manufactured or assembled after June 30, 1964, and designated as a 1965 or later year model, shall be sold or registered in this city unless it is equipped with at least two sets of seat safety belts for the front seat of the motor vehicle. The state highway patrol shall maintain a list of seat safety belts which meet SAE J-4 or higher standards and shall furnish a copy of the list to the state director of revenue and keep the director informed as to any changes or additions to the list. A violation of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor and be punished as provided by law. 
(b)  Each driver, front seat passenger, and persons less than 18 years of age operating or riding in a motor vehicle, excluding trucks with licensed gross weights of 12,000 lbs. or more, and people under 18 years of age operating or riding in a truck, regardless of licensed gross weight, shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt that meets Federal National Highway, Transportation and Safety Act requirements; providing, however, that persons employed by the United States Postal Service, while performing duties for that federal agency, which require the operators to service postal boxes from their vehicles and/or vehicles being used for agricultural activities shall not be subject to this subsection. Each driver transporting children between the ages of four and 15 years are to secure the child in a properly adjusted and fastened seat belt. The driver and passengers are not in violation of this section if there are more persons than there are seatbelts in the enclosed area of the motor vehicle. The provisions of this subsection shall not be applicable to a person who has a medical reason for failing to leave a seat belt fastened about their body. 
(c)  Each driver who violates provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall be guilty of an infraction for which a fine not to exceed $10.00, may be imposed. All other provisions of law and court rules to the contrary notwithstanding, no court costs may be imposed if court costs have been assessed on any other charge arising out of the same occurrence. 
(d)  (1)  No person shall operate any truck, as defined in RSMo 301.010, with a licensed gross weight of less than 12,000 pounds on any highway which is part of the state or federal highway system or when such truck is operated within the corporate limits of the city when any person under 18 years of age is riding in the unenclosed bed of such truck. No person under 18 years of age shall ride in the unenclosed bed of such truck when the truck is in operation. Any person who operates a truck with a licensed gross weight of less than 12,000 pounds in violation of this subsection is guilty of a class C misdemeanor. 
(2)  The provisions of this subsection shall only apply when a truck described in paragraph (1) of subsection (d) is operated on a highway which is part of the state or federal highway system and/or when such truck is operated within the corporate limits of the City of Ballwin. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to: 
a.  An employee engaged in the necessary discharge of the employee's duties where it is necessary to ride in the unenclosed bed of the truck; 
b.  Any person while engaged in the agricultural activities where it is necessary to ride in the unenclosed bed of the truck; 
c.  Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck while such truck is being operated in a parade, caravan or exhibition which is authorized by law; 
d.  Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck has installed a means of preventing such person from being discharged or such person is secured to the truck in a manner which will prevent the person from being thrown, falling or jumping from the truck; 
e.  Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is being operated solely for the purposes of participating in a special event and it is necessary that the person ride in such unenclosed bed due to a lack of available seating. "Special event," for the purposes of this subsection, is a specific social activity of a definable duration which is participated in by the person riding in the unenclosed bed; 
f.  Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is being operated solely for the purposes of providing assistance to, or ensuring the safety of, other persons engaged in a recreational activity; or 
g.  Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is the only legally titled, licensed and insured vehicle owned by the family of the person riding in the unenclosed bed and there is insufficient room in the passenger cab of the truck to accommodate all passengers in such truck. For the purposes of this subdivision the term "family" shall mean any person related within the first degree of consanguinity. 
(Code 1973, § 14-126; Ord. No. 2638, § 1, 10-13-97; Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 11-10-97; Ord. No. 08-09, § 1, 4-28-08) 
State Law reference- Seat safety belts, RSMo 307.165. 
Sec. 15-138. - Passenger restraint system required for children. 
(a)  As used in this section, the following terms shall mean: 
(1)  "Child booster seat", a seating system which meets the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in 49 C.F.R. 571.213, as amended, that is designed to elevate a child to properly sit in a federally approved safety belt system; 
(2)  "Child passenger restraint system", a seating system which meets the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in 49 C.F.R. 571.213, as amended, and which is either permanently affixed to a motor vehicle or is affixed to such vehicle by a safety belt or a universal attachment system; 
(3)  "Driver", a person who is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle. 
(b)  Every driver transporting a child under the age of 16 years shall be responsible, when transporting such child in a motor vehicle operated by that driver on the streets or highways of the city, for providing for the protection of such child as follows: 
(1)  Children less than four years of age, regardless of weight, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system appropriate for that child; 
(2)  Children weighing less than 40 pounds, regardless of age, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system appropriate for that child; 
(3)  Children at least four years of age but less than eight years of age, who also weigh at least 40 pounds but less than 80 pounds, and who are also less than four feet, nine inches tall, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system or booster seat appropriate for that child; 
(4)  Children at least 80 pounds or children more than four feet, nine inches in height shall be secured by a vehicle safety belt or booster seat appropriate for that child. 
(5)  A child who otherwise would be required to be secured in a booster seat may be transported in the back seat of a motor vehicle while wearing only a lap belt if the back seat of the motor vehicle is not equipped with a combination lap and shoulder belt for booster seat installation. 
(6)  When transporting children in the immediate family when there are more children than there are seating positions in the enclosed area of a motor vehicle, the children who are not able to be restrained by a child safety restraint device appropriate for the child shall sit in the area behind the front seat of the motor vehicle unless the motor vehicle is designed only for a front seat area. The driver transporting children referred to in this subsection is not in violation of this section. 
This subsection shall only apply to the use of a child passenger restraint system or vehicle safety belt for children less than 16 years of age being transported in a motor vehicle. 
(c)  Any driver who violates subsections (b)(1) through (3) above is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction, may be punished by a fine of not more than $50.00 and court costs. Any driver who violates subsection (b)(4) above is guilty of an infraction for which a fine not to exceed $10.00 may be imposed. All other provisions of law and court rules to the contrary notwithstanding, no court costs shall be imposed on any person due to a violation of subsection (b)(4) and in no case shall points be assessed against any person, pursuant to RSMo 302.302, for a violation of this subdivision. If a driver receives a citation for violating subsections (b)(1) through (3), the charges shall be dismissed or withdrawn if the driver prior to or at his or her hearing provides evidence of acquisition of a child passenger restraint system or child booster seat which is satisfactory to the court or the party responsible for prosecuting the driver's citation. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any public carrier for hire. The provisions of this section shall not apply to students four years of age or older who are passengers on a school bus designed for carrying 11 passengers or more and which is manufactured or equipped pursuant to Missouri Minimum Standards for School Buses as school buses are defined in RSMo 301.010. 
(Code 1973, § 14-127; Ord. No. 2413, §§ 1, 2, 10-24-94; Ord. No. 06-57, § 1, 10-9-06) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 210.104. 
Sec. 15-139. - Excessive acceleration prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in the city at a rate of acceleration greater than is reasonably necessary to safely enter the existing flow of traffic or obtain the maximum speed limit. Tire friction marks or squealing of tires shall be evidence of such excessive acceleration. 
Sec. 15-140. - Reimbursement of costs for alcohol and drug-related offenses. 
(a)  Upon a plea of guilty, finding of guilt or conviction for violation of the provisions of sections 15-112 through 15-116 set forth above, the court may, in addition to imposition of any penalties provided by law, order the person to reimburse law enforcement authorities for the costs associated with such arrest. 
(b)  Such costs shall include the reasonable cost of making the arrest, including the cost of any chemical tests to determine the alcohol or drug content of the person's blood, and the cost of processing, charging, booking and holding such person in custody. 
(c)  Law enforcement authorities may establish a schedule of such costs for submission to the court; however, the court may order the costs reduced if it determines that the schedule of costs is excessive given the circumstances of the case for good cause shown. 
(d)  These fees shall be calculated as additional costs by the municipal court and shall be collected by the court in the same manner as other costs and fees are collected and remitted to the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 2289, § 1, 1-25-93) 
Secs. 15-141-15-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 

Sec. 15-156. - Required position and method of turning at intersection. 
    The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(1)  Right turns: Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the righthand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  Left turns on two-way roadways: At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(3)  Left turns on other than two-way roadways: At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme lefthand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the lefthand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. 
(Code 1973, § 14-131) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.215. 
Sec. 15-157. - Turning on curve or crest of grade. 
    No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to, or near the crest of a grade or hill, where the vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either direction within 500 feet. 
(Code 1973, § 14-132) 
Sec. 15-158. - Limitations on turning around. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1973, § 14-133) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.235. 
Sec. 15-159. - Placement of turning markers; obedience required. 
(a)  The director of public works is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at intersections, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(b)  When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Code 1973, § 14-134) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.220. 
Sec. 15-160. - Placement of signs prohibiting or restricting turns. 
    The board of aldermen is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn and the director of public works shall place proper signs at such intersections as set out in schedule C (section 15-478). The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Code 1973, § 14-135) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.225. 
Sec. 15-161. - Obedience to signs required. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Code 1973, § 14-136) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.230. 
Sec. 15-162. - Hand signals and mechanical signals. 
    No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of or turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only after the giving of an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this section. 
(1)  An operator or driver when stopping, or when checking the speed of his vehicle, if the movement of other vehicles may reasonably be affected by such checking of speed, shall extend his arm at an angle below horizontal so that the same may be seen in the rear of his vehicle. 
(2)  An operator or driver intending to turn his vehicle to the right shall extend his arm at an angle above horizontal so that the same may be seen in front of and in the rear of his vehicle, and shall slow down and approach the intersecting highway as near as practicable to the right side of the highway along which he is proceeding before turning. 
(3)  An operator or driver intending to turn his vehicle to the left shall extend his arm in a horizontal position so that the same may be seen in the rear of his vehicle, and shall slow down and approach the intersecting highway so that the left side of his vehicle shall be as near as practicable to the centerline of the highway along which he is proceeding before turning. 
(4)  The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by a signal light or signal device in good mechanical condition of a type approved by the state highway patrol; however, when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle then such signals shall be given by such light or device. A vehicle shall be considered as so constructed or loaded that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load exceeds 24 inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereon exceeds 14 feet, which limit of 14 feet shall apply to single vehicles or combinations of vehicles. The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to any trailer which does not interfere with a clear view of the hand signals of the operator or of the signaling device upon the vehicle pulling such trailer; provided further that the provisions of this section as far as mechanical devices on vehicles so constructed that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle as above provided shall only be applicable to new vehicles registered within this state after January 1, 1954. 
(Code 1973, § 14-137) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.019. 
Sec. 15-163. - Turns at intersection; crossing private property prohibited; exceptions. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall make all turns at the intersection of roadways in accordance with turning movements of section 15-156 and state law. No person shall drive any vehicle on or across private property to make his turn onto an intersecting roadway, except if such vehicle enters the property and stops on such property to purchase merchandise, delivers or picks up merchandise, property or persons. 
(Code 1973, § 14-139) 
Secs. 15-164-15-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPEED LIMITS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Speed limits generally, RSMo 304.010. 

Sec. 15-181. - Generally. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle (except authorized emergency vehicles on emergency runs) on any highway, road, street or alley in the city at a rate of speed in excess of 25 miles per hour except as may be otherwise provided. 
(Code 1973, § 14-144) 
Sec. 15-182. - Through streets. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle (except authorized emergency vehicles on emergency runs) on any through highway, road or street, described in schedule A (section 15-476), at a rate of speed in excess of 30 miles per hour. 
(Code 1973, § 14-145) 
Sec. 15-183. - Collector streets. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle (except authorized emergency vehicles on emergency runs) on any collector highway, road or street, described in schedule P (section 15-491) at a rate of speed in excess of 35 miles per hour. 
(Code 1973, § 14-145.5) 
Sec. 15-184. - Arterial streets. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle (except authorized emergency vehicles on emergency runs) on any arterial road or highway described in schedule B (section 15-477), at a rate of speed in excess of 40 miles per hour. 
(Code 1973, § 14-146) 
Sec. 15-185. - Public areas. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any parking lot, drive-in or on any driveway or access road thereto at a rate of speed in excess of 15 miles per hour; and the operator of such motor vehicle is charged with the duty of operating at such lesser speed as will be consistent of the safety of others using such places, taking into consideration the amount of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the visibility and atmospheric conditions and condition of the pavement. 
(Code 1973, § 14-147; Ord. No. 04-26, § 1, 6-14-04) 
Sec. 15-186. - Posted. 
    All highways, roads and streets or portions thereof on which a speed limit has been established shall be marked by signs, erected under the supervision of the director of public works, at the beginning and end of such designated portions of highways, roads or streets indicating the speed limit established. 
(Code 1973, § 14-148) 
Sec. 15-187. - Slow speed. 
    No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. Peace officers may enforce the provisions of this section by directions to drivers, and in the event of apparent willful disobedience to this provision and refusal to comply with direction of an officer in accordance herewith, the continued slow operation by a driver is a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 14-149) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.011. 
Sec. 15-188. - School zones. 
    The streets and highways, or parts of streets and highways, set forth in schedule N (section 15-489), pertaining to the speed limit in school zones, are designated school zone streets. No person shall operate a motor vehicle (except authorized emergency vehicles on emergency runs) on such streets or highways, or parts thereof, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on days when any school is in session in the city at a rate of speed in excess of five miles per hour less than the speed limit established in sections 15-181, 15-182 and 15-476. The maximum school zone speed limit for collector streets (sections 15-183 and 15-491) and arterial streets (sections 15-184 and 15-477) shall be 25 miles per hour. 
    The streets and highways, or parts of streets and highways as set forth in schedule Z, section 15-496, pertaining to the speed limit in school zones having flashing light warning signs and/or signals, shall be 30 miles, per hour. 
(Code 1973, § 14-150; Ord. No. 2336, § 1, 9-13-93; Ord. No. 99-23, § 1, 5-24-99; Ord. No. 00-27, § 1, 6-12-00) 
Sec. 15-189. - Parks and recreational areas. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle (except authorized emergency vehicles on emergency runs) on any highway, road, or street described in schedule O (section 15-490) at a rate of speed in excess of 15 miles per hour. 
(Code 1973, § 14-152) 
Sec. 15-190. - Twenty-five-mile-per-hour speed limit. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle (except authorized emergency vehicles on emergency runs) on any highway, road or street described in schedule R (section 15-492) at a rate of speed in excess of 25 miles per hour. 
Sec. 15-191. - Pedestrian crosswalks. 
    Pedestrian crosswalks may be established by ordinance by the board of aldermen. Upon establishment of such crosswalks and their inclusion, as described in schedule X, section 15-495, pedestrians in such crosswalks shall have the right-of-way with respect to all vehicles except for police, fire and ambulance vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2480, § 7, 11-13-95) 
Secs. 15-192-15-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PARADES AND PROCESSIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 24. 

Sec. 15-206. - Permit required. 
    No parade or procession shall occupy, march or proceed along any highway, road or street except in accordance with a permit issued by the city clerk pursuant to appendix A, article XVI, section 25 and such other regulations as are set forth which may apply. 
(Code 1973, § 14-157; Ord. No. 16-09, § 2, 2-22-16) 
Sec. 15-207. - Funeral procession to be identified. 
    A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display of an identifying insignia and by the burning of headlights. 
(Code 1973, § 14-158) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.320. 
Sec. 15-208. - Driving in procession. 
    Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the righthand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
(Code 1973, § 14-159) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.315. 
Sec. 15-209. - Driving through procession. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this division. When an organized funeral procession is proceeding through a red signal light, a vehicle not in the organized funeral procession shall not enter the intersection unless such vehicle may do so without crossing the path of a funeral procession. 
(Code 1973, § 14-160; Ord. No. 09-14, § 1, 4-27-09) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.310. 
Secs. 15-210-15-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS 

Sec. 15-226. - Designation of through streets. 
    Those highways, roads, streets and parts of highways, roads and streets described in schedule D (section 15-479) are hereby declared to be through highways, roads or streets for the purpose of this division. 
(Code 1973, § 14-167) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.255. 
Sec. 15-227. - Stop or yield signs to designate through intersections. 
    Whenever any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city designates and describes a through street, it shall be the duty of the director of public works to place and maintain a stop sign or, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, at any intersection, a yield sign on each and every street intersecting the through street unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of the streets, as may be determined by the director of public works upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study. 
(Code 1973, § 14-168) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.260. 
Sec. 15-228. - Stop or yield signs at intersections other than designated through streets. 
    The board of aldermen is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where a particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such intersection, in which event they shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required, or whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at such intersection as prescribed in this division, in which event they shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where obedience thereto is required. (See schedule E, section 15-480.) 
(Code 1973, § 14-169) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.265. 
Sec. 15-229. - Duty of driver approaching stop sign. 
    Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop as required by subsection 15-235(b), and after having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on such highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when the driver is moving across or within the intersection. 
(Code 1973, § 14-170) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.275. 
Sec. 15-230. - Stop when traffic obstructed. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1973, § 14-171) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.290. 
Sec. 15-231. - School stops. 
    At those street intersections or crosswalks lawfully designated as school stops in schedule F (section 15-481), signs shall be erected by the director of public works and when such signs are placed facing traffic, every driver of a vehicle facing such sign shall bring his vehicle to a complete stop and yield the right-of-way to all children and other persons crossing thereat and shall not proceed until safe to do so. 
(Code 1973, § 14-172) 
Sec. 15-232. - Emerging from alley or driveway. 
    The driver of a vehicle emerging either by forward motion or backing, from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, yielding the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway. 
(Code 1973, § 14-173) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.285. 
Sec. 15-233. - Right-of-way at intersection; signs. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different highway; provided, however, there is no form of traffic control at such intersection. 
(b)  When two vehicles enter an intersection from different highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the driver of the vehicle on the right. This subsection shall not apply to vehicles approaching each other from opposite directions when the driver of one of such vehicles is attempting to or is making a left turn. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(d)  The city, with reference to highways under its jurisdiction, may designate through highways and erect stop signs or yield signs at specified entrances thereto, or may designate any intersection as a stop intersection or as a yield intersection and erect stop signs or yield signs at one or more entrances to such intersection. Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop signs or yield signs as authorized in this section: 
(1)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection, indicated by a stop sign, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic in the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on the highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such driver is moving across or within the intersection. 
(2)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to the sign slow down to a speed reasonable to the existing conditions and, if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After slowing or stopping the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such traffic is moving across or within the intersection. 
(e)  The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from an alley, building or any private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the highway to be entered. 
(f)  The driver of a vehicle intending to make a left turn into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction when the making of such left turn would create a traffic hazard. 
(g)  The city, with respect to roads under its jurisdiction, on any section where construction or major maintenance operations are being effected, may fix a speed limit in such areas by posting of appropriate signs, and the operation of a motor vehicle in excess of such speed limit in the area so posted shall be deemed prima facie evidence of careless and imprudent driving. 
(Code 1973, § 14-174) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.351. 
Sec. 15-234. - Duty of driver approaching yield sign; evidence of fault in collision. 
    The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience to the sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection; if a driver approaching a yield sign is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his failure to yield the right-of-way. 
(Code 1973, § 14-175) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.280. 
Sec. 15-235. - Position for stopping in observance of stop or yield signs. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required for safety to stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. 
(b)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. 
(Code 1973, § 14-176) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.270. 
Sec. 15-236. - Handicapped persons with white cane or dog, driver to take all necessary precautions; cane or dog not required to enforce rights. 
    The driver of a vehicle approaching a blind or visually handicapped, deaf or partially deaf person or physically disabled person who is carrying a cane predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip, or using a guide dog, hearing dog or service dog shall yield to such blind pedestrian, and any driver who fails to take such precautions shall be liable in damages for any injury caused such pedestrian; provided that a totally or partially blind pedestrian not carrying such cane or using a guide dog, hearing dog or service dog in any of the places, accommodations or conveyances listed in RSMo 209.150 shall have all of the rights and privileges conferred by law upon other persons. 
(Code 1973, § 14-177) 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, ch. 5. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.080. 
DIVISION 6. - WORK ZONE SAFETY 

Sec. 15-237. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Code, the term "construction zone" or "work zone" means (i) any area upon or around any highway as defined in RSMo 302.010, and (ii) other street or road in the City of Ballwin, which is visibly marked by the department of transportation, St. Louis County and/or the City of Ballwin, or a contractor or subcontractor performing work for any such governmental entity, as an area where construction, maintenance, incident removal, or other work is temporarily occurring. The term "work zone" or "construction zone" also includes the lanes of highway or other street or road leading up to the area upon which an activity described in this section is being performed, beginning at the point where appropriate signs or traffic control devices are posted or placed. The terms "worker" or "highway worker" as used herein shall mean any person that is working in a construction zone or work zone, or any employee of the department of transportation that is performing duties under the department's motorist assist program on a state highway or the right-of-way of a state highway. 
(Ord. No. 06-66, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-238. - Additional penalties. 
(a)  Upon the first conviction or plea of guilty by any person for a moving violation as defined in this Code or other traffic ordinance the court shall assess a fine of $35.00 in addition to any other fine authorized to be imposed by law, if the offense occurred within a construction zone or a work zone. A second or subsequent violation of this section shall result in the court assessing a fine of $75.00 in addition to any other fine authorized to be imposed by law. 
(b)  Upon the first conviction or plea of guilty by any person for a speeding violation under this Code, or a passing violation under subsection (d) below, the court shall assess a fine of $250.00 in addition to any other fine authorized by law if the offense occurred within a construction zone or a work zone and at the time the speeding or passing violation occurred there was any highway worker in such zone. A second or subsequent violation of this subsection shall result in the court assessing a fine of $300.00 in addition to any other fine authorized by law. However, no person assessed an additional fine under this subsection shall also be assessed an additional fine under subsection (a), and no person shall be assessed an additional fine under this subsection if no signs have been posted under subsection (c). 
(c)  The penalty authorized by subsection (b) shall only be assessed by the court if the department of transportation or a contractor or subcontractor performing work for the department of transportation has erected signs upon or around a construction or work zone which are clearly visible from the highway and which state substantially the following message: "Warning: Minimum $250 fine for speeding or passing in this work zone when workers are present". 
(d)  (1)  The driver of a motor vehicle shall not overtake or pass another motor vehicle within a work zone or construction zone as provided in this subsection. Violation of this subsection is a class C misdemeanor. 
(2)  This subsection (d) applies to a construction zone or work zone located upon a highway divided into two or more marked lanes for traffic moving in the same direction and for which motor vehicles are instructed to merge from one lane into another lane and not pass by appropriate signs or traffic control devices erected by the department of transportation or a contractor or subcontractor performing work for the department of transportation. 
(3)  This subsection also prohibits the operator of a motor vehicle from passing or attempting to pass another motor vehicle in a work zone or construction zone located upon a two-lane highway when highway workers or equipment are working and when appropriate signs or traffic control devices have been erected by the department of transportation or a contractor or subcontractor performing work for the department of transportation. 
(e)  The additional fines imposed by this section shall not be construed to enhance the assessment of court costs or the assessment of points under RSMo 302.302. 
(Ord. No. 06-66, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-239. - Endangerment. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of endangerment of a highway worker upon conviction or plea of guilty for any of the following offenses when such offense occurs within a construction zone or work zone, as defined in section 15-237: 
(1)  Exceeding the posted speed limit by ten miles per hour or more; 
(2)  Passing in violation of subsection 15-238(d); 
(3)  Failure to stop for a work zone flagman or failure to obey traffic control devices erected in the construction zone or work zone for purposes of controlling the flow of motor vehicles through the zone; 
(4)  Driving through or around a work zone by any lane not clearly designated to motorists for the flow of traffic through the work zone; 
(5)  Physically assaulting, attempting to assault, or threatening to assault a highway worker in a construction zone or work zone with a motor vehicle or other instrument; 
(6)  Intentionally striking, moving, or altering barrels, barriers, signs, or other devices erected to control the flow of traffic to protect workers and motorists in the work zone for a reason other than avoidance of an obstacle, an emergency, or to protect the health and safety of an occupant of the motor vehicle or of another person; or 
(7)  Committing any of the following offenses for which points may be assessed under RSMo 302.302: 
a.  Leaving the scene of an accident; 
b.  Careless and imprudent driving; 
c.  Operating without a valid license; 
d.  Operating with a suspended or revoked license; 
e.  Obtaining a license by misrepresentation; 
f.  Driving while in an intoxicated condition or under the influence of controlled substances or drugs or driving with an excessive blood alcohol content; 
g.  Any felony involving the use of a motor vehicle; or 
h.  Knowingly permitting an unlicensed operator to operate a motor vehicle. 
(b)  Upon conviction or a plea of guilty for committing the offense of endangerment of a highway worker under subsection (a) above if no injury or death to a highway worker resulted from the offense, in addition to any other penalty authorized by law, the person shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 and shall have eight points assessed to his or her driver's license under RSMo 302.302, and shall be subject to the provisions regarding the suspension of the person's license and driving privileges. 
(c)  A person commits the offense of aggravated endangerment of a highway worker upon conviction or a plea of guilty for any offense under subsection (a) when such offense occurs in a construction zone or work zone as defined in section 12-337 results in the injury or death of a highway worker. Upon conviction or a plea of guilty for committing the offense of aggravated endangerment of a highway worker, in addition to any other penalty authorized by law, the person shall be subject to a fine of not more than $5,000.00 if the offense resulted in injury to a highway worker and $10,000.00 if the offense resulted in death to a highway worker. In addition, such person shall have 12 points assessed to their driver's license under RSMo 302.302, and shall be subject to the provisions of law regarding the revocation of the person's license and driving privileges. 
(d)  Except for the offense established under subsection (a)(6) herein, no person shall be deemed to commit the offense of endangerment of a highway worker except when the act or omission constituting the offense occurred when one or more highway workers were in the construction zone or work zone. 
(e)  No person shall be cited or convicted for endangerment of a highway worker or aggravated endangerment of a highway worker for any act or omission otherwise constituting an offense under subsection (a) if such act or omission resulted in whole or in part from mechanical failure of the person's vehicle or from the negligence of another person or a highway worker. 
(Ord. No. 06-66, § 1, 11-13-06) 
Secs. 15-240-15-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Parking recreational vehicle or utility trailer near fuel pump or storage, § 28-6; site improvements in planned multiple dwelling districts, app. A, art. VII, § 12; parking in regional shopping districts, app. A, art. X, § 3; parking regulations in mixed use development districts, app. A, art. XIIA, § 7; offstreet parking and loading, app. A, art. XV. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-256. - Traffic to stop when devices not working. 
    When a traffic signal is not operating through mechanical failure or for other reasons, all traffic shall come to a complete stop before operating onto or through an intersection. 
(Code 1973, § 14-246) 
Sec. 15-257. - Duty of drivers upon approach of authorized emergency vehicle. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an emergency vehicle giving audible signal by siren or while having at least one lighted lamp exhibiting red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle or a flashing blue light authorized by RSMo 307.175, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as far as possible to the right of, the traveled portion of the highway and thereupon stop and remain in such position until such emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police or traffic officer. 
(b)  Upon approaching a stationary emergency vehicle displaying lighted red or red and blue lights, the driver of every motor vehicle shall: 
(1)  Proceed with caution and yield the right-of-way, if possible with due regard to safety and traffic conditions, by making a lane change into a lane not adjacent to that of the stationary vehicle, if on a roadway having at least four lanes with not less than two lanes proceeding in the same direction as the approaching vehicle; or 
(2)  Proceed with due caution and reduce the speed of the vehicle, maintaining a safe speed for road conditions, if changing lanes would be unsafe or impossible. 
(c)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Code 1973, § 14-103; Ord. No. 05-38, § 2, 8-22-05) 
Cross reference- Police, ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.105. 
Sec. 15-258. - Stops for school bus required; exceptions. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle upon any public road, alley or highway upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging any schoolchildren and whose driver has, in the manner prescribed by law, given the signal to stop, shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus and shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion or until signaled by its driver to proceed. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or overtaking a school bus which is on a different roadway, which is proceeding in the opposite direction on a highway containing four or more lanes of traffic, or which is stopped in a loading zone constituting a part of, or adjacent to, a limited or controlled access highway at a point where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. 
(Code 1973, § 14-105) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.050. 
Sec. 15-259. - Manner of discharging or taking on school bus passengers. 
    No driver of a school bus shall take on or discharge passengers at any location upon a highway consisting of four or more lanes of traffic, whether or not divided by a median or barrier, in such a manner as to require the passengers to cross more than two lanes of traffic; nor shall he take on or discharge passengers while the vehicle is upon the road or highway proper unless the vehicle so stopped is plainly visible for at least 300 feet in each direction to drivers of other vehicles upon the highway or road, and then only for such time as is actually necessary to take on and discharge passengers. 
(Code 1973, § 14-106) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 304.050(3). 
Sec. 15-260. - Stopping for fire apparatus. 
(a)  Drivers of vehicles upon any street, road or highway, upon approaching any firehouse from which any fire truck, apparatus or equipment is then leaving and entering upon such street, road or highway, shall stop his vehicle before reaching such firehouse exit at a point upon the street, road or highway designated by a sign posted at the side of the street, road or highway, or designated by a white or yellow line painted upon the street, road or highway. If there is any siren sounding or any blinker warning light flashing in front of any such firehouse, drivers of vehicles having stopped shall not proceed until such siren shall stop sounding or until such blinker light shall stop flashing, but, in any event, not until such fire truck, apparatus or equipment shall have completed its entry onto such street, road or highway. 
(b)  The board of directors of any fire district or the fire chief of any fire department maintaining any firehouse within the city may, with the approval of the board of aldermen: 
(1)  Erect at the side of any street, road or highway an appropriate sign indicating the point of stopping for vehicles thereon when any fire truck or fire equipment may be leaving such firehouse. 
(2)  Paint across the traffic lane of such street, road or highway opposite such sign, a white or yellow line further indicating such stopping point. 
Such line and sign shall be located at such distance from the exit of such firehouse as the board of directors or fire chief and the board of aldermen may find as an appropriate distance to preserve and protect the safety of drivers of vehicles upon such street, road or highway as well as the operators and passengers upon any such fire truck, apparatus or equipment. 
(Code 1973, § 14-107) 
Sec. 15-261. - Opening and closing vehicle doors. 
    No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic, unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
(Code 1973, § 14-118) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.340. 
Sec. 15-262. - Fire lanes and fire lane designations. 
(a)  When signs are erected or the pavement is marked giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, leave or park a vehicle at any time upon any portion of a public or private street, highway, roadway, alley, or driveway set forth in section 15-493, schedule V, pertaining to fire lanes. In emergencies the chief of police or his representatives are authorized and empowered to establish and designate fire lanes to provide unobstructed access for fire apparatus and emergency vehicles. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave a vehicle in or upon, or to obstruct in any manner, any fire lane so designated by the chief of police and marked with appropriate signs or markings. 
(c)  The presence of any vehicle in or upon or obstructing in any manner any fire lane in violation hereof shall be prima facie evidence that the person in whose name such vehicle is registered committed such violation. If the vehicle is operated by someone other than the registered owner thereof, the registered owner shall furnish the name, address and operator's license number of the person operating the vehicle at the time the violation occurred to the chief of police within three working days from the time of receipt of a notice of the violation from the police department. If the registered owner shall fail to furnish such information within the time provided above, the registered owner shall then be deemed to have committed the violation. The report in writing from the registered owner of the name of the person having operated the vehicle shall be prima facie evidence that the person named committed the violation. 
(d)  Members of the police department shall have the same authority to remove a vehicle stopped in, parked in, or obstructing a fire lane, and they shall follow the same procedure as set forth in section 15-277. 
(e)  Fire lanes so designated by the chief of police shall be posted with appropriate signs or markings as specified by the chief of police in order that the public will be aware of the existence of such fire lanes. In cases of fire lanes established on private property, the owner thereof shall provide such signs or markings at the owner's expense and within 30 days after the owner shall have been notified of the designations by the chief of police. In cases of fire lanes established on public property, the chief of police shall provide with signs or markings at the expense of the city. If the owner of such property does not comply within 30 days of such notification or such other time as the chief of police or his representative shall provide, for good cause shown, not to exceed 90 days, the chief of police shall close access to such property until such signs or markings are posted. 
(f)  Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of the section shall be subject to the penalties provided for violating the provisions of this Code, provided that the fine for the violation of this section shall be $50.00. 
(Code 1973, § 14-151; Ord. No. 2233, Art. I, 1-27-92) 
Sec. 15-263. - Housing of motor-driven vehicles in excess of two. 
    Except as may be otherwise provided in this chapter, the owner or resident of property in any residential area shall provide parking for motor-driven vehicles within an enclosed structure for all such vehicles in excess of one vehicle for each licensed driver resident, plus one additional vehicle in addition to the vehicle total provided above, where such vehicles are regularly parked overnight at such property. 
(Code 1973, § 14-15) 
Sec. 15-264. - Parked vehicles to be lighted; exceptions. 
(a)  Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked upon a street or highway during the hours between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise and in the event there is sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a distance of 500 feet upon such street or highway, no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle. 
(b)  Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a highway or shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise and there is not sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a distance of 500 feet upon the highway, a vehicle so parked or stopped shall be equipped with one or more lamps meeting the following requirements: At least one lamp shall display a white or amber light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle, and the same lamp or at least one other lamp shall display a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear of the vehicle, and the location of the lamps shall always be such that at least one lamp or combination of lamps meeting the requirements of this section is installed as near as practicable to the side of the vehicle which is closer to passing traffic. This section does not apply to a motor-driven cycle. Any lighted headlamp upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. 
(Code 1973, § 14-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.435. 
Sec. 15-265. - Owner prima facie responsible for illegal parking. 
    If any vehicle is found upon a street, alley, highway, public place, parking lot, drive-in, driveway or entrance drive, in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation; except, however, when such vehicle is being permissively used by a lessee and is illegally parked and the registered owner-lessor of such vehicle furnishes to the police department the name, address and operator's license number of the person renting or leasing the vehicle at the time the violation occurred, within three working days from the time of receipt of written request for such information, then the person whose name has been supplied by the owner-lessor as the person who rented or leased the vehicle shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation; provided, however, that in the event that any registered owner-lessor fails or refuses to provide such information within such three-day period or in the event that a leased motor vehicle is illegally parked due to a defect in such vehicle, which renders it inoperable, not caused by the fault or negligence of the lessee, then such registered owner-lessor shall be liable for any violation for the illegal parking of such vehicle. 
(Code 1973, § 14-188) 
Sec. 15-266. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited. 
(a)  Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official trafficcontrol device, no person shall: 
(1)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
a.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
b.  On a sidewalk. 
c.  Within an intersection. 
d.  On a crosswalk. 
e.  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the board of aldermen indicates a different length by signs or markings. 
f.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic. 
g.  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel. 
h.  On any railroad tracks. 
i.  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
j.  Within eight feet of a public U.S. mailbox at any time. 
k.  Within eight feet of a mailbox located on or at private property between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. except on Sunday and federal holidays. 
l.  Within 15 feet of an intersection. 
(2)  Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers: 
a.  In front of a public or private driveway. 
b.  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
c.  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
d.  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
e.  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of such entrance (when properly signposted). 
f.  At any place where official signs prohibit standing. 
(3)  Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers at any place where official signs prohibit parking. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1973, § 14-189; Ord. No. 2292, § 1, 1-25-93) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.440. 
Sec. 15-267. - Parking prohibited for certain purposes. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle on any roadway for the principal purpose of washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle displayed "for sale" upon any public or private parking lot within the city. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any motor vehicle dealer duly licensed to do such business within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 14-190) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.455. 
Sec. 15-268. - Parking prohibited at all times. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in schedule G (section 15-482). 
(Code 1973, § 14-191) 
Sec. 15-269. - Parking on State Highway 100 prohibited. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle within the limits of the right-of-way of State Highway 100 within the city, except in case of emergency or at the direction of a police officer. 
(Code 1973, § 14-192) 
Sec. 15-270. - Parking adjacent to schools prohibited. 
    No person shall park any vehicle upon either or both sides of any highway, road or street adjacent to any school property during the hours from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days, when the director of public works, at the direction of the board of aldermen, has posted signs designating such no parking areas. 
(Code 1973, § 14-193) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.460. 
Sec. 15-271. - Parking or vending not to obstruct traffic on city streets. 
(a)  No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, road or highway, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(b)  It is unlawful to vend or distribute merchandise or material from a vehicle, stand, or otherwise within the limits of any highway, roadway or alleyway in the city, except under such license, conditions and regulations prescribed by city ordinances; but in no instance shall such vending be permitted or authorized where the same causes stopping, standing or parking in or upon a highway, roadway or alleyway, or when such vending or distributing causes traffic confusion and interferes with the free and unhindered mobile progression of traffic. 
(Code 1973, § 14-194) 
Sec. 15-272. - Parking in alleys. 
    No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Code 1973, § 14-195) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.450. 
Sec. 15-273. - Angle parking. 
    All angle parking is strictly prohibited upon any highway, road, street or alley, except where so allowed by the board of aldermen by the adoption of an appropriate ordinance, and the proper signs are posted allowing the angle parking. 
(Code 1973, § 14-196) 
State Law reference- Angle parking, RSMo 300.420 et seq. 
Sec. 15-274. - Parking on lots, drive-ins, etc. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in such a manner as to occupy more than one delineated parking space, or to encroach upon lanes marked, set aside or commonly used for driving motor vehicles upon any parking lot, drive-in, driveway, or any entrance drive provided, however, a vehicle making collections or deliveries to an adjacent building may occupy more than one such parking space during such collection or delivery, not to exceed one hour in time limit. 
(Code 1973, § 14-197; Ord. No. 99-25, § 1, 5-24-99) 
Sec. 15-275. - Restricted parking generally. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle during the times or for a longer period than indicated upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in schedule H (section 15-483). 
(Code 1973, § 14-198) 
Sec. 15-276. - Leaving vehicle over 24 hours prohibited. 
    No person shall park a vehicle on any street for an uninterrupted period of time longer than 24 hours. 
(Code 1973, § 14-199) 
Sec. 15-277. - Removal of illegally parked vehicles. 
    Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in a place where parking is not permitted, or whenever a vehicle shall be parked in violation of other parking provisions, such vehicle may be removed and conveyed by or under the immediate direction of a member of the police department by means of towing the same, or otherwise, to a police station or other place under the control of the police department. Before the owner or person in charge of such vehicle shall be permitted to remove it from the custody of the police department, he shall furnish evidence of his identity and the title of the vehicle, shall sign a release and shall pay the cost of towing of the vehicle and storage charges, if any. 
(Code 1973, § 14-200) 
Sec. 15-278. - Truck parking, one-hour limit. 
    No commercial vehicle or trailer shall be parked for a period of more than one hour, when not in the process of loading or unloading, on any street within the dwelling districts established by the zoning regulations of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 14-201) 
Sec. 15-279. - Manner of parking. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the righthand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within 18 inches of the righthand curb and headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement. 
(Code 1973, § 14-202) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.415. 
Sec. 15-280. - Parking on streets in the event of snow, ice or freezing rain. 
(a)  Whenever there has been an accumulation of snow of two inches or more or ice or freezing rain within the city, the parking of vehicles on any part of any street within the city is prohibited until the snow, ice or freezing rain has been cleared to such an extent as to permit the movement on the street of emergency vehicles, including police cars, fire trucks and ambulances. 
(b)  Any person in possession of a vehicle or owner of a vehicle parked in violation of this section shall be precluded from defending the violation on the grounds that such person or owner was not able to park the vehicle on adjoining property by reason of the snow or ice conditions or lack of space to park thereon, including in the driveway or garage. 
(c)  Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided for violating the provisions of this Code, provided that the minimum fine shall be $50.00. 
(d)  Vehicles parked in violation of this section shall be removed in accordance with section 15-277. 
(Code 1973, § 14-203; Ord. No. 2211, § 1, 9-23-91) 
Sec. 15-281. - Offstreet parking restrictions in residential, public activity and commercial service districts. 
(a)  Residential zoning classifications. No commercial vehicle shall be parked or stored on any property in a residential dwelling district, including the R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-5 and PSD zoned districts, except commercial vehicles: 
(1)  Engaged in loading or unloading at a facility located in the district or which can show intention to deliver at such facility by suitable delivery papers, including but not limited to cargo bills or bills of lading, may park for a period not to exceed two hours while loading or unloading between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.; provided, however, that one commercial vehicle per dwelling unit, not to exceed nine feet in overall height, as measured from the ground at the point below the axle to the highest point of the trailer as it is configured when parked, may be parked within a fully enclosed building. 
(2)  During construction when a valid building permit and /or subdivision permit is in effect for the property; 
(3)  Tractor and attachments used on the property for lawn mowing, provided that it is stored in a fully enclosed building when not being used; or 
(4)  On property that has been continuously used on or before November 13, 1989, by the same property owner to lawfully store construction equipment and attachments provided it is stored behind the building line and is not offered for sale or lease except as an occasional sale by the property owner. 
(5)  A delivery/service vehicle meeting the definition of commercial vehicle may be parked in the C-1 district provided: 
a.  It is parked behind the main building on the premises, or 
b.  It is parked within the required rear yard of the C-1 district, or 
c.  It is parked in a loading zone designated on a site development plan approved via a public hearing process, and 
d.  It is parked on an authorized improved surface, and 
e.  It is owned and/or operated by a licensed business or person operating a business on the premises where the vehicle is parked, and 
f.  No more than two such vehicles are parked on a commercial premises by any one business or person. 
(6)  Premises which, due to their site design or parcel utilization, do not have facilities to allow parking of commercial vehicles behind the building or in the required rear yard and cannot amend the improvements on the site or amend the approved site development plan to accommodate such parking may submit an application to the city clerk for an administrative permit to allow the parking of delivery/service vehicles elsewhere on the site provided such parking is not within the first row of parking spaces along a public right of way frontage, shall not exceed one vehicle per 5,000 square feet of gross floor area for any business and shall be parked in as close a proximity to the footprint of the business on the site as is allowed by the limitations of site design and parking layout. 
(b)  Commercial zoning classifications. No commercial vehicle shall be parked in the C-1, C-2, C-3, PA, S-1 and MXD zoned districts for a period exceeding two hours unless the commercial vehicle is engaged in loading or unloading at a facility located in the district and can show intention to deliver at such facility by suitable delivery papers, including but not limited to cargo bills or bills of lading, except construction equipment and/or commercial vehicles: 
(1)  That are stored in a fully enclosed building; 
(2)  During construction when a valid building and/or subdivision permit is in effect for the property; 
(3)  On property that has been continuously used on or before November 13, 1989, by the same property owner to lawfully store construction equipment and attachments, provided it is stored behind the building line and is not offered for sale or lease except as an occasional sale by the property owner; or 
(4)  Is on property located in a zoned district where it is an allowed use. 
(c)  Operating engines while loading or parked in commercially zoned district. Commercial vehicles are prohibited from operating engines, excluding refrigeration equipment, while loading or unloading or parked in the C-1, C-2, C-3, PA, MXD, and S-1 zoned areas between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. and the owner of real property in such zoned areas will erect and maintain signs informing the operator of such motor vehicle of this requirement. 
(d)  Parking for delivery vehicles. Shopping centers and shopping plazas with two or more tenants and having more than 200,000 square feet of gross floor area and having one or more tenants with at least 130,000 gross square feet of floor area are permitted for each such tenant to park trucks, trailers and/or vehicles meeting the definition of delivery vehicle overnight provided: 
(1)  The number of such vehicles does not exceed six in number; 
(2)  The delivery vehicles do not exceed 37 feet in length, 13 feet in height, eight feet in width and are not licensed in excess of 53,500 lbs. gross vehicle weight; and 
(3)  Overnight parking of the vehicles is within the perimeter of the shopping plaza or shopping center in a designated area or areas approved by the board of alderman. 
Failure to park any delivery vehicle overnight in such designated area(s) shall be grounds for revocation of approval of the board for such overnight parking and for towing of the vehicles at the owner's cost. 
(Code 1973, § 14-204; Ord. No. 00-49, § 2, 9-25-00; Ord. No. 01-41, § 3, 6-11-01; Ord. No. 13-12, § 2, 4-22-13) 
Cross reference- Zoning, app. A. 
Sec. 15-282. - Hard surface required for parking. 
(a)  No parking shall be permitted in the front yard of any property within the city except on a hard-surfaced driveway or other hard surface. Anyone desiring to hard surface any portion of the public right-of-way shall first apply for a permit for such purpose. No permit shall be granted to hard surface any portion of the public right-of-way except that portion contained in the driveway for such residence. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) above notwithstanding, motor vehicles may be temporarily parked on a surface other than a hard surface in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and PA districts for a period not to exceed 24 hours; however, regular parking, storage or display for sale of any motor vehicle on a surface other than a hard surface is prohibited at any time. 
(Code 1973, § 14-205) 
Sec. 15-283. - Handicapped parking; penalties. 
    Vehicles parked in spaces designated for the handicapped that do not bear a permit sticker issued by a governmental agency, as visual evidence of handicap shall be subject to a penalty of $100.00, and the vehicle shall be immediately removed as provided by section 15-277. 
(Code 1973, § 14-207; Ord. No. 2209, § 1, 9-23-91) 
State Law reference- Parking space for physically disabled, RSMo 301.143. 
Sec. 15-284. - Parking bicycles. 
    No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at a curb in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1973, § 14-336) 
Secs. 15-285-15-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING LOT MARKING 

Sec. 15-301. - Marking required; minimum area for spaces. 
    Every parking lot shall have marked, individual spaces for each motor vehicle to be parked, and the location of each parking space shall be indicated by parallel lines painted upon or placed in the pavement by markers at an angle with the alignment of a traffic lane. Each parking lot marked, remarked, painted or repainted after January 8, 1973, shall have individual parking spaces 20 feet in length by ten feet in width for each motor vehicle to be parked, which spaces shall be connected to a street or alley by a driveway the width of which shall be governed by the parking table set out in the definition of "parking space" in section 1-2. 
(Code 1973, § 14-212) 
Sec. 15-302. - Operation of unmarked lots prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate or maintain a parking lot without first having complied with the requirements of this division. 
(Code 1973, § 14-213) 
Sec. 15-303. - Direction of movement in lot to be indicated. 
    The location of traffic lanes or driveways and the direction of movement along them at ingress and egress points shall be indicated by arrows painted upon or placed in the surfacing or by raised directional signs. 
(Code 1973, § 14-214) 
Sec. 15-304. - Traffic movement lanes. 
    Driveways may contain more than one lane for the movement of traffic. All lanes and other parking lot dimensions shall be in accordance with the definition of "parking space" in section 1-2. 
Sec. 15-305. - New Ballwin Park parking. 
    After the erection of signs giving notice thereof, only those utilizing the park facilities shall park any vehicle at any time on the north side of the New Ballwin Park parking lot along its entire length. 
(Code 1973, § 14-216) 
Secs. 15-306-15-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ONE-WAY STREETS 

Sec. 15-321. - Authority to signpost. 
    Whenever any ordinance of the city designates any one-way highway, road or street, the director of public works shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1973, § 14-227) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.250. 
Sec. 15-322. - Obedience to signs required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of any markings, signs, barriers or other devices indicating the direction of traffic. 
(Code 1973, § 14-228) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.250. 
Sec. 15-323. - Direction of movement. 
    Upon those roads and streets and parts of roads and streets and in those alleys described in schedule I (section 15-484), vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1973, § 14-229) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.245. 
Sec. 15-324. - Designation of one way streets. 
    Those roads, streets, and alleys and parts of roads, streets and alleys described in schedule I, section 15-484, are hereby declared to be one way roads, streets or alleys for the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2265, § I, 8-24-92) 
Sec. 15-325. - One way signs to designate one way streets. 
    It shall be the duty of the director of public works to place and maintain one way street signs on all roads, streets, alleys or parts of all roads, streets or alleys which are designated as one way streets in accordance with section 15-151. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2265, § I, 8-24-92) 
Sec. 15-326. - One way streets and alleys. 
    Upon roads, streets, alleys and parts of roads, streets and those alleys described and designated by ordinance and set forth in Schedule I, Section 15-484, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2265, § I, 8-24-92) 
Sec. 15-327. - Authority to restrict direction of movement on streets during certain periods. 
(a)  The director of public works is hereby authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and in the opposite direction during another period of the day and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof. The director of public works may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the roadway. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of such markings, signs, barriers or other devices so placed in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2265, § I, 8-24-92) 
Secs. 15-328-15-340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Department of public works, § 2-271. 

Sec. 15-341. - Placement. 
    The director of public works when directed by the board of aldermen and, whenever necessary, in cooperation with the traffic commissioners of the county or the state highways and transportation department, shall place and maintain traffic control signals, signs and devices at the intersections or locations described in schedule M (section 15-488). There may be traffic control signals, devices or signs at such other intersections or locations as may be established by ordinance and described in such schedule M (section 15-488). 
(Code 1973, § 14-241) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.130. 
Sec. 15-342. - Obedience required. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 14-242) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.140. 
Sec. 15-343. - When required for enforcement purposes. 
    No provision of this chapter for which traffic control devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation a device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that traffic control devices are required, such section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or in place. 
(Code 1973, § 14-243) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.145. 
Sec. 15-344. - Presumption of validity of device. 
(a)  Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position approximately conforming to the requirements of this chapter, such devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(b)  Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this chapter, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(Code 1973, § 14-244) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.150. 
Sec. 15-345. - Traffic control signal legend; right turn on red light. 
    Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting different colored lights, or colored lighted arrows, successively one at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and such lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(1)  Green indication: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited; 
b.  Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection; 
c.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in section 15-347, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(2)  Steady yellow indication: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection; 
b.  Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in section 15-347, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway. 
(3)  Steady red indication: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until a green indication is shown except as provided in paragraph b. of this subsection; 
b.  The driver of a vehicle which is stopped as close as practicable at the entrance to the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then at the entrance to the intersection in obedience to a red signal, may cautiously enter the intersection to make a right turn but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and other traffic proceeding as directed by the signal at the intersection; except that the state highways and transportation commission with reference to an intersection involving a state highway, and local authorities with reference to an intersection involving other highways under their jurisdiction, may prohibit any such right turn against a red signal at any intersection where safety conditions so require, such prohibition shall be effective when a sign is erected at such intersection giving notice thereof; 
c.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in section 15-347, pedestrians facing a steady red signal alone shall not enter the roadway. 
(4)  In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(5)  Any person operating a motorcycle or bicycle who violates the provisions of RSMo 304.281 or 304.301 by entering or crossing an intersection controlled by a traffic control signal against a red light shall have an affirmative defense to that charge if the person establishes all of the following conditions: 
a.  The motorcycle or bicycle has been brought to a complete stop; 
b.  The traffic control signal continues to show a red light for an unreasonable time; 
c.  The traffic control is apparently malfunctioning or, if programmed or engineered to change to a green light only after detecting the approach of a motor vehicle, the signal has apparently failed to detect the arrival of the motorcycle; and 
d.  No motor vehicle or person is approaching on the street or highway to be crossed or entered or is so far away from the intersection that it does not constitute an immediate hazard. 
(Code 1973, § 14-245; Ord. No. 14-01, § 2, 1-13-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.155. 
Sec. 15-346. - Flashing signals. 
    Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red (stop signal): When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign; 
(2)  Flashing yellow (caution signal): When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
(Code 1973, § 14-247) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.165. 
Sec. 15-347. - Pedestrian control signals; legend; observance. 
    Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Don't Walk" are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  "Walk": Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(2)  "Wait" or "Don't Walk": No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the wait signal is showing. 
(Code 1973, § 14-248) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.160. 
Sec. 15-348. - Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display or cause to be placed, maintained or displayed upon or in view of any highway an unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles a traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(b)  This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(c)  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the director of public works is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(Code 1973, § 14-249) 
Cross reference- Signs conflicting with traffic control devices, § 22-5. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.175. 
Sec. 15-349. - Interference with traffic control devices. 
    No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove or cause to be altered, defaced, injured, knocked down or removed any official traffic control device or any inscription or shield, or insignia thereon or any other part thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 14-250) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.180. 
Sec. 15-350. - Establishment of crosswalks and safety zones. 
    The director of public works is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To designate and maintain by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(Code 1973, § 14-251) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.195. 
Secs. 15-351-15-365. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ACCIDENTS AND EMERGENCY SITUATIONS 

Sec. 15-366. - Leaving scene of accident without giving proper identification. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in any accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any property shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident and shall give his name; residence, including street number and city; registration number of his vehicle; and any chauffeur's or registered operator's number, if any, to the person injured, or to the driver or occupants of any vehicle collided with, or to a police officer, or if no police officer is in the vicinity, then to the nearest police station of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 14-263) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.110. 
Sec. 15-367. - Notice to be given by occupant when driver incapacitated. 
    Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving immediate notice of an accident as required by this article and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of giving the required notice, such occupant shall give, or cause to be given, the notice. 
(Code 1973, § 14-264) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.120. 
Sec. 15-368. - Leaving children in vehicles. 
    No person shall leave any child ten years of age or less in a standing, parked, or locked motor vehicle. The police department of the city or any officer or agent thereof is authorized to use whatever force may be necessary to remove the child from the vehicle in order to protect the health, welfare, and safety of such child. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 2, 1-13-14) 
Sec. 15-369. - Leaving animals in vehicles. 
    No person shall leave any animal in any standing, parked or locked motor vehicle. The police department of the city or any officer or agent thereof is authorized to use whatever force is reasonably necessary to remove the animal from the vehicle whenever it reasonably appears that such animal's health, welfare or safety is substantially endangered. 
Secs. 15-370-15-385. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PEDESTRIAN RIGHTS AND DUTIES 

Sec. 15-386. - Obedience to traffic control signals. 
    Pedestrians are subject to traffic control signals as provided in this chapter, but at all other places pedestrians have those rights and are subject to the restrictions stated in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 14-276) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.370. 
Sec. 15-387. - Right-of-way in crosswalk. 
(a)  When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk, when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. 
(c)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
(Code 1973, § 14-277) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.375. 
Sec. 15-388. - When pedestrian shall yield. 
    Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(Code 1973, § 14-278) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.390. 
Sec. 15-389. - Prohibited crossing. 
    Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk. 
(Code 1973, § 14-279) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.395. 
Sec. 15-390. - Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk. 
    Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
(Code 1973, § 14-280) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.380. 
Sec. 15-391. - Crossing at right angles. 
    No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except in a crosswalk. 
(Code 1973, § 14-281) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.385. 
Sec. 15-392. - Walking along roadway. 
(a)  Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(b)  Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. 
(Code 1973, § 14-282) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.405. 
Sec. 15-393. - Soliciting rides or business. 
    No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(Code 1973, § 14-283) 
Sec. 15-394. - Drivers to exercise highest degree of care. 
    Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise the highest degree of care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Code 1973, § 14-284) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.410. 
Secs. 15-395-15-410. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - ABANDONED PROPERTY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 99-59, § 1, adopted Nov. 22, 1999, has enacted a new article X by repealing former §§ 15-411-15-424 and replacing them with the similar provisions of §§ 15-411-15-419 as currently set out herein. Former §§ 15-411-15-424 derived from the Code of 1973, §§ 14-297-14-310. 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 23. 
State Law reference- Abandoned motor vehicles on public property, RSMo 304.155; vehicles left unattended on private property of another, RSMo 304.157; abandoning motor vehicle, RSMo 577.080. 

Sec. 15-411. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall mean: 
    Abandoned property. Any unattended motor vehicle, trailer, all-terrain vehicle, out-board motor or vessel removed or subject to removal from public or private property as provided in this article, whether or not operational. 
    Person. Any natural person, corporation, or other legal entity. 
    Right-of-way. The entire width of land between the boundary lines of a public road or state highway, including any roadway. 
    Roadway. That portion of a public road or state highway ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. 
    Towing company. Any person or entity which tows, removes or stores abandoned property. 
    Urbanized area. An area with a population of 50,000 or more designated by the bureau of the census, within boundaries to be fixed by the state highways and transportation commission and local officials in cooperation with each other and approved by the secretary of transportation. The boundary of an urbanized area shall, at a minimum, encompass the entire urbanized area as designed by the bureau of the census. 
(Ord. No. 99-59, § 1, 11-22-99) 
Sec. 15-412. - Abandoned motor vehicles-Last owner of record deemed the owner of abandoned motor vehicle, procedures-Penalty-Civil liability. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of abandoning a vehicle, vessel or trailer if he or she knowingly abandons any vehicle, vessel or trailer on the right-of-way of any public road or state highway or on or in any of the waters in this state or on the banks of any stream, or on any land or water owned, operated or leased by the state, any board, department, agency or commission thereof, or any political subdivision thereof or on any land or water owned, operated or leased by the federal government or on any private real property owned by another without his or her consent. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the last owner of record of a vehicle, vessel or trailer found abandoned and not shown to be transferred pursuant to RSMo 301.196 and 301.197, shall be deemed by prima facie evidence to have been the owner of such vehicle, vessel or trailer at the time it was abandoned and to have been the person who abandoned the vehicle, vessel or trailer or caused or procured its abandonment. 
(Ord. No. 99-59, § 1, 11-22-99; Ord. No. 17-02, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-02, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 2017, changed the title of § 15-412 from "Abandoned vehicles prohibited" to "Abandoned motor vehicles-Last owner of record deemed the owner of abandoned motor vehicle, procedures-Penalty-Civil liability." 
Sec. 15-413. - Open storage of inoperable vehicles or public safety hazards prohibited. 
    The open storage of inoperable vehicles or other vehicles deemed by the city to constitute a public safety hazard is prohibited. Nothing in this subsection shall apply to a vehicle which is completely enclosed within a locked building or locked fenced area and not visible from adjacent public or private property, nor to any vehicle upon the property of a business licensed as salvage, swap, junk dealer, towing or storage facility so long as the business is operated in compliance with its business license and the property is in compliance with applicable zoning ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 99-59, § 1, 11-22-99) 
Sec. 15-414. - Obstructing the flow of traffic prohibited. 
    Except in the case of an accident resulting in the injury or death of any person, the driver of a vehicle which for any reason obstructs the regular flow of traffic on the roadway of any public road or state highway shall make every reasonable effort to move the vehicle or have it moved so as not to block the regular flow of traffic. Any person who fails to comply with the requirements of this section is guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars nor more than $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 99-59, § 1, 11-22-99) 
Sec. 15-415. - Towing of abandoned property on public real property. 
(a)  Any law enforcement officer, or an official of the city where the city's real property is concerned, may authorize a towing company to remove to a place of safety: 
(1)  Any abandoned property on the right-of-way of: 
a.  Any state highway, or interstate highway or freeway in an urbanized area of the city left unattended for ten hours; 
b.  Any state highway, or interstate highway or freeway outside of an urbanized area of the city left unattended for more than 48 hours; provided that commercial motor vehicles not hauling waste designated as hazardous under 49 USC 5103(a) may only be removed under this section to a place of safety until the owner or owner's representative has had a reasonable opportunity to contact a towing company of choice; 
(2)  Any unattended abandoned property illegally left standing upon any highway or bridge if the abandoned property is left in a position or under such circumstances as to obstruct the normal movement of traffic where there is no reasonable indication that the person in control of the property is arranging for its immediate control or removal; 
(3)  Any abandoned property which has been abandoned under section 15-412 of this Code or RSMo 577.080; 
(4)  Any abandoned property that has been reported as stolen or taken without consent of the owner; 
(5)  Any abandoned property for which the person operating such property is arrested for an alleged offense for which the officer is required to take the person into custody and where such person is unable to arrange for the property's timely removal; 
(6)  Any abandoned property which due to any other state law or city ordinance is subject to towing because of the owners' outstanding traffic or parking violations; 
(7)  Any abandoned property left unattended in violation of a state law or city ordinance where signs have been posted giving notice of the law or where the violation causes a safety hazard. 
(b)  When the city police department authorizes a tow pursuant to this section in which the abandoned property is moved from the immediate vicinity it shall complete a crime inquiry and inspection report. 
(c)  Any city agency other than the city police department authorizing a tow under this section where property is towed away from the immediate vicinity shall report the tow to the city police department within two hours of the tow, along with a crime inquiry and inspection report. 
(Ord. No. 99-59, § 1, 11-22-99) 
Sec. 15-416. - Towing of abandoned property on private real property. 
(a)  Generally. The city, including the city police department, may tow motor vehicles from real property which are deemed a public safety hazard pursuant to section 15-413, or are derelict, junk, scrapped, disassembled, or otherwise harmful to the public health. The city shall perform such tow pursuant to the terms of section 15-417. When a city agency other than the police department authorizes a tow under this subsection, it shall report the tow to the police department within two hours with a crime inquiry and inspection report. 
(b)  Towing authorized by city police department. If a person abandons property on any real property owned by another without the consent of the owner or person in possession of the real property, at the request of the person in possession of the real property, any city police officer may authorize a towing company to remove such abandoned property from the property in the following circumstances: 
(1)  The abandoned property is left unattended for more than 48 hours; or 
(2)  In the judgment of a police officer, the abandoned property constitutes a safety hazard or unreasonably interferes with the use of the real property by the person in possession. 
(c)  Towing authorized by real property owner, lessee, or property or security manager. 
(1)  The owner of real property or lessee in lawful possession of the real property or the property or security manager of the real property may authorize a towing company to remove abandoned property or property parked in a restricted or assigned area without authorization by a law enforcement officer only when the owner, lessee or property or security manager of the real property is present. A property or security manager must be a full-time employee of a business entity. An authorization to tow pursuant to this subsection may be made only under any of the following circumstances: 
a.  Sign. There is displayed, in plain view at all entrances to the property, a sign not less than 17 by 22 inches in size, with lettering not less than one inch in height, prohibiting public parking and indicating that unauthorized abandoned property or property parked in a restricted or assigned area will be removed at the owner's expense, disclosing the maximum fee for all charges related to towing and storage, and containing the telephone number of the local traffic law enforcement agency where information can be obtained or a 24-hour staffed emergency information telephone number by which the owner of the abandoned property or property parked in a restricted or assigned area may call to receive information regarding the location of such owner's property; 
b.  Unattended on owner-occupied residential property. The abandoned property is left unattended on owner-occupied residential property with four residential units or less and the owner, lessee, or agent of the real property in lawful possession has notified the city police department and ten hours have elapsed since that notification; or 
c.  Unattended on other private real property. The abandoned property is left unattended on private real property, and the owner, lessee or agent of the real property in lawful possession of real property has notified the city police department, and 96 hours have elapsed since that notification. 
(2)  Pursuant to this section, any owner or lessee in lawful possession of real property that requests a towing company to tow abandoned property without authorization from a city police officer shall at that time complete an abandoned property report which shall be considered a legal declaration subject to criminal penalty pursuant to RSMo 575.060. The report shall be in the form designed, printed and distributed by the Missouri Director of Revenue and shall contain the following: 
a.  The year, model, make and abandoned property identification number of the property, and the owner and any lienholders, if known; 
b.  A description of any damage to the abandoned property noted by owner, lessee or property or security manager in possession of the real property; 
c.  The license plate or registration number and the state of issuance, if available; 
d.  The physical location of the property and the reason for requesting the property to be towed; 
e.  The date the report is completed; 
f.  The printed name, address and telephone number of the owner, lessee or property or security manager in possession of the real property; 
g.  The towing company's name and address; 
h.  The signature of the towing operator; 
i.  The signature of the owner, lessee or property or security manager attesting to the facts that the property has been abandoned for the time required by this section and that all statements on the report are true and correct to the best of the person's knowledge and belief and that the person is subject to the penalties for making false statements; 
j.  Space for the name of the law enforcement agency notified of the abandoned property and for the signature of the law enforcement official receiving the report; and 
k.  Any additional information the Missouri Director of Revenue deems appropriate. 
(3)  Any towing company that tows abandoned property without authorization from the city police department pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall deliver a copy of the abandoned property report to the city police department. The copy may be produced and sent by facsimile machine or other device which produces a near exact likeness of the print and signatures required, but only if the city police department has the technological capability of receiving such copy and has registered the towing company for such purpose. The report shall be delivered within two hours if the tow was made from a signed location pursuant to subsection (c)(1)a. of this section, otherwise the report shall be delivered within 24 hours. 
(4)  The city police department, after receiving such abandoned property report, shall record the date on which the abandoned property report is filed with the police department and shall promptly make an inquiry into the national crime information center (NCIC) and any statewide Missouri law enforcement computer system to determine if the abandoned property has been reported as stolen. The police department shall enter the information pertaining to the towed property into the statewide law enforcement computer system and a police officer shall sign the abandoned property report and provide the towing company with a signed copy. 
(5)  The city police department, after receiving notification that a towing company has towed abandoned property, shall search the records of the Missouri Department of Revenue and provide the towing company with the latest owner and lienholder information on the abandoned property. If the abandoned property is not claimed within ten working days, the towing company shall send a copy of the abandoned property report signed by a law enforcement officer to the department of revenue. 
(6)  No owner, lessee, or property or security manager of real property shall knowingly authorize the removal of abandoned property in violation of this section. 
(7)  Any owner of any private real property causing the removal of abandoned property from that real property shall state the grounds for the removal of the abandoned property if requested by the registered owner of that abandoned property. Any towing company that lawfully removes abandoned property from private property with the written authorization of the property owner or the property owner's agent who is present at the time of removal shall not be held responsible in any situation relating to the validity of the removal. Any towing company that removes abandoned property at the direction of the landowner shall be responsible for: 
a.  Any damage caused by the towing company to the property in the transit and subsequent storage of the property; and 
b.  The removal of property other than the property specified by the owner of the private real property from which the abandoned property was removed. 
(d)  Damage to property. The owner of abandoned property removed from private real property may recover for any damage to the property resulting from any act of any person causing the removal of, or removing, the abandoned property. 
(e)  Real property owner liability. Any owner of any private real property causing the removal of abandoned property parked on that property is liable to the owner of the abandoned property for double the storage or towing charges whenever there has been a failure to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(f)  Written authorization required; delegation of authority to tow. 
(1)  Except for the removal of abandoned property authorized by the city police department pursuant to this section, a towing company shall not remove or commence the removal of abandoned property from private real property without first obtaining written authorization from the real property owner. The towing company shall maintain all written authorizations for at least one year. 
(2)  General authorization to remove or commence removal of abandoned property at the towing company's discretion shall not be delegated to a towing company or its affiliates except in the case of abandoned property unlawfully parked within 15 feet of a fire hydrant or in a fire lane designated by a fire department or the state fire marshal. 
(g)  Towing company liability. Any towing company, or any affiliate of a towing company, which removes, or commences removal of, abandoned property from private property without first obtaining written authorization from the property owner or lessee, or any employee or agent thereof, who is present at the time of removal or commencement of the removal, except as permitted in subsection (f) of this section, is liable to the owner of the property for four times the amount of the towing and storage charges, in addition to any applicable ordinance violation penalty, for a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 99-59, § 1, 11-22-99) 
Sec. 15-417. - General provisions and procedures. 
(a)  Payment of charges. The owner of abandoned property removed as provided in this article shall be responsible for payment of all reasonable charges for towing and storage of such abandoned property as provided in section 15-418. 
(b)  Crime inquiry and inspection report. Upon the towing of any abandoned property pursuant to section 15-415 or under authority of a law enforcement officer or local government agency pursuant to section 15-416, the city police department, where it authorized such towing or was properly notified by another government agency of such towing, shall promptly make an inquiry with the national crime information center (NCIC) and any statewide Missouri law enforcement computer system to determine if the abandoned property has been reported as stolen and shall enter the information pertaining to the towed property into the statewide law enforcement computer system. 
    If the abandoned property is not claimed within ten working days of the towing, the city police department shall submit a crime inquiry and inspection report to the Missouri Director of Revenue. The city police department shall also provide one copy of the report to the storage facility and one copy to the towing company. A towing company in possession of abandoned property after ten working days shall report such fact to the city police department. The crime inquiry and inspection report shall be designed by the director of revenue and shall include the following: 
(1)  The year, model, make and property identification number of the property and the owner and any lienholders, if known; 
(2)  A description of any damage to the property noted by the law enforcement officer authorizing the tow; 
(3)  The license plate or registration number and the state of issuance, if available; 
(4)  The storage location of the towed property; 
(5)  The name, telephone number and address of the towing company; 
(6)  The date, place and reason for the towing of the abandoned property; 
(7)  The date of the inquiry of the national crime information center, any statewide Missouri law enforcement computer system, and any other similar system which has titling and registration information to determine if the abandoned property had been stolen. Only the city police department shall enter this information; 
(8)  The signature and printed name of the law enforcement officer authorizing the tow and the towing operator; and 
(9)  Any additional information the missouri director of revenue deems appropriate. 
(c)  Reclaiming property. The owner of such abandoned property, or the holder of a valid security interest of record, may reclaim it from the towing company upon proof of ownership or valid security interest of record and payment of all reasonable charges for the towing and storage of the abandoned property. 
(d)  Lienholder repossession. If a lienholder repossesses any motor vehicle, trailer, all-terrain vehicle, outboard motor or vessel without the knowledge or cooperation of the owner, then the repossessor shall notify the city police department within two hours of the repossession and shall further provide the police department with any additional information the police department deems appropriate. The city police department shall make an inquiry with the national crime information center and the Missouri statewide law enforcement computer system and shall enter the repossessed vehicle into the statewide law enforcement computer system. 
(e)  Notice to owner/tow lien claim. Any towing company which comes into possession of abandoned property pursuant to this article and who claims a lien for recovering, towing or storing abandoned property shall give notice to the title owner and to all persons claiming a lien thereon, as disclosed by the records of the Missouri Department of Revenue or of a corresponding agency in any other state. The towing company shall notify the owner and any lienholder within ten business days of the date of mailing indicated on the notice sent by the Missouri Department of Revenue pursuant to RSMo 304.156, by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the storage facility; 
(2)  The date, reason and place from which the abandoned property was removed; 
(3)  A statement that the amount of the accrued towing, storage and administrative costs are the responsibility of the owner, and that storage and/or administrative costs will continue to accrue as a legal liability of the owner until the abandoned property is redeemed; 
(4)  A statement that the storage firm claims a possessory lien for all such charges; 
(5)  A statement that the owner or holder of a valid security interest of record may retake possession of the abandoned property at any time during business hours by proving ownership or rights to a secured interest and paying all towing and storage charges; 
(6)  A statement that, should the owner consider that the towing or removal was improper or not legally justified, the owner has a right to request a hearing as provided in this section to contest the propriety of such towing or removal; 
(7)  A statement that if the abandoned property remains unclaimed for 30 days from the date of mailing the notice, title to the abandoned property will be transferred to the person or firm in possession of the abandoned property free of all prior liens; and 
(8)  A statement that any charges in excess of the value of the abandoned property at the time of such transfer shall remain a liability of the owner. 
(f)  Physical search of property. In the event that the Missouri Department of Revenue notifies the towing company that the records of the department of revenue fail to disclose the name of the owner or any lienholder of record, the towing company shall attempt to locate documents or other evidence of ownership on or within the abandoned property itself. The towing company must certify that a physical search of the abandoned property disclosed no ownership documents were found and a good faith effort has been made. For purposes of this section, good faith effort means that the following checks have been performed by the company to establish the prior state of registration and title: 
(1)  Check of the abandoned property for any type of license plates, license plate record, temporary permit, inspection sticker, decal or other evidence which may indicate a state of possible registration and title; 
(2)  Check the law enforcement report for a license plate number or registration number if the abandoned property was towed at the request of a law enforcement agency; 
(3)  Check the tow ticket/report of the tow truck operator to see if a license plate was on the abandoned property at the beginning of the tow, if a private tow; and 
(4)  If there is no address of the owner on the impound report, check the law enforcement report to see if an out-of-state address is indicated on the driver license information. 
(g)  Petition in circuit court. The owner of the abandoned property removed pursuant to this article or any person claiming a lien, other than the towing company, within ten days after the receipt of notification from the towing company pursuant to subsection (e) of this section may file a petition in the associate circuit court in the county where the abandoned property is stored to determine if the abandoned property was wrongfully taken or withheld from the owner. The petition shall name the towing company among the defendants. The petition may also name the agency ordering the tow or the owner, lessee or agent of the real property from which the abandoned property was removed. The Missouri Director of Revenue shall not be a party to such petition but a copy of the petition shall be served on the director of revenue. 
(h)  Notice to owner. Notice as to the removal of any abandoned property pursuant to this article shall be made in writing within five working days to the registered owner and any lienholder of the fact of the removal, the grounds for the removal, and the place to which the property has been removed by either: 
(1)  The public agency authorizing the removal; or 
(2)  The towing company, where authorization was made by an owner or lessee of real property. 
If the abandoned property is stored in any storage facility, a copy of the notice shall be given to the operator of the facility. The notice provided for in this section shall include the amount of mileage if available shown on the abandoned property at the time of removal. 
(i)  Tow truck requirements. Any towing company which tows abandoned property for hire shall have the towing company's name, city and state clearly printed in letters at least three inches in height on the sides of the truck, wrecker or other vehicle used in the towing. 
(j)  Storage facilities. Persons operating or in charge of any storage facility where the abandoned property is stored pursuant to this article shall accept cash for payment of towing and storage by a registered owner or the owner's agent claiming the abandoned property. 
(Ord. No. 99-59, § 1, 11-22-99) 
Sec. 15-418. - Maximum charges. 
(a)  A towing company may only assess reasonable storage charges for abandoned property towed without the consent of the owner. Reasonable storage charges shall not exceed the charges for vehicles which have been towed with the consent of the owner on a negotiated basis, and/or as provided for in ordinances of the City of Ballwin. Storage charges may be assessed only for the time in which the towing company complies with the procedural requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board of aldermen may from time to time establish maximum reasonable towing, storage and other charges that can be imposed by towing and storage companies operating within the city, and which are consistent with this article and with RSMo 304.155 to 304.158. Any violation of said established maximum charges shall be deemed a violation of this section of the Code and shall be punishable, upon conviction, by fine in an amount not less than five dollars nor more than $1,000.00, or by incarceration for not more than 90 days or by both such fine and incarceration. 
(c)  A towing company may impose a charge of not more than one-half of the regular towing charge for the towing of abandoned property at the request of the owner of private real property or that owner's agent pursuant to this article if the owner of the abandoned property or the owner's agent returns to the abandoned property before it is removed from the private real property. The regular towing charge may only be imposed after the abandoned property has been removed from the property and is in transit. 
(Ord. No. 99-59, § 1, 11-22-99; Ord. No. 03-07, § 2, 1-27-03) 
Sec. 15-419. - Sale of abandoned property by city. 
    When the city has physical possession of the abandoned property, it may sell the abandoned property in accordance with its established provisions and regulations and may transfer ownership by means of a bill of sale signed by the city clerk and sealed with the official city seal. Such bill of sale shall contain the make and model of the abandoned property, the complete abandoned property identification number and the odometer reading of the abandoned property if available and shall be lawful proof of ownership for any dealer registered under the provisions of RSMo 301.218 or RSMo 301.560, or for any other person. 
(Ord. No. 99-59, § 1, 11-22-99) 
Secs. 15-420-15-440. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - BICYCLES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Bicycle equipment, RSMo 307.180 et seq. 

Sec. 15-441. - Applicability of article. 
    The regulations applicable to bicycles in this article shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any highway, road or street or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated herein. 
(Code 1973, § 14-322) 
Sec. 15-442. - Traffic laws to apply to persons riding bicycles. 
    Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of the state declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic ordinances of the city applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this article and except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no application. 
(Code 1973, § 14-323) 
Sec. 15-443. - Obedience to traffic control signals. 
(a)  Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right turn, left turn or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1973, § 14-324) 
Sec. 15-444. - Riding on sidewalk in commercial district prohibited. 
    No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a district zoned for commercial use under the zoning regulations of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 14-325) 
Cross reference- Zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.347. 
Sec. 15-445. - Pedestrians to have right-of-way. 
    Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(Code 1973, § 14-326) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 300.347. 
Sec. 15-446. - Persons 15 years of age or older not to ride on sidewalks. 
    No person 15 or more years of age shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk in any district in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 14-327) 
Sec. 15-447. - Use of bicycle paths required when available. 
    Wherever a usable path for bicycles practical for sustained riding for transportation purposes has been officially designated adjacent to a street or highway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the street or highway. 
(Code 1973, § 14-328) 
Sec. 15-448. - Emerging from alley or driveway. 
    The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
(Code 1973, § 14-329) 
Sec. 15-449. - Duty to keep to right. 
    Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(Code 1973, § 14-330) 
Sec. 15-450. - Manner of riding. 
    A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
(Code 1973, § 14-331) 
Sec. 15-451. - Number of riders restricted. 
    No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(Code 1973, § 14-332) 
Sec. 15-452. - Riding abreast. 
    Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(Code 1973, § 14-333) 
Sec. 15-453. - Carrying articles. 
    No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars. 
(Code 1973, § 14-334) 
Sec. 15-454. - Speed limit. 
    No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Code 1973, § 14-335) 
Sec. 15-455. - Lights and reflectors. 
    Every bicycle and motorized bicycle when in use on a street or highway during the period from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise shall be equipped with the following: 
(1)  A front-facing lamp on the front or carried by the rider which shall emit a white light visible at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway at 500 feet; 
(2)  A rear-facing red reflector, at least two square inches in reflective surface area, on the rear which shall be visible at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver under the lower beams of vehicle headlights at 600 feet; 
(3)  Essentially colorless or amber reflectors on both the front and rear surfaces of all pedals. Each pedal reflector shall be recessed below the plane of the pedal or reflector housing. Each reflector shall be at least 90/100 square inch in projected effective reflex area, and must be visible at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver under the lawful lower beams of vehicle headlights at 200 feet; and 
(4)  A side-facing essentially colorless or amber reflector visible on each side of the wheel mounted on the wheel spokes of the front wheel within three inches of the inside of the wheel rim and a side-facing essentially colorless or red reflector mounted on the wheel spokes of the rear wheel within three inches of the inside of the wheel rim, or continuous retroreflective material on each side of both tires which shall be at least 3/16 of an inch wide. All such reflectors or retroreflective tire sidewalls shall be visible at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver under the lawful lower beams of vehicle headlights at 300 feet. The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to motorized bicycles which comply with National Highway Traffic and Safety Administration regulations relating to reflectors on motorized bicycles. 
(Code 1973, § 14-337) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.185. 
Sec. 15-456. - Brakes required. 
    Every bicycle and motorized bicycle shall be equipped with a brake or brakes which will enable its driver to stop the bicycle or motorized bicycle within 25 feet from a speed of ten miles per hour on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(Code 1973, § 14-338) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 307.183. 
Sec. 15-456.1. - Wheeled sports helmet. 
(a)  Scope. These regulations apply to bicyclists, scooter operators, roller bladers, roller skaters, and skateboarders when such devices are operated upon any highway, road or street or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated herein. For purposes of this section, a "scooter" shall be defined as a device that typically has one front and one rear wheel with a low footboard between, is steered by a handlebar, and is propelled either by pushing one foot against the ground while resting the other foot on the footboard or by a motor. A scooter may have more than two wheels. 
(b)  Operators and passengers to wear helmets. It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian to permit a child of at least one year of age and who has not reached the age of 17 to operate or be a passenger on a bicycle, a scooter, roller skates, roller blades or a skateboard unless the child shall wear protective headgear which properly fits and is fastened securely upon the head of the operator or passenger. The headgear shall meet or exceed the impact standard for protective bicycle helmets set by the U.S. Consumer Products Safety Commission, the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), the Snell Memorial Foundation or the American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM). 
(c)  Notice of violation. Every person reasonably believed by a law enforcement officer to have violated the provisions of this section shall be issued a notice of violation on a form approved by the director of health. The notice of violation shall advise persons to whom it is issued of the dangers to children under the age of 17 associated with operating bicycles and the items set out in subsection (a) hereof without protective headgear. The director of health shall keep and maintain records of all persons issued a notice of violation. Any person receiving more than two notices of violation within a 12-month period shall be mailed a summons charging such person with having violated this section. 
(d)  Use of bicycles, scooters, roller blades, roller skates and skateboards in city parks. The use of bicycles, scooters, roller blades, roller skates and skateboards is lawful in parks maintained by the City of Ballwin unless prohibited by other ordinance or law. 
(1)  If a parent or guardian is in the park and permits a child between 1 and 17 years old to operate or be a passenger on any such device without proper headgear, the parent or guardian will be required to leave the park immediately. 
(2)  If a child between 1 and 17 years old operates or is a passenger on any such device without proper headgear, the child shall be required to leave the park immediately. 
(e)  Restrictions on use. No person in a park maintained by the City of Ballwin shall: 
(1)  Ride a bicycle, scooter, skateboard, roller blades or roller skates on other than a paved vehicular road or path designated for that purpose, except a bicyclist may wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use. 
(2)  When riding a bicycle, scooter, skateboard, roller blades or roller skates, fail to comply with all traffic rules and regulations as are applicable to the operation of such devices on the city streets. 
(3)  Ride any other person on a bicycle, scooter, skateboard, roller blades or roller skates in addition to the rider. 
(4)  Leave a bicycle, scooter, skateboard, roller blade(s) or roller skate(s) lying on the paving, or in any place or position where other persons may trip over or be injured by it. 
(5)  Leave a bicycle, scooter, skateboard, roller blades or roller skates in a place other than a storage or parking rack when such is provided and there is a space available. 
(6)  Ride a bicycle on any road between sunset and before sunrise without an attached headlight plainly visible, and without a red taillight or red reflector plainly visible. 
(7)  Ride or push a bicycle, scooter, skateboard, roller blades or roller skates into any area of a park that has been marked by signs bearing the words, or words of similar intent, "No bicycle, scooter, skateboard, roller blades or roller skates allowed in this area." 
(f)  Penalties. Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $25.00. Provided, however, that any parent or guardian found to be in violation of this section may be issued an equipment violation notice as prescribed on a Missouri Uniform Complaint and Summons, which violation may be dismissed if the parent or guardian brings an approved helmet to the Ballwin Police Department within 25 working days of the receipt of the violation and receives compliance verification as set forth on the back of the Missouri Uniform Complaint and Summons. 
(Ord. No. 09-13, § 1, 4-27-09) 
Sec. 15-457. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person 17 years of age or older who violates any provision of this article is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $5.00 nor more than $25.00. Such an infraction does not constitute a crime, and conviction shall not give rise to any disability or legal disadvantage based on conviction of a criminal offense. 
(b)  If any person under 17 years of age violates any provision of this article in the presence of a peace officer possessing the duty and power of arrest for violation of the general criminal laws of the state or for violation of ordinances of the city, such officer may impound the bicycle involved for a period not to exceed five days upon issuance of a receipt to the child riding it or to its owner. 
(Code 1973, § 14-339) 
Secs. 15-458-15-475. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - SCHEDULES 

Sec. 15-476. - Schedule A-Speed limit on through streets. 
    In accordance with section 15-182 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, the maximum speed limit on the streets, roads, highways or portions thereof listed in this schedule shall be 30 miles per hour: 
Route Portion or Limits of Route Henry Road From Clayton Road to the city limit Holloway Road From Manchester Road to city limits Kehrs Mill Road From Holloway Road to city limits New Ballwin Road From its intersection with Woodrun Drive to its intersection with Oak Street New Ballwin Road From Manchester Road to Woodrun except as provided in schedule N Ries Bend Road Along its entire length Ries Road From Manchester Road to city limits  
(Code 1973, § 14-351; Ord. No. 2120, § 1, 8-27-90; Ord. No. 2328, § 1, 7-26-93; Ord. No. 09-34, § 1, 9-14-09; Ord. No. 17-23, § 9, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 15-477. - Schedule B-Speed on arterial streets. 
    In accordance with section 15-184 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, the maximum speed limit on the streets, roads, highways or portions thereof listed in this schedule shall be 40 miles per hour: 
Route Portion of Limits of Route Clayton Road From eastern city limits to western city limits Manchester Road (Route 100) From eastern city limits to western city limits New Ballwin Road From the intersection of Big Bend and New Ballwin Road to Kiefer Creek Road Big Bend (westbound) From eastern city limits to western city limits Clarkson Road (Route 340) From southern city limits to northern city limits  
(Code 1973, § 14-352; Ord. No. 99-50, § 1, 10-11-99; Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, 2-11-13) 
Sec. 15-478. - Schedule C-Turns restricted. 
    In accordance with section 15-160 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, vehicular traffic shall at certain intersections or locations be prohibited from making a right turn, left turn or U-turn as specified in this schedule: 
Intersection 
or Location Turn Restriction Center curb cut for Ballwin Plaza 15425 Manchester Road and Manchester Road No left turn on to eastbound Manchester Road Holloway Road at 
Manchester Road No left turns on northbound Holloway Road for 175 feet north of the north right-of-way line of its intersection with Manchester Road Holloway Road at south entrance North Pointe No left turn into south entrance of North Pointe 14799 Manchester Road No left turn from eastbound Manchester Road 15021 Manchester Road No left turns on to Holloway Road from property known as 15021 Manchester Road 15302 Manchester Road No left turn from property known as 15302 Manchester Road at exit nearest intersection of New Ballwin Road and Manchester Road Northbound Ries Road at eastbound Manchester Road No Right Turn on Red when prohibited by electrical intermittent signage activated by pedestrian. Old Ballwin Road and 
Manchester Road No left turn onto westbound Manchester Road from Old Ballwin Road South entrance North Pointe and Holloway Road No left turn onto Holloway Road Steamboat Lane at 
Manchester Road No left turn for southbound traffic on Steamboat Lane between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., Sundays excepted  
(Code 1973, § 14-353; Ord. No. 99-15, § 1, 3-8-99; Ord. No. 03-43, § 1, 8-25-03; Ord. No. 04-32, § 1, 8-23-04; Ord. No. 14-01, § 2, 1-13-14; Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 15-479. - Schedule D-Stops for through streets. 
    In accordance with the provisions of section 15-226 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop at every intersection before entering any of the streets, roads, highways or portions thereof listed in this schedule: 
Route Portions or Limits of Route Baxter Road From its intersection with Clear Meadows Drive to its intersection with Holloway Road, and the northbound lane of Baxter Road from Holloway Road to Wildwood Drive Big Bend From eastern city limits to western city limits Clayton Road (Route HH) From eastern city limits to western city limits Henry Avenue From Clayton Rd. to City limits Holloway Road From Manchester Road to Baxter Road, except at Manchester Road Kehrs Mill Road From city limits to Seven Trails Drive, except at Clayton Road Manchester Road (Route 100) From eastern city limits to western city limits New Ballwin Road From Manchester Road to city limits, except at Manchester Road Ries Road From Manchester Road to city limits, except at Manchester Road  
(Code 1973, § 14-354; Ord. No. 99-29, § 1, 6-28-99; Ord. No. 01-76, § 2, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 14-01, § 2, 1-13-14; Ord. No. 17-23, § 10, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 15-480. - Schedule E-Stop intersections and locations. 
    In accordance with the provisions of section 15-229 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles at the intersections or locations listed in this schedule shall stop their vehicles as specified in this schedule: 
Intersection or Location Traffic on Street, Road, Highway or Alley Listed Below Shall Stop Agean Way and Henry Agean Way Algonquin and Claymont (north/south corners of Algonquin) Algonquin Alverston Court (east) and Richland Meadows Alverston Court Alverston Court (west) and Richland Meadows Alverston Court Alverston Court (north) and Westrun Alverston Court Alverston Court (south) and Westrun Alverston Court Amber Jack Drive Breezeview Drive Andante Drive and Camargo Drive Northbound on Andante Drive Andover and Algonquin Andover Andrews Park Way and Seven Trails Drive Eastbound at Seven Trails Drive Andrews Park Way Westbound at Ballpark Drive Applegate Lane and Birchwood Drive Eastbound on Applegate Lane Applestone Drive and Twigwood Drive Southbound on Applestone Drive Asilomar and Cleta and Brightfield Drives Asilomar and Cleta and Brightfield Drives Aspen Village and Reinke Aspen Village Aspen Village Drive and Reinke Road Northbound on Aspen Village Drive Aspen Village at Westglen Village Northwest corner of the intersection for southbound Aspen Village traffic Baberton and Claymont Baberton Ballpark Drive Northbound at Kehrs Mill Road Ballpark Drive Southbound at Jefferson Avenue Ballwin Athletic Association Exiting traffic Ballwin Commons Cir Ballwin Commons Drive Ballwin Commons Cir Old Ballwin Road Ballwin Commons and Old Ballwin Ballwin Commons Ballwin Commons and Ramsey Ballwin Commons Ballwin Elementary School Traffic exiting the west driveway Ballwin Estates Court at Ries Bend Road Eastbound on Ballwin Estates Court Ballwood Drive and Twigwood Drive Westbound on Ballwood Drive Barker Ct Barker Lane Baxter Road and Clear Meadows Drive Eastbound on Clear Meadows Drive Baxter Road and Forest Leaf Parkway Westbound on Forest Leaf Parkway Baxter Road and Greenmore Drive Northbound on Greenmore Drive Baxter Road and Hill Trail Drive Southbound on Hill Trail Drive Baxter Road and Shady Meadows Drive Northbound on Shady Meadows Drive Baxter Road and Wildwood Drive Westbound on Wildwood Drive Bedford Lane and Lenox Drive Southbound on Lenox Drive Bellerive and Claymont Bellerive Bitterfield and Henry (east/west corner of Bitterfield) Bitterfield Bitterwood Drive and Golfwood Drive Eastbound and westbound on Golfwood Drive Bitterwood Drive and Golfwood Drive Northbound and westbound on Golfwood Drive Blue Ridge Lane and Kehrs Mill Road Southbound on Blue Ridge Lane Brass Lamp and Brightspur Brightspur Brass Lamp Drive/Forest Leaf Parkway Northbound and southbound on Forest Leaf Parkway Westbound on Brass Lamp Drive Brass Lamp/Glenmeadow/Bright Spur Drives Brass Lamp/Glenmeadow/Bright Spur Drives Breezeview and Nassau Way Nassau Way Briarhill Court and Twigwood Drive Northbound on Briarhill Court Briarhill Drive and Twigwood Drive Southbound on Briarhill Drive Briarwyck and Country Club Briarwyck Briarwyck and Country Club Drive Country Club Drive Bridgeport Drive and Nantucket Drive Eastbound on Bridgeport Drive Bright Meadows Drive and Clear Meadow Drive Northbound on Bright Meadows Drive Brookside Lane and Ries Road Northwestbound on Brookside Lane Brooktree and Iron Lantern Brooktree Brooktree and Kingridge Brooktree Burlington Mill Drive and Windsor Mill Drive Southeastbound on Burlington Mill Drive Burtonwood Drive Mimosa Lane Burtonwood Drive Portsdown Road Burtonwood and Hillsdale Northbound on Burtonwood Burtonwood and Portsdown Northbound on Burtonwood Bush Drive and Ramsey Lane Southwestbound on Bush Drive Bush Drive and Ramsey Lane Westbound on Bush Drive Camargo Drive and Del Ebro Drive Southeastbound on Camargo Drive Capital Landing Drive Wetherburn Road Capital Landing and Wetherburn Eastbound on Wetherburn at the intersection with Capital Landing Caprice Garden Court and Claymont Caprice Garden Court Caravel Drive and Ries Road Westbound on Caravel Drive Carina Court (north) and Kylemore Drive Carina Court Southbound Castle Glen at Castle Pines Castle Glen Westbound Castle Meadows at Castle Pines Castle Meadows Westbound Castle Pines at Castle Glen Castle Pines Eastbound Castle Pines at Castle Glen Castle Pines Castle Ridge Drive and Castle Pines Dr. Castle Ridge Drive Cedar Run Dr and Rustic Valley Drive Southbound on Cedar Run Drive Center Court Drive and Highview Drive Southwestbound on Center Court Drive Center Court Drive and Hillsdale Drive Northeastbound on Center Court Drive Chancellor Heights and Henry Chancellor Heights Clarkson Road and Downall Green Westbound on Downall Green Cla-Ter-Ri (east) and Clayton Road Cla-Ter-Ri (east) Cla-Ter-Ri (west) and Clayton Road Cla-Ter-Ri (west) Claymont Place Drive Country Club Drive Claymont and Baxter Claymont Claymont Cove Court and Claymont Claymont Cove Court Claymont Drive Southbound on Greenbriar at Claymont Drive Clayton Road and Highland Ridge Drive Northbound on Highland Ridge Drive Clayworth and Henry (east/west corner of Clayworth) Clayworth Clear Meadows Drive and High Meadows Drive Northbound on High Meadows Drive Clear Meadows Drive and Holloway Road Westbound on Clear Meadows Drive Clear Meadows Drive and Shady Meadows Drive Northbound and southbound on Shady Meadows Drive Clear Meadows Drive and Shady Meadows Drive Eastbound and Westbound on Clear Meadow Drive Northbound and Southbound on Shady Meadows Drive Cleta Court and Cleta Drive Westbound on Cleta Court at the intersection with Cleta Drive Coachgate Court Ballwin Commons Drive Coachgate Lane 241 Coachgate Court Coachgate Lane 200 Coachgate Court Columbard Drive (east) and Kylemore Drive Columbard Drive Coronado and Claymont Coronado Coronet Drive Highview Drive Coronet Drive and Hillsdale Drive Eastbound on Coronet Drive Country Club and Claymont Country Club Country Club and Clayton Road Country Club Country Creek and Spring Oak Drive Westbound on Country Creek Country Downs Dr and Twigwood Drive Southbound on Country Downs Drive Covenant Place and Ries Covenant Place Crestland Drive W Skyline Drive Crestland Drive W Skyline Drive Crestland Drive and Sunset Drive Southbound on Sunset Drive Cypress Trace Drive Westpar Drive Cypress Trace Drive and Westpar Drive Westbound and southeastbound on Cypress Trace David Harrison Lane at Ries Bend Road Eastbound on David Harrison Lane Del Ebro Drive and Nottingham Drive Eastbound on Del Ebro Drive at Nottingham Drive Dennison Drive and Nancy Place Southbound on Nancy Place Dickens Farm Lane at Ries Bend Road Westbound on Dickens Farm Lane Downall Green and Wetherburn Downall Green Down Hill Drive and Twigwood Drive Westbound on Down Hill Drive Dutch Mill and Henry Dutch Mill Echo Hill Court and Rustic Valley Drive Eastbound on Echo Hill Court Echo Hill Court and Twigwood Drive East and west bound on Twigwood Drive at the intersections with Rustic Valley Drive and Echo Hill Court Echo Hill Court and Twigwood Drive Southbound on Echo Hill Court Elm and Manchester Elm Elmcrest and Claymont Elmcrest Essen Lane and Rethmeier Court Rethmeier Court northbound Essen Lane and Woerther Avenue Woerther Avenue southbound Far Hill Drive and Twigwood Drive Southbound on Far Hill Drive Fox Village Ct. Westglen Village Drive Ganahl Drive and West Skyline Drive Southeastbound on Ganahl Drive Gardenway and Dutch Mill Gardenway Glen Meadow and Henry Glen Meadow Goldwood Drive and Statewood Drive Westbound on Goldwood Drive Northbound and southbound on Statewood Drive Graywood and Spring Meadows (north intersection) Graywood Green Lantern and Milldale (north/south corners of Green Lantern) Green Lantern Great Hill Drive and Twigwood Drive Northbound and southbound on Great Hill Drive Hatteras and Clayton Road Hatteras Henry Oaks and Henry Henry Oaks Hillbrook and Glen Meadow (north/south corners of Hillbrook) Hillbrook Hill Trail Drive and Wildwood Drive Northbound and southbound on Hill Trail Drive Hill Trail and Wildwood Parkway Eastbound on Hill Trail Holloway Road and Stoddards Mill Drive Eastbound on Stoddards Mill Drive Holly Green Drive and Ries Road Westbound on Holly Green Drive Holly Leaf Drive and Ries Road Westbound on Holly Leaf Drive Hollyridge and Dutch Mill (4-way stop) Hollyridge and Dutch Mill Hollyridge and Dutch Mill (west intersection) Hollyridge Huntleigh Drive and Sunset Drive Southwestbound on Huntleigh Drive Iron Lantern and Clayton Road Iron Lantern Iron Lantern and Kingridge Iron Lantern Jacob Lane (north) and Oakwood Farms Lane Jacob Lane Jasmine Park Court at Ries Bend Road Westbound on Jasmine Park Court Jefferson Avenue Northbound and southbound on Ries Road Jefferson Avenue Westbound at Ballpark Drive Jefferson Ave and Ries Road Eastbound on Jefferson Ave Joyce Court and Ramsey Lane Northeastbound on Joyce Court Kehrs Mill Road Eastbound at Ballpark Drive Kenilworth and Country Club Kenilworth Kenilworth and Country Club Drive Country Club Drive Kingridge and Henry Kingridge Kingridge and Hillbrook Kingridge Kylemore Drive (east) and Carina Court Kylemore Drive Kylemore Drive (west) and Carina Court Kylemore Drive Kylemore Drive (south) and Columbard Kylemore Drive Lakewood Lane and Claymont Drive Northbound on Lakewood Lane Lark Hill Lane and Robin Hill Lane Southwestbound on Robin Hill Lane Lering Drive and Lering Court Lering Drive Lexbridge and Kenilwort Lexbridge Lilybud Court and Mimosa Lane Westbound on Lilybud Court Lindell Drive 802 W Skyline Drive Lindell Drive and East Skyline Drive Eastbound on Lindell Drive Lindell Drive and West Skyline Drive Eastbound on Lindell Drive Log Hill Lane Lucerne Place Drive Londondary and Clayton Road Londonary Madrina Court and Ries Road Eastbound on Madrina Court Madrina Court and Ries Road Westbound and northbound on Ries Road Maeve Court (north) and Palm Bay Drive Maeve Court Mansion Hill and Gardenway/Green Lantern Mansion Hill Mayfair Drive and Lennox Drive Northeastbound on Lennox Drive Southwestbound on Lennox Drive Northwestbound on Mayfair Drive Southeastbound on Mayfair Drive Mayfair Drive and Nottingham Drive Northwestbound on Mayfair Drive Northeastbound on Nottingham Drive Southwestbound on Nottingham Drive Maymont and Spring Meadows Maymont Meadow Bridge and Clayton Road Meadow Bridge Meadowbrook Country Club Drive in the vicinity of lots 11, 12 and 19 (3-way stop) Meadowbrook Country Club Drive, all directions Meadowbrook Country Club Drive in the vicinity of lots 80 and 81 (3-way stop) Meadowbrook Country Club Drive, all directions Meadowbrook Country Club Drive in the vicinity of lot 6 (3-way stop) Meadowbrook Country Club Drive, west direction Meadowbrook Country Club Drive in the vicinity of the tennis courts (3-way stop) Meadowbrook Country Club Drive, all directions Meadowbrook Country Club Drive and Clayton Road Meadowbrook Country Club Drive Meadowbrook Country Club Drive and Kehrs Mill Road Meadowbrook Country Club Drive Melanie Meadows Drive and Ries Road Southbound on Melanie Meadows Drive Mercer Manor and Clayton Road Mercer Manor Milldale and Gardenway Milldale Mimosa Lane Burtonwood Drive Mimosa Lane Burtonwood Drive Mimosa and Portsdown Northbound on Mimosa Monticello and Claymont Monticello Monticello and Kenilworth Monticello Morewood Court and Brass Lamp (north/south corners of Morewood) Morewood Morena Court and Del Ebro Northbound on Morena Court Southbound on Morena Court Muir View and Henry Muir View Nancy Place Old Ballwin Road Nantucket Drive and Providence Road Eastbound on Nantucket Drive Southbound on Nantucket Drive Nantucket Drive and Warwick Lane Southwestbound on Warwick Lane New Ballwin Road and Oak Run Lane Eastbound on Oak Run Lane New Ballwin Road and Redstart Drive Eastbound on Redstart Drive New Ballwin Road and Show Place Court Westbound on Show Place Court New Ballwin Road and Woodrun Court Eastbound and westbound on Woodrun Court Newton Place and Parker Road Northwestbound on Newton Place Northmoor and Claymont Northmoor Nottingham Drive and Bedford Lane Southbound on Nottingham Drive Oak Bridge Drive Oak Run Lane Oakbriar Farm Drive (north) and Oakwood Farms Lane Oakbriar Farms Drive Oakbriar Farm Drive (south) and Oakwood Farm Lane Oakbriar Farms Drive Oakbriar Farm Drive (east) and Oakmont Farm Oakbriar Farm Drive Oakbriar Farm Drive (north) and Columbard Drive Oakbriar Farm Drive Oakbriar Farm Drive (south) and Columbard Drive Oakbriar Farm Drive Oakmont Farm Drive and Oak Borough Drive Both directions of Oakmont Farm Drive and Oak Borough Drive at the intersection with Oakmont Farm Drive Oakwood Farms Lane (east) and Oakbriar Farms Drive Oakwood Farms Lane Oakwood Farms Lane (west) and Oakbriar Farms Drive Oakwood Farms Lane Oakwood Farms Lane (east) and Jacob Lane Oakwood Farms Lane Oakwood Farms Lane (west) and Jacob Lane Oakwood Farms Lane Old Ballwin Road and Fox Den Northbound on Fox Den Old Ballwin Road and Parker Drive Eastbound on Parker Drive Old Ballwin Road and St. Joseph Westbound on St. Joseph Old Oaks and Brooktree Old Oaks Old Oaks Drive Highland Ridge Drive Olde Towne Plaza and Ballpark Dr. two locations Olde Towne Plaza Olde Towne Plaza and Ries Road Olde Towne Plaza Orchard Avenue and Kehrs Mill Road Eastbound on Orchard Avenue Orkney and Henry Orkney Palm Bay Drive (east) and Maeve Court Palm Bay Drive Palm Bay Drive (west) and Maeve Court Palm Bay Drive Palm Bay Drive (north) and Columbard Drive Palm Bay Drive Park Drive Andrews Park Way Park Drive and Holloway Road Northwestbound at Holloway Road Park Drive and Stoddards Mill Drive Holloway Road Portsdown Road Burtonwood Drive Portwind and Windcliffe Portwind and Windcliffe Quail Terrace Court and West Glen Village Drive Eastbound on Quail Terrace Court Quail Village Court Fox Village Court Quenevere and Henry Quenevere Quinmoor and Baxter Quinmoor Radford Lane and Ramsey Lane Southwestbound on Radford Lane Ramsey Lane and Ries Road Eastbound traffic on Ramsey Lane Rauscher Drive and West Skyline Drive Southeastbound on Rauscher Drive Reinke Road and Fox Briar Northbound on Fox Briar Reinke Road and Fox Hollow Northbound on Fox Hollow Reinke Road and Village Creek Drive Northbound on Village Creek Drive Reinke Road and Kylemore Kylemore Reinke Road and Oakwood Farms Oakwood Farms Reinke Road and Palm Bay Drive Palm Bay Drive Reinke Road and Village Creek Court Village Creek Court Reinke Road and Windy Acres Estates Drive Windy Acres Estates Drive Renehale Drive and Pleasant Grove Westbound traffic on Renehale Drive Richland Meadows (south) and Kiefer Creek Richland Meadows Richland Meadows (north) and Alverston Court Richland Meadows Ries Road and Jefferson Ave Northbound and Southbound on Ries Road Ries Road and Ramsey Lane Northbound traffic on Ries Road Ries Road and Ramsey Lane Southbound on Ries Road Westbound on Ries Road Ries Road and Talbert Court Eastbound on Talbert Court Ries Road and Tara Ridge Court Westbound on Tara Ridge Court Ries Road and Twigwood Ries Road and Twigwood Royal Oaks Drive and Windcliffe Drive Northbound on Royal Oaks Drive Rue Montand and Henry Rue Montand Rustic Valley Drive and Running Creek Court Westbound on Running Creek Court Rustic Valley Drive and Running Creek Eastbound and westbound on Rustic Valley Drive Rustic Valley Drive and Rustic Valley Court Southbound on Rustic Valley Court Rustic Valley Drive and Twigwood Drive East and west bound on Twigwood Drive at the intersections with Rustic Valley Drive and Echo Hill Drive Rustic Valley Drive and Twigwood Drive Eastbound on Rustic Valley Drive Rustic Valley Drive and Vernal Hill Court Northbound on Vernal Hill Court Rustic Valley Drive and Walnut Point Court Southbound on Walnut Point Court St. Mary's Drive and Old Ballwin Road St. Mary's Drive Seawind Drive and Old Ballwin Road Westbound on Seawind Drive Seawind Drive and Ramsey Lane Eastbound on Seawind Drive Shandra Drive and Cleta Drive Northbound on Shandra Drive at the intersection with Cleta Drive East Skyline Drive and West Skyline Drive Northbound and southbound on East Skyline Drive Northeastbound on West Skyline Drive Solon Drive and Ballwin Commons Drive Solon Drive Spragues Mill Drive and Stoddards Mill Drive Southwestbound on Spragues Mill Court Spring Meadow and Henry Spring Meadow Spring Oaks Drive and Oak Pass Court Eastbound and westbound on Spring Oaks Drive and northbound on Oak Pass Court Springlake and Dutch Mill Springlake Statewood Drive and Twigwood Drive Southbound on Statewood Drive Steamboat Lane, 526 feet south of its intersection with Kehrs Mill Road Steamboat Lane Steamboat Lane, 1,572 feet north of intersection with Manchester Road Steamboat Lane Streiff Lane and West Skyline Drive Southeastbound on Streiff Lane Sudbury Lane and Claymont Drive Northwestbound on Sudbury Lane Sudbury Lane and Claymont Drive Southeastbound on Sudbury Lane Sunnyslope and Claymont Sunnyslope Sunstone and Spring Meadows Sunstone Tall Timbers Meadows Drive at Ries Bend Road Eastbound on Tall Timbers Meadows Drive Tamarack and Claymont Tamarack Terrington Drive (north) and Westrun Terrington Drive Trailwood Drive and Wildwood Drive Northbound on Trailwood Drive Treasure Cove with Towercliffe Drive and Portwind Place Southbound traffic on Treasure Cove Turfwood Drive and Twigwood Drive Northbound on Turfwood Drive Vail Drive and Ramsey Lane Northbound on Ramsey Lane Westbound on Vail Drive Victoria Pointe Court Reinke Road Wendevy Court and Mimosa Lane Westbound on Wendevy Court Westglen Village Drive and Castle Pines Drive Castle Pines Drive Westglen Village Drive and Castle Pines Court Castle Pines Court Westrun Drive and Westglen Village Drive Northbound and southbound Westglen Village Drive Eastbound and westbound on Westrun Drive W. Orchard Avenue Ballpark Drive Westrun (east) and Alverston Court Westrun Westrun (west) and Alverston Court Westrun Westrun (east) and Terrington Drive Westrun Westrun (west) and Terrington Drive Westrun Westwood Drive and Meadowbrook Drive Southwestbound on Westwood Drive Wetherburn and Downall Green Wetherburn Windcliffe Drive and Breezeview Drive Northbound on Breezeview Drive Windcliffe Drive at Ries Bend Road Westbound on Windcliffe Drive Windcliffe Drive and Sunrise Boulevard Northbound on Sunrise Boulevard Windmill and Dutch Mill (north/south corners of Windmill) Windmill Windsor Mill (NE corner) at Monroe Mill Westbound Windsor Mill Windy Acres Estates and Reinke Windy Acres Estates Woodruff Drive and Claymont Drive Northeastbound on Woodruff Drive Woodruff Drive and Meadowbrook Drive Southwestbound on Woodruff Drive  
(Code 1973, § 14-355; Ord. No. 2096, § 1, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 567, 10-24-66; Ord. No. 573, §§ 1, 2, 11-14-66; Ord. No. 766, §§ 1-4, 6-22-70; Ord. No. 767, §§ 1-4, 6-22-70; Ord. No. 852, §§ 1, 2, 10-25-71; Ord. No. 917, §§ 1, 2, 1-10-72; Ord. No. 935, §§ 1, 2, 3-13-72; Ord. No. 952, §§ 1, 2, 6-5-72; Ord. No. 989, §§ 1, 2, 9-11-72; Ord. No. 1077, § 2, 10-29-73; Ord. No. 1124, § 2, 6-10-74; Ord. No. 1127, § 2, 6-24-74; Ord. No. 1153, § 2, 9-23-74; Ord. No. 1157, § 2, 11-25-74; Ord. No. 1159, § 2, 12-9-74; Ord. No. 1170, §§ 1, 2, 1-27-75; Ord. No. 1182, §§ 1-3, 4-28-75; Ord. No. 1183, § 1, 4-28-75; Ord. No. 1214, § 1, 8-25-75; Ord. No. 1311, § 1, 3-14-77; Ord. No. 1314, § 1, 3-28-77; Ord. No. 1334, § 2, 7-11-77; Ord. No. 1336, § 1, 7-11-77; Ord. No. 1354, § 2, 10-10-77; Ord. No. 1622, § I, 3-28-83; Ord. No. 1771, § I, 9-23-85; Ord. No. 1775, § I, 10-14-85; Ord. No. 1816, § I, 6-9-86; Ord. No. 1853, § I, 10-27-86; Ord. No. 1854, § I, 10-27-86; Ord. No. 1867, § I, 1-12-87; Ord. No. 1896, § I, 6-8-87; Ord. No. 1922, § I, 11-23-87; Ord. No. 1947, § I, 4-11-88; Ord. No. 1952, § I, 5-23-88; Ord. No. 1957, § I, 6-13-88; Ord. No. 1974, § 1, 10-24-88; Ord. No. 1998, § 1, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 2018, § 1, 7-10-89; Ord. No. 2029, § 1, 8-28-89; Ord. No. 2054, § 1, 1-8-90; Ord. No. 2080, § 1, 4-23-90; Ord. No. 2109, § 1, 7-23-90; Ord. No. 2124, § 1, 8-27-90; Ord. No. 2136, § 1, 11-12-90; Ord. No. 2143, § 1, 12-10-90; Ord. No. 2145, § 1, 12-10-90; Ord. No. 2158, § 1, 4-8-91; Ord. No. 2184, § 1, 6-24-91; Ord. No. 2188, § 1, 7-8-91; Ord. No. 2194, § 1, 8-12-91; Ord. No. 2223, § 1, 12-9-91; Ord. No. 2247, § 1, 4-27-92; Ord. No. 2291, § 1, 1-25-93; Ord. No. 2376, § 1, 4-25-94; Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 8-22-94; Ord. No. 2441, § 1, 4-24-95; Ord. No. 2445, § 1, 6-12-95; Ord. No. 2449, § 1, 6-26-95; Ord. No. 2450, § 1, 6-26-95; Ord. No. 2480, § 1, 11-13-95; Ord. No. 2517, § 1, 4-22-96; Ord. No. 2532, § 1, 7-22-96; Ord. No. 2580, § 1, 3-10-97; Ord. No. 2596, § 1, 4-28-97; Ord. No. 2599, § 1, 5-12-97; Ord. No. 2639, § 1, 10-13-97; Ord. No. 2691, § 1, 7-27-98; Ord. No. 99-12, § 1, 2-22-99; Ord. No. 99-24, § 1, 5-24-99; Ord. No. 99-44, § 1, 9-27-99; Ord. No. 99-50, § 2, 10-11-99; Ord. No. 01-72, § 1, 11-26-01; Ord. No. 01-76, § 1, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 02-04, § 1, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 02-07, § 1, 1-28-02; Ord. No. 02-25, § 1, 5-21-02; Ord. No. 02-38, § 1, 7-23-02; Ord. No. 02-39, § 1, 7-23-02; Ord. No. 02-46, § 1, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 09-05, § 1, 2-9-09; Ord. No. 10-17, § 1, 6-21-10; Ord. No. 14-01, § 2, 1-13-14; Ord. No. 16-13, § 1, 4-25-16; Ord. No. 17-23, § 1, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 15-481. - Schedule F-School stops. 
    In accordance with the provisions of section 15-231 and when proper signs are placed facing traffic, every driver of a vehicle facing such sign shall bring his vehicle to a complete stop and yield the right-of-way to all children and other persons crossing at the locations listed in this schedule: 
Location 
(At the time of codification, there were 
no entries for this schedule.) 
(Code 1973, § 14-356) 
Sec. 15-482. - Schedule G-Parking prohibited at all times. 
    In accordance with the provisions of section 15-268 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts thereof described in this schedule: 
Street or Part Thereof Where Parking Prohibited 
Andrews Park Way, both sides along its entire length from Seven Trails Drive to Ballpark Drive 
Applegate Lane, both sides, from Birchwood Drive to a point 300 feet west of Birchwood 
Ballpark Drive, both sides along its entire length. 
Ballwin Commons Drive north side from Ramsey Lane intersection to Solon Drive intersection, south side from Old Ballwin Road Intersection to Coachgate Lane intersection 
Barker Lane, either side, from Ries Road to 139 Barker Lane 
Baxter Road (east side) between a point 185 feet south of Hill Trail to the intersection of Baxter Road and Hill Trail 
Birchwood Drive, both sides, between Applegate Lane and Manchester Road 
Brass Lamp on north side of street from 411 Brass Lamp west to Morewood Court 
Brass Lamp on north side of street from 423 to 427 Brass Lamp 
Brass Lamp Drive on south side of street between Morewood Drive and Brass Lamp Court 
Burtonwood, between no parking signs placed on the west side of the street in the vicinity of and opposite of 110 Burtonwood 
Claymont east from Northmoor to Baxter on both sides of Claymont 
Coronet Drive, any side, from its intersection at Hillsdale for a distance of 150 feet 
Country Club north from Briarwyck to Clayton on both sides of Country Club 
Crestland Drive, both sides, from Huntleigh Drive, southwestwardly and southwardly for a distance of 650 feet following the curvature of the right-of-way for Crestland Drive, and the south side of Crestland Drive from Huntleigh Drive to Sunset Drive 
Dennison Drive, on its south side from its intersection with New Ballwin Road, and on the east side to its northern intersection with Nancy Place 
Dennison Drive, North side from its intersection with Nancy Place to 130 feet west of intersection 
Down Hill Drive, both sides, from 106 feet to 232 feet east of its intersection with Twigwood Drive 
Echo Hill Drive, west side, at its intersection with Twigwood Drive to 34 feet north of the intersection 
Essen Lane, both sides, from Ries Road to Woerther Lane 
Fox Village, on its southwest side beginning at 325 Fox Village and ending at the corner of Fox Village and Westglen Village 
Glenmeadow on north side of street from Ironwood east approximately 25 feet from the intersection with Ironwood 
Glenmeadow on north side of street from Manorcrest east to Henry 
Glenmeadow on south side of street from Ironwood west approximately 25 feet from the intersection with Ironwood 
Glenmeadow on west of Henry approximately 25 feet on south side of street from the intersection with Henry 
Glenmeadow west of Hillbrook on both sides of Glenmeadow for a distance of approximately 25 feet from the intersection with Hillbrook 
Graywood on east side of street from 488 Graywood to Spring Meadows 
Henry Road on both sides, between Kingridge and Spring Meadows 
Highland Ridge Drive, both sides, at its intersection with Clayton Road and for 107 feet south of the intersection 
Hillsdale Drive, east and south sides, from Manchester Road to Crestland Drive 
Holloway Road, both sides, from Manchester Road to city limits 
Holloway Spur, west side along its entire length 
Jefferson Avenue, both sides along its entire length, except adjacent to Ballwin Elementary School where a parking lane is designated 
Kehrs Mill Road, both sides along its entire length 
Kehrs Mill Road from Holloway to Seven Trails Drive, both sides 
Leslie Lane, Change from "east and north sides" to "West and South sides" 
Leslie Lane, east and north sides 
Lock Drive, east or south side, along its entire length from Manchester Road 
Maple Lane both sides 150 feet from entrance at Manchester Road 
Meadowbrook Country Club Estates Drive and Meadowbrook Country Club Way within 50 feet of the installed traffic islands 
Meadowbrook Country Club Estates Drive along the western curb from the tennis court complex to the entrance of the Villas at Meadowbrook 
Milldale Drive from Highway 141 to Green Lantern Lane-Both sides Eastbound and Westbound lanes 
Mimosa on the east side of the street between Manchester Road and Portsdown 
Nancy Place, on its east side from its southern intersection with Dennison Road and on its south side to its intersection with Old Ballwin Road 
New Ballwin Road, both sides, from Manchester Road to city limits 
Oakmont Farm Drive on east side from address 244 to entrance of Oakbriar Farm Drive 
Old Ballwin Road, both sides, from Manchester Road to New Ballwin Road 
Orchard Avenue, both sides, from Kehrs Mill Road to Holloway Road 
Outdoor Recreational Complex, (North Pointe) no parking in designated yellow striped curbs at all times 
Park Drive, both sides, from the intersection of Andrews Park Way to the western parking lot entrance of 300 Park Drive 
Park Drive on the north side from Holloway Road east to the tennis court parking lot 
Pleasant Grove, east side, from Kehrs Mill Road to Renehale Drive 
Pleasant Grove, west side, from Kehrs Mill Road to a point 142 feet north of Kehrs Mill Road 
Portsdown, south side, between its intersections with Burtonwood Drive and Cumberland Drive 
Quail Village, on its southeast side beginning at the corner of Quail Village at Fox Village and ending in front of 306 Quail Village 
Ramsey Lane, both sides, from Manchester Road to Ries Road 
Ries Road, both sides, from Manchester Road to city limits 
Ries Bend Road both sides from Southern Ries Road entrance to Northern Ries Road entrance 
Rustic Valley Drive from New Ballwin Road eastwardly to Walnut Point Court on both sides of Rustic Valley 
Seawind Drive, north side, from Ramsey Lane to Old Ballwin Road 
Seven Trails Drive, both sides from Valley Trails Drive to Manchester Road 
Shady Meadows, both sides, from Oakleigh Woods to Baxter Road 
Solon Drive, Change from "east and north sides" to "East and South sides" 
Solon Drive, east and north sides 
Spring Meadows on south side of street from Graywood to Henry 
Spring Meadows Drive on the western side from a point 65 feet south of the southernmost chicane island to a point 40 feet north of the northernmost chicane island 
Spring Meadows Drive on the eastern side from a point 40 feet south of the southernmost chicane island to a point 60 feet north of the northernmost chicane island 
Spring Meadows Drive on the southeastern side thereof from a point 150 feet northeast of the centerline of Sunstone Drive to a point 158 feet southwest of the centerline of Sunstone Drive 
Spring Meadows Drive on the northwestern side thereof from a point 127 feet northeast of the centerline of Sunstone Drive to a point 153 feet southwest of the centerline of Sunstone Drive 
Spring Oaks Drive southwest side 185 feet from entrance at Holloway Road 
Steamboat Lane, both sides, from Manchester Road to Kehrs Mill Road 
Stoddard's Mill Drive, north side, from Holloway Road to Sprague's Mill Court 
Twigwood Drive on the south side thereof from New Ballwin Road to Turfwood Drive 
Vlasis Drive both sides 350 feet from entrance at Manchester Road 
W. Orchard Ave., both sides, from Ballpark Drive to Holloway Road 
West Skyline Drive, east side 
Westglen Village Drive (south intersection) from New Ballwin Road westward to Castle Pines Court on both sides of Westglen Village Drive 
Westglen Village Drive along two traffic-calming areas with Castle Pines Subdivision (generally lots 451-460 and lots 468-476 respectively) 
Windy Acres Estates Drive East side 130 feet from entrance at Reinke Road 
Woerther Lane, both sides, from Essen Lane to Jefferson Avenue 
Woodrun Drive, north side, from its intersection with New Ballwin Road to 211 feet west of the intersection 
Woodrun Drive, south side, from its intersection with New Ballwin Road to 83 feet west of the intersection 
Woodside Trails Drive, on the entire east side of the street to the cul-de-sac at the end of the road, both sides from the intersection with New Ballwin to 375 ft from that intersection. 
(Code 1973, § 14-357; Ord. No. 2123, § 1, 8-27-90; Ord. No. 2480, § 2, 11-13-95; Ord. No. 2510, § 1, 3-25-96; Ord. No. 2518, § 1, 4-22-96; Ord. No. 2565, § 1, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2619, § 1, 7-28-97; Ord. No. 2646, § 2, 10-27-97; Ord. No. 2676, § 1, 4-13-98; Ord. No. 99-11, § 1, 2-22-99; Ord. No. 00-32, § 1, 6-26-00; Ord. No. 00-51, § 1, 9-25-00; Ord. No. 00-58, § 1, 11-13-00; Ord. No. 00-61, § 1, 11-27-00; Ord. No. 01-77, § 1, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 02-08, § 1, 1-28-02; Ord. No. 03-03, § 1, 1-27-03; Ord. No. 03-42, § 1, 8-25-03; Ord. No. 03-44, § 1, 8-25-03; Ord. No. 03-52, § 1, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 07-42, § 1, 12-10-07; Ord. No. 13-39, § 1, 10-14-13; Ord. No. 14-01, § 2, 1-13-14; Ord. No. 16-14, § 1, 5-9-16; Ord. No. 17-23, § 2, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 15-483. - Schedule H-Limited parking. 
    In accordance with the provisions of section 15-275 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle during the times or for a longer period than indicated upon any of the streets or parts thereof described in this schedule: 
Streets or Parts Thereof Where Parking is Regulated 
Clayheath Court, on its west side beginning at Clayton Road and ending at 447 Clayheath Court, no parking between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. 
Clayton Ridge Drive, on its north and south sides beginning at Kehrs Mill and ending at Clayheath Court, no parking at all times. 
Country Club north from Kenilworth to Briarwyck on both sides of Country Club, no parking between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., except Saturdays and Sundays. 
Cypress Trace Drive, no parking between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12 p.m. on days in which the Rockwood school district is in session. 
Cypress Trace Court, no parking between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. on days in which the Rockwood school district is in session. 
Dennison Drive on Saturday from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m., and Sunday from 7:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. 
Eagles Chase Court, no parking between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12 p.m. on days in which the Rockwood school district is in session. 
Eagles Glen Court, no parking between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12 p.m. on days in which the Rockwood school district is in session. 
Fairway Lake Court, no parking between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12 p.m. on days in which the Rockwood school district is in session. 
Fairwood Forest Court, no parking between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12 p.m. on days in which the Rockwood school district is in session. 
Graywood on west side of street from 489 to 495 Graywood, no parking between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
Hillsdale Drive, east and south side, from Manchester Road to West Skyline Drive, west side of Hillsdale Drive 300 feet north of Manchester Road. 
Hollybend Drive cul-de-sac circle between the driveways of 1009 and 1010 Hollybend Drive, no parking on trash pick-up days from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Oakmont Farm Drive, no parking between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on School days. Southwest side from address 231 to address 251, northeast side from address 244 to address 256 
West Par Drive, no parking between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12 p.m. on days in which the Rockwood school district is in session. 
(Code 1973, § 14-358; Ord. No. 2218, § 1, 11-25-91; Ord. No. 2300, § 1, 3-8-93; Ord. No. 2480, § 3, 11-13-95; Ord. No. 2565, § 2, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2626, § 1, 8-11-97; Ord. No. 2627, § 1, 8-11-97; Ord. No. 2646, § 1, 10-27-97; Ord. No. 01-18, § 1, 3-12-01; Ord. No. 05-29, § 1, 6-13-05; Ord. No. 12-43, § 1, 11-26-12; Ord. No. 17-23, § 3, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 15-484. - Schedule I-One-way streets. 
    In accordance with the provisions of section 15-323 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers shall move only in the direction indicated upon any of the streets or parts thereof described in this schedule: 
Street or Part Thereof Where Direction of Movement Is Regulated Regulations (Reserved)  
(Code 1973, § 14-359; Ord. No. 2265, § II, 8-24-92; Ord. No. 02-09, § 1, 1-28-02) 
Sec. 15-485. - Schedule J-Vehicles prohibited. 
    Except as otherwise posted, in accordance with the provisions of section 15-132 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate a vehicle or motor vehicle, the gross weight of which, including the load, exceeds the weight indicated upon any of the streets or parts thereof described in this schedule: 
Street or Part Thereof Where Vehicle Weight Is Restricted Gross Weight of Vehicle Not to Exceed Any public bridge on Old Ballwin Road or Ries Road 20 tons single unit Buckhurst Dr 20 tons single unit/56.0 tons all others Change Forest Leaf Parkway to Forest Leaf Drive 20 tons single unit/56.0 tons all others Forest Leaf Parkway north of its intersection with Oakleigh Woods Drive 20 tons single unit/56.0 tons all others Hillsdale Dr 20 tons Ramsey Lane 20 tons Richland Meadows Drive 20 tons single unit/56.0 tons all others Smith Drive 20 tons  
(Code 1973, § 14-360; Ord. No. 2398, § 1, 8-8-94; Ord. No. 07-28, § 1, 10-8-07; Ord. No. 17-23, § 4, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 15-486. - Schedule K-Commercial vehicles prohibited. 
    In accordance with the provisions of section 15-133 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate a commercial vehicle upon the streets or parts thereof described in this schedule: 
Street or Part Thereof Upon Which Commercial Vehicles Prohibited 
Articulated axle (tractor-trailer) vehicles on Jefferson between Ballpark Drive and Ries Road. 
Claymont Drive from Clayton Road to Holloway Road within the city limits 
Hillsdale Drive from Manchester Road north and east to Crestland Drive 
Holloway Road from Manchester Road north to the city limits 
Kehrs Mill Road from Manchester Road north to the city limits 
Lark Hill Lane from Manchester Road south to Brookside Lane 
Mimosa Drive from Manchester Road north to Burtonwood 
New Ballwin Road from Manchester Road south to the city limits 
Old Ballwin Road from Manchester Road south to New Ballwin Road 
Parker Drive from Old Ballwin Road southwest to New Ballwin Road 
Ramsey Lane from Manchester Road south and east to Ries Road 
Ries Road from Manchester Road south to the city limits 
Rustic Valley from new Ballwin Road to Twigwood 
St. Joseph Lane from Old Ballwin Road east to Ramsey Lane 
Seven Trails Drive from Manchester Road north and west to Holloway Road 
Vlasis Drive entire length after 350 feet north of Manchester Road entrance 
West Glen Village Drive along entire length 
West Run Drive along entire length 
West Skyline from Crestland Drive north to Kehrs Mill Road 
(Code 1973, § 14-361; Ord. No. 2322, § 1, 6-28-93; Ord. No. 2394, § 1, 7-25-94; Ord. No. 2399, § 1, 8-8-95; Ord. No. 03-13, § 1, 2-10-03; Ord. No. 17-23, § 5, 9-11-17) 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, ch. 14. 
Sec. 15-487. - Schedule L-Yield intersections. 
    In accordance with the provisions of sections 15-233 and 15-234 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles at the intersections listed in this schedule shall yield the right-of-way as specified in this schedule: 
Intersection Traffic on Street Listed Below Shall Yield Amber Jack Drive and Treasure Cove Amber Jack Drive Aspen Village Drive and Forest Village Drive Eastbound on Forest Village Drive Baxter Road and Holloway Road Northbound on Baxter Road Breezeview Drive and Portwind Place Southbound on Portwind Place Breezewood Drive and Wildwood Parkway Northbound on Breezewood Drive Burlington Mill Drive and Windsor Mill Drive Southbound on Burlington Mill Drive Claymont Drive and Greenbriar Lane Greenbriar Lane Crestland Drive and Huntleigh Drive Northwestbound on Huntleigh Drive Crestland Drive and Sunset Drive Sunset Drive Cumberland Park Lane and Mimosa Lane Eastbound on Cumberland Park Lane Essex Mill Drive and Windsor Mill Drive Essex Mill Drive Graywood Drive and Spring Meadows Drive Graywood Dr. and Spring Meadows Dr. (4-way yield) Gardenway and Green Lantern Mansion Hill (north and south) Greenbriar Lane and Del Ray Circle Del Ray Circle Greenbriar Lane and Westwood Drive Westwood Drive Howard Drive Southwestbound on Howard Drive to westbound Ramsey Lane Kent Court and Highview Drive Westbound on Kent Court Leslie Lane Southbound on Leslie Lane at Ballwin Commons Drive Lindell Drive and Sunset Drive Northwestbound on Lindell Drive Mansion Hill Drive, Gardenway Drive, and Green Lantern Lane Mansion Hill Drive Mark Wesley and Pine Hollow Mark Wesley Mockingbird Lane and Lark Hill Lane Westbound on Mockingbird Lane Mockingbird Lane and Robin Hill Lane Eastbound on Mockingbird Lane New Ballwin and Big Bend Northbound on New Ballwin turning to east Big Bend New Ballwin and Big Bend Southbound on New Ballwin Newport Lane and Nantucket Drive Southwestbound on Newport Lane Newport and Providence Eastbound on Newport Olde Towne Plaza and Manchester Rd. unsignalized exit Olde Towne Plaza Parkway Drive and Highview Drive Westbound on Parkway Drive Ramsey Lane and Ries Road Northbound on Ries Road Renehale Drive and Monroe Mill Drive Eastbound on Renehale Drive Royal Oaks Drive and Portwind Place Northeastbound on Royal Oaks Drive Ruthwood and Clayworth Ruthwood Spragues Mill Drive and Stoddards Mill Drive Northbound Spragues Mill Drive Spring Leigh and Spring Oak Southbound on Spring Leigh St. Joseph Drive and Solon Drive Eastbound on St. Joseph Drive Shady Meadows Oakleigh Woods, north bound and south bound Stoddards Mill Drive and Spooners Mill Drive Northeastbound on Spooners Mill Drive Steepleton Court and Richland Meadows Drive Northbound and southbound on Steepleton Court Streiff Lane and Sunset Drive Northwestbound on Streiff Drive Sudbury Lane and Norwood Circle Norwood Circle Sunset Drive Rauscher Road Sunset Drive Ganahl Road Victor Court and Parker Drive Northbound on Victor Court Village Creek Drive and West Glen Village Drive Eastbound and westbound on Village Creek Drive Warwick and Providence Eastbound on Warwick Westwood Drive and Sudbury Lane Sudbury Lane Windy Acres Estates and Windy Acres Estates Windy Acres Estates and Windy Acres Estates Woerther Avenue and Rasch Court Rasch Court  
(Code 1973, § 14-362; Ord. No. 2144, § 1, 12-10-90; Ord. No. 2195, § 1, 8-12-91; Ord. No. 2480, § 4, 11-13-95; Ord. No. 2500, § 1, 2-12-96; Ord. No. 2510, § 2, 3-25-96; Ord. No. 99-50, § 3, 10-11-99; Ord. No. 02-07, § 2, 1-28-02; Ord. No. 02-14, § 1, 2-25-02; Ord. No. 02-42, § 1, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 05-24, § 1, 5-9-05; Ord. No. 17-23, § 6, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 15-488. - Schedule M-Traffic control signals. 
    In accordance with the provisions of section 5-341 et seq., and when signals are erected, installed and in operation, giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles at the intersections and locations listed in this schedule shall be governed and controlled by such traffic signals or devices: 
Traffic Signals 
Baxter Road and Holloway Road 
Big Bend and Ries Road 
Clayton Road and Kehrs Mill Road 
Dutch Mill at Woods Mill 
Henry at Glenmeadow (school crosswalk light) 
Manchester Road and Holloway Road 
Manchester Road and Maple Lane 
Manchester Road and New Ballwin Road 
Manchester Road 1,945 feet west of the northern prolongation of the centerline of New Ballwin Road 
Manchester Road and Ries Road 
New Ballwin Road, Old Ballwin Road and Reinke Road 
New Ballwin Road and Big Bend 
Milldale Drive and Woods Mill 
Clayworth Drive and Woods Mill 
Henry Avenue and Clayton Road 
Holloway Road and Baxter Road 
Manchester Road and Ballpark Drive 
(Code 1973, § 14-363; Ord. No. 2122, § 1, 8-27-90; Ord. No. 2137, § 1, 11-12-90; Ord. No. 2146, § 1, 12-10-90; Ord. No. 2480, § 5, 11-13-95; Ord. No. 99-50, § 4, 10-11-99; Ord. No. 14-01, § 2, 1-13-14; Ord. No. 17-23, § 7, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 15-489. - Schedule N-20 miles per hour speed limit in certain zones. 
    In accordance with the provisions of section 15-188, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, the maximum speed limit on the streets, roads, highways or portions thereof listed in this schedule shall be 20 miles per hour: 
Alverston Court along its entire length and Richland Meadows Drive from Alverston Court to its termination at Kieffer Creek Road. 
Country Club Drive from a location 50 feet south of Clayton Road to the intersection of Country Club Drive and Turnbury. 
Crestland Drive from the intersection of the prolongation of the centerline of Sunset Drive northwardly to a point 350 feet south of the intersection of the prolongation of the centerline of Huntleigh Drive with Crestland Drive 
Jefferson Road along its entire length. 
Richland Meadows Drive from Alverston Court to its termination at Kieffer Creek Road. (This shall expire on the one year anniversary of its passage [11-9-09] unless extended by subsequent legislation.) 
(Code 1973, § 14-364; Ord. No. 2328, § 2, 7-26-93; Ord. No. 99-23, § 3, 5-24-99; Ord. No. 00-27, § 2, 6-12-00; Ord. No. 08-36, §§ 1-3, 11-10-08; Ord. No. 09-41, §§ 1, 2, 11-9-09; Ord. No. 11-04, § 1, 1-24-11; Ord. No. 11-07, § 1, 2-14-11) 
Sec. 15-490. - Schedule O-Speed limit in parks and recreational areas. 
    In accordance with provisions of section 15-189, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, the maximum speed limit on the streets, roads, highways, or portions thereof listed in this schedule shall be 15 miles per hour: 
Route Portion or Limits 
of Route Andrews Park Way From Seven Trails Drive to Ballpark Park Drive From Holloway to Andrews Park Way  
(Code 1973, § 14-365; Ord. No. 14-01, § 2, 1-13-14) 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 18. 
Sec. 15-491. - Schedule P-Speed limit on collector streets. 
    In accordance with section 15-183, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, the maximum speed limit on the streets, roads, highways or portions thereof listed in this schedule shall be 35 miles per hour: 
Route Portion or Limits 
of Route Baxter Road From its intersection with the eastern city limits to intersection with Holloway Road, and northbound lane of Baxter Road to its intersection with north city limit Henry Road From its intersection with Clayton Road to its intersection with the southern city limit at approximately Chancellor Heights.  
(Code 1973, § 14-366; Ord. No. 2480, § 6, 11-13-95) 
Sec. 15-492. - Schedule R-Speed limit of 25 miles per hour. 
    In accordance with section 15-190, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, the maximum speed limit on the streets, roads, highways or portions thereof listed in this schedule shall be 25 miles per hour: 
Route Portion or Limits 
of Route Old Ballwin Road Along its entire route  
(Code 1973, § 14-153; Ord. No. 2121, § 1, 8-27-90; Ord. No. 2328, § 3, 7-26-93; Ord. No. 14-01, § 2, 1-13-14) 
Sec. 15-493. - Schedule V-Fire lanes. 
    In accordance with section 15-262 and when signs are erected or the pavement is marked giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, park or leave a vehicle at any time in the following designated fire lanes: 
Fire Lane Schedule 
14650 Manchester Road 
14660-14666 Manchester Road 
14751-14755 Manchester Road 
14766 Manchester Road 
14780 Manchester Road 
14802-14916 Manchester Road 
15025 Manchester Road 
15031 Manchester Road 
15101 Manchester Road 
15246-15266 Manchester Road 
15287-15355 Manchester Road 
15401 Manchester Road 
15425 Manchester Road 
300 Park Drive 
333 Holloway Road 
335 Holloway Road 
930 Kehrs Mill Road 
15415 Clayton Road 
15421 Clayton Road 
15407-15495 Clayton Road 
235 New Ballwin Road 
248 New Ballwin Road 
314 New Ballwin Road 
908 Crestland Drive 
2511 Kehrs Mill Road 
14400-14446 Clayton Road 
785 Henry Road 
(Code 1973, § 14-371; Ord. No. 02-23, § 1, 4-22-02; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 4-22-13) 
Sec. 15-494. - Schedule W-Steady red alone right turn prohibited. 
    In accordance with section 15-345(3)(b), when signs have been erected giving notice, no person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red light alone at the following locations: 
Traffic Intersection 
New Ballwin Road, Old Ballwin Road and Reinke Road 
(Code 1973, § 14-372) 
Sec. 15-495. - Schedule X-Pedestrian crosswalk. 
    In accordance with section 15-191, pedestrian crosswalk signs shall be erected at the following locations: 
Pedestrian crosswalk signs 
343 Village Creek Drive 
405 Country Club at Claymont Elementary 
710 Fox Briar Lane 
Andrews Park Way at Park Drive 
On Claymont at Algonquin 
On Claymont at Country Club 
Forest Leaf Drive at Oakleigh Woods Drive 
Glenmeadow at Hillbrook 
Henry at Clayworth 
Henry at Dutch Mill 
Henry at Glenmeadow 
Holloway and Clear Meadows 
Kehrs Mill Road at East Skyline Drive 
Kehrs Mill Road at Sunset Drive 
Old Ballwin Road at Ballwin Commons Circle 
Park Drive at Police Station (Tennis court and parking lot exit) 
Ramsey Lane at Ballwin Commons Drive 
Reinke Road at Aspen Village Drive 
Richland Meadows Drive at Steepleton Court 
Seven Trails Drive at Andrews Park Way 
Seven Trails Drive at Vlasis Park lower pond 
Twigwood Drive at Down Hill Drive 
Westglen Village Drive at Fox Village Court 
(Ord. No. 2480, § 7, 11-13-95; Ord. No. 14-01, § 2, 1-13-14; Ord. No. 17-23, § 8, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 15-496. - Schedule Z-School zones on streets and highways designated by flashing lights. 
    In accordance with section 15-188, when signs have been erected giving notice, the speed limit in areas having flashing lights operating between 7:40 a.m. and 8:10 a.m. and 2:40 p.m. and 3:10 p.m. shall be reduced to 30 miles per hour, when such lights are flashing. 
Street Area 
    Along Clayton Road between 15707 Clayton Road and 15605 Clayton Road. 
(Ord. No. 99-23, § 2, 5-24-99) 
Sec. 15-497. - Schedule AA-Special enforcement areas. 
(a)  A special enforcement area should be defined as any public or private street or roadway posted as a special enforcement area which are included in Schedule AA contained in subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  That the municipal judge is hereby directed by the Board of Aldermen of the City of Ballwin to determine the fine of any person found guilty of a speeding violation in a special enforcement area in the City of Ballwin, at a rate double the standard fine for such speeding violation. 
(c)  That signs may be posted in any area as needed, to be reviewed at least annually by the board of aldermen. The failure for such signs to be posted; however, shall not act to reduce the affect of any otherwise qualified special enforcement area. 
(d)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, the special enforcement areas on the streets, roads, highways or portions thereof listed in this Schedule AA shall be enforceable as a double fine zone: 
ROUTE PORTION OR LIMITS OF ROUTE Aspen Village Drive From Reinke Road to Westglen Village Drive Bitterfield Drive From Henry to Woods Mill Road Claymont Drive From Clayton Road to Baxter Road Clayworth Drive From Henry Road to Woods Mill Road Clear Meadows Drive From Holloway Road to Baxter Road Cleta Drive From Ries Road to Asilomar Court Dutchmill Drive From eastern city limits to Henry Road Glen Meadow Drive From Henry Road to Brightspur Lane Hillsdale Drive From Manchester Road to West Skyline Drive Hill Trail Drive From Wildwood Pkwy to Baxter Road New Ballwin Road From Twigwood to Manchester Road Old Ballwin Road From Manchester Road to New Ballwin Road Parker Drive From New Ballwin Road to Old Ballwin Road Ramsey From Manchester Road to Ries Road Reinke From New Ballwin Road to Kylemore Drive Richland Meadows From West Run Road to Kiefer Creek Road Rustic Valley From New Ballwin Road to Twigwood Drive Twigwood From New Ballwin Road to Ries Road Westglen Village Length of from both n/s access of New Ballwin Wildwood Parkway From Baxter Road to Clayton Road Windcliffe Drive From Ries Bend to Portwind  
(Ord. No. 08-08, §§ 1-4, 3-10-08; Ord. No. 08-10, 5-12-08; Ord. No. 14-01, § 2, 1-13-14) 
Chapter 16 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The city, in Ord. No. 1416, §§ 1, 2, adopted on November 27, 1978, elected to have all violations of city ordinances heard and determined by a municipal judge presiding over a municipal division of the St. Louis County Circuit Court on and after Jan. 1, 1979, and declined to accept the option extended under the provisions of H.B. 1634 passed by the 69th General Assembly, which allowed such violations to be heard and adjudicated by an associate circuit judge of St. Louis County. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Courts and attorneys, RSMo Chs. 98 and 476 et seq.; schedule of court reform and revision, RSMo 476.016; municipal courts, RSMo Ch. 479; juries, RSMo Ch. 494. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Jurisdiction. 
    Violations of ordinances of the city shall be tried before the Ballwin municipal division of the St. Louis County circuit court. 
(Code 1973, § 15-1) 
Sec. 16-2. - Appearance required when summoned. 
    No person who has been lawfully summoned to appear in the Ballwin municipal division of the county circuit court to answer lawful charges for violations of any of the ordinances of the city shall fail to appear on the day and at the hour to which such person has been summoned. 
(Code 1973, § 15-2) 
Sec. 16-3. - Court costs. 
(a)  (1)  There shall be assessed against persons who are found guilty of violating the provisions of any city ordinance the sum of $12.00 as basic court costs. 
(2)  There shall be assessed against persons requesting a continuation of a court date the sum of $10.00. 
(b)  There shall be assessed and collected from each person found guilty of violating the provisions of any city ordinance such additional witness fees, service costs and jail costs as may be established by any ordinance of the city, including the sum of $50.00 for each warrant issued for the arrest of such person. 
(c)  There shall be assessed and collected from each person found guilty of a moving traffic violation of the ordinances of the city, an additional cost of $2.00 to be used for the training of police officers. 
(d)  There shall be assessed and collected from each person requiring a service of warrant for arrest a sum of $20.00 for each item to be served. In addition to such charge, a fee shall be collected and received for each mile actually traveled in serving any summons, writ, subpoena, warrant, or other order of court, the rate prescribed by the Internal Revenue Service for all allowable expenses for motor vehicle use expressed as an amount per mile, provided that such mileage shall not be charged for more than one subpoena or summons or other writ served in the same cause on the same trip. At the time of passage of Ordinance No. 2677, the mileage cost is $0.28.5 cents per mile. 
(e)  There shall be assessed and collected from each person found guilty of violating a traffic ordinance or found guilty of the offenses set forth in chapter 17 of this Code, an additional cost of $2.00 for the development of a biometric identification system, payable to the inmate security fund of the city. 
(f)  The assessments provided in this section shall be made by the judge sitting in the court wherein the case has been heard and shall be collected by the clerk of such court; provided, however, the judge may remit all costs and fees in those cases where the defendant is found by the judge to be indigent and unable to pay. 
(Code 1973, § 15-3; Ord. No. 2228, § 1, 12-9-91; Ord. No. 2553, § 1, 10-28-96; Ord. No. 2561, § 1, 12-16-96; Ord. No. 2624, § 1, 8-11-97; Ord. No. 2677, § 1, 4-13-98; Ord. No. 03-06, § 1, 1-27-03; Ord. No. 06-14, § 1, 2-27-06) 
Sec. 16-4. - Fines, installments allowed. 
    When a fine is assessed for violation of the provisions of an ordinance of the city, it shall be within the discretion of the judge assessing the fine to provide for the payment of the fine on an installment basis under such terms and conditions as the judge may deem appropriate. 
(Code 1973, § 15-4) 
Sec. 16-5. - Additional court costs; training of law enforcement officers. 
    An additional court cost fee of $1.00 is to be collected in each court case, except fish and game violations. No such fee shall be collected in any case when the case for defendant has been dismissed by the court. The additional $1.00 court cost collected in all cases classified in this section by the clerk of the court shall be kept in a separate fund and there shall be a separate accounting of such fund. Such fund may only be used to pay for the training of police officers of this city or for the training of other law enforcement officers employed or appointed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 1, 8-11-97) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, RSMo 590.140. 
Sec. 16-6. - Crime victims compensation. 
    In addition to any fine that may be imposed by the municipal judge, or where the accused has been found guilty but no fine has been assessed, there may be assessed as cost and surcharges, a judgment entered, as follows: 
    A surcharge relating to the crime victims compensation fund in the amount of $7.50, in all cases except any proceeding in the municipal court when the proceeding or defendant has been discharged by the court or when the costs are to be paid by the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-62, § 1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 16-7. - Alcohol-related traffic offenses. 
    In addition to any fine that may be imposed by the municipal judge, or where the accused has been found guilty but no fine has been assessed, there may be assessed as costs and surcharges, and judgments entered as follows: 
    A judgment shall be entered, relating to the spinal cord injury fund, in the amount of $25.00, in all cases when a person is convicted of an intoxication-related offense as defined in Section 577.023 of the Revised Statute of Missouri. The judgment entered and collected under the section shall be transmitted by the city to the director of revenue for the State of Missouri to the credit of the spinal cord injury fund. 
(Ord. No. 01-62, § 1, 10-8-01) 
Sec. 16-8. - Reimbursement of administrative costs incurred in processing bonds for other jurisdictions. 
(a)  When the police department of the City of Ballwin accepts and processes a bond for another jurisdiction, it shall charge the defendant posting such bond the sum of $10.00 which shall be paid at the time the bond is posted. 
(b)  All such fees paid pursuant to subsection (a) above shall be transferred to the director of finance and deposited into the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 07-29, §§ 1, 2, 10-8-07; Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 7-14-08) 
Sec. 16-9. - Disturbing a judicial proceeding. 
(a)  Until December 31, 2016-Disturbing a judicial proceeding. 
(1)  A person commits the crime of disturbing a judicial proceeding if, with purpose to intimidate a judge, attorney, juror, party or witness, and thereby to influence a judicial proceeding, he disrupts or disturbs a judicial proceeding by participating in an assembly and calling aloud, shouting, or holding or displaying a placard or sign containing written or printed matter, concerning the conduct of the judicial proceeding, or the character of a judge, attorney, juror, party or witness engaged in such proceeding, or calling for or demanding any specified action or determination by such judge, attorney, juror, party or witness in connection with such proceeding. 
(b)  Beginning January 1, 2017-Disturbing a judicial proceeding-Penalty. 
(1)  A person commits the offense of disturbing a judicial proceeding if, with the purpose to intimidate a judge, attorney, juror, party or witness and thereby influence a judicial proceeding, he or she disrupts or disturbs a judicial proceeding by participating in an assembly and calling aloud, shouting, or holding or displaying a placard or sign containing written or printed matter, concerning the conduct of the judicial proceeding, or the character of a judge, attorney, juror, party or witness engaged in such proceeding, or calling for or demanding any specified action or determination by such judge, attorney, juror, party, or witness in connection with such proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 15-16, § 1, 3-9-15) 
Secs. 16-10-16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL JUDGE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Municipal judge, RSMo 98.500. 

Sec. 16-21. - Office created. 
    The office of municipal judge is hereby established. 
(Code 1973, § 15-15) 
Sec. 16-22. - Jurisdiction. 
    The municipal judge shall have original jurisdiction to hear and determine all violations against the ordinances of the city and shall preside over the Ballwin municipal division of the county circuit court. 
(Code 1973, § 15-16) 
Sec. 16-23. - Appointment. 
    The mayor, with the consent and approval of the majority of the members of the board of aldermen, shall appoint a municipal judge who shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and board. 
(Code 1973, § 15-17; Ord. No. 2108, § 1, 7-23-90; Ord. No. 06-25, § 1, 4-24-06; Ord. No. 09-10, § 1, 3-9-09) 
Sec. 16-24. - Removal. 
    The mayor may, with the consent of a majority of all the members of the board of aldermen, remove from office the municipal judge of the city at will, and the municipal judge may be so removed by a two-thirds vote of all the members of the board of aldermen, independently of the mayor's approval or recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 09-10, § 1, 3-9-09) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-10, § 1, adopted March 9, 2009, repealed the former section 16-24, and enacted a new § 16-24 as set out herein. The former § 16-24 pertained to term and derived from Code 1973, § 15-18; Ord. No. 2108, § 2, 7-23-90. 
Sec. 16-25. - Qualifications for office. 
    In addition to the requirements set forth in section 16-23 and the selection policy as determined by the board of aldermen, no person appointed to hold office shall serve as municipal court judge or provisional municipal court judge unless at the time of appointment such person shall be: 
(1)  A citizen of the United States. 
(2)  Over the age of 21 years and under the age of 70 years, unless such age restrictions are otherwise provided by supreme court rule or state statute. 
(3)  A resident of the state for one year. 
(4)  Licensed to practice law in the state. 
(Code 1973, § 15-19; Ord. No. 2108, § 3, 7-23-90; Ord. No. 2397, § 1, 8-8-94; Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 4-24-06; Ord. No. 11-13, § 1, 4-11-1) 
Sec. 16-26. - Office of judge deemed vacant. 
    Should any person appointed as municipal judge during the term of office: 
(1)  Reach his 70th birthday, except as provided in section 16-25(2). 
(2)  Cease to be a citizen of the United States of America; 
(3)  Cease to be a resident of the state; 
(4)  Cease to be licensed to practice law in the state; or 
(5)  Hold any other elective or appointive office of the city; 
the office shall be deemed vacant and such person shall not be permitted to serve as municipal judge, nor shall any compensation be paid to such person for serving as municipal judge. 
(Code 1973, § 15-20; Ord. No. 2108, § 4, 7-23-90; Ord. No. 2397, § 2, 8-8-94; Ord. No. 11-13, § 1, 4-11-11) 
Sec. 16-27. - Provisional judge-During absence or disqualification. 
    In the event of the absence, illness or disqualification in any way of the municipal judge, the mayor, or person performing the duties of mayor, may designate a provisional municipal judge to serve during such absence, illness or disqualification. 
(Code 1973, § 15-21) 
State Law reference- Absence of judge, procedure, RSMo 479.230. 
Sec. 16-28. - Same-Qualifications. 
    A provisional judge shall have all the qualifications required for election as municipal judge as set forth in section 16-25. 
(Code 1973, § 15-22) 
Sec. 16-29. - Same-Compensation. 
    For any session of the Ballwin Municipal Division of the county circuit court at which he presides, a provisional judge shall be paid 75 percent of compensation established for the municipal judge for that session and the municipal judge shall receive 25 percent of the compensation established for that session. 
(Code 1973, § 15-24; Ord. No. 04-47, § 1, 11-22-04) 
Sec. 16-30. - Office of designated judge deemed vacant. 
    Except for nonresidence in the city, those occurrences which are deemed to cause a vacancy in the office of an elected municipal judge, as set forth in section 16-26, shall also be deemed to cause a vacancy in the office of a judge designated under the provisions of section 16-27; and the person who is deemed to have vacated such office shall not thereafter be permitted to serve as municipal judge, nor shall any compensation be paid to such person for serving as municipal judge. 
(Code 1973, § 15-23) 
Sec. 16-31. - Vacancies in office. 
    Should a vacancy occur in the office of provisional municipal judge, the position shall be filled as set forth in section 16-27. 
(Code 1973, § 15-25) 
Secs. 16-32-16-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COURT CLERK[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 16-51. - Position established. 
    The position of clerk of the Ballwin municipal division of the county circuit court is hereby established. 
(Code 1973, § 15-50) 
Sec. 16-52. - Appointment; term. 
    The clerk of the Ballwin Municipal Division of the county circuit court shall be a full time city employee hired for that position by the city as an at will employee, subject to the personnel rules and regulations of other city employees. 
(Code 1973, § 15-51; Ord. No. 03-12, § 1, 2-10-03) 
Sec. 16-53. - Duties of clerk generally. 
    The clerk of the Ballwin municipal division of the county circuit court shall perform such duties and have such authority as may be prescribed by statute, ordinance and court rule, or as may be otherwise prescribed by the presiding judge of the county circuit court and by the municipal judge. 
(Code 1973, § 15-52) 
Sec. 16-54. - Fines, court costs and fees. 
    The clerk of the Ballwin municipal division of the county circuit court shall collect all fines, costs and fees assessed by the court and, within the first ten days of every month, shall pay to the city treasurer the full amount of all fines, costs and fees collected during the preceding month if not previously paid to the city treasurer. 
(Code 1973, § 15-53) 
Sec. 16-55. - Monthly report. 
    Until modified or otherwise provided by a supreme court rule, the court clerk shall, within the first ten days of every month, make a list of all cases heard or tried before the municipal judge during the preceding month, giving in each case the name of the defendant, the fine imposed, if any, the amount of costs and fees, the names of defendants committed and the cases in which there was an application for trial de novo, respectively. Such list shall be filed forthwith with the city clerk and shall be verified by affidavit of the court clerk or the municipal judge. 
(Code 1973, § 15-54) 
Secs. 16-56-16-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC DEFENDER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Public defenders, RSMo Ch. 600. 

Sec. 16-71. - Position created. 
    The position of public defender of the city is hereby created. 
(Code 1973, § 15-70) 
Sec. 16-72. - Appointment. 
    The public defender shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of a majority of the elected members of the board of aldermen. 
(Code 1973, § 15-71) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to appoint officers, RSMo 79.230. 
Sec. 16-73. - Qualifications. 
    The public defender shall be licensed to practice law in the state and, if possible, a resident of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 15-72) 
Sec. 16-74. - Compensation. 
    The compensation of the public defender shall be determined by the board of aldermen. 
(Code 1973, § 15-73) 
Sec. 16-75. - Duties generally. 
    The duties of the public defender shall be to serve as counsel, when directed by the judge of the municipal court, to represent indigent persons charged with violations of this Code or other ordinances of the city which may be punished by imprisonment, and when such persons demonstrate to the satisfaction of the judge that they are indigent and unable to employ counsel and desire to have counsel appointed to represent them. 
(Code 1973, § 15-74) 
Secs. 16-76-16-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROSECUTING ATTORNEY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-13, § 2, adopted April 11, 2011, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 16-91-16-94, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 2-114-2-117 of the 1973 Code. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Attorney to prosecute violations, RSMo 479.120. 

Sec. 16-91. - Office created. 
    The offices of prosecuting attorney and provisional prosecuting attorney are hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 11-13, § 2, 4-11-11) 
Sec. 16-92. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the city prosecuting attorney to: 
(1)  Prosecute violations of the ordinances of the city. 
(2)  Attend all meetings of the municipal court of the city. 
(3)  Attend to all cases arising in municipal court in which the city may be a party or in any way interested, and in any court of record to which cases may be certified from the municipal court. 
(4)  File an information with the municipal court of the city for each offense charged and brought before such court. 
(5)  Provide a list of three attorneys that meet the qualifications in section 16-95 to serve as interim prosecuting attorney if the prosecuting attorney and provisional prosecuting attorney are unavailable. From this list, an interim prosecuting attorney shall be appointed, utilizing the process adopted in Sec. 1 of Ordinance 11-11. 
(Ord. No. 11-13, § 2, 4-11-11) 
Sec. 16-93. - Appointment. 
    The mayor, with the consent and approval of the majority of the members of the board of aldermen, shall appoint a prosecuting attorney and a provisional prosecuting attorney who shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and board. 
(Ord. No. 11-13, § 2, 4-11-11) 
Sec. 16-94. - Removal. 
    The mayor may, with the consent of a majority of all the members of the board of aldermen, remove from office the prosecuting attorney and provisional prosecuting attorney of the city at will, and the prosecuting attorney and provisional prosecuting attorney may be so removed by a two-thirds vote of all the members of the board of aldermen, independently of the mayor's approval or recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 11-13, § 2, 4-11-11) 
Sec. 16-95. - Qualifications for office. 
    In addition to the requirements set forth in section 16-93 and the selection policy as determined by the board of aldermen, no person appointed to hold office shall serve as prosecuting attorney or provisional prosecuting attorney unless at the time of appointment such person shall be: 
(1)  A citizen of the United States. 
(2)  Over the age of 21 years and under the age of 70 years, unless such age restrictions are otherwise provided by supreme court rule or state statute. 
(3)  A resident of the state for one year. 
(4)  Licensed to practice law in the state. 
(Ord. No. 11-13, § 2, 4-11-11) 
Sec. 16-96. - Office of prosecuting attorney and provisional prosecuting attorney deemed vacant. 
    Should any person appointed as municipal judge during the term of office: 
(1)  Reach his 70th birthday, except as provided in section 16-95(2). 
(2)  Cease to be a citizen of the United States of America; 
(3)  Cease to be a resident of the state; 
(4)  Cease to be licensed to practice law in the state; or 
(5)  Hold any other elective or appointive office of the city; 
the office shall be deemed vacant and such person shall not be permitted to serve as prosecuting attorney or provisional prosecuting attorney, nor shall any compensation be paid to such person for serving as prosecuting attorney or provisional prosecuting attorney. 
(Ord. No. 11-13, § 2, 4-11-11) 
Sec. 16-97. - Provisional prosecuting attorney-During absence or disqualification. 
    In the event of the absence, illness or disqualification in any way of the prosecuting attorney, the provisional prosecuting attorney shall serve during such absence, illness or disqualification. 
(Ord. No. 11-13, § 2, 4-11-11) 
Sec. 16-98. - Compensation. 
    Compensation for the prosecuting attorney and provisional prosecuting attorney shall be established by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11-13, § 2, 4-11-11) 
Chapter 17 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, adopted Feb. 13, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 17, and enacted a new Ch. 17 as set out herein. The former Ch. 17 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1973, §§ 16-1-16-10, 16-23-16-26, 16-37-16-50, 16-53, 16-58-16-66, 16-75, 16-77, 16-89-16-16-94; Ord. No. 2097, § 1, adopted July 7, 1990; Ord. No. 2153, § 1(16-105-16-130), adopted March 11, 1991; Ord. No. 2243, § 1, adopted March 23, 1992; Ord. No. 2290, § 1, adopted Jan. 25, 1993; Ord. No. 2418, § 2, adopted Dec. 12, 1994; Ord. No. 2428, § 1, adopted Feb. 13, 1995; Ord. No. 2567, § 1, adopted Jan. 24, 1997; Ord. No. 2700, § 1, adopted Sept. 28, 1998; Ord. No. 01-43, § 1, adopted June 11, 2001; Ord. No. 01-50, § 1, adopted July 23, 2001; Ord. No. 02-13, §§ 2, 4, adopted Feb. 11, 2002; Ord. No. 03-07, § 2, adopted Jan. 27, 2003; Ord. No. 03-32, § 1, adopted June 23, 2003; Ord. No. 05-01, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 10, 2005; Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, adopted June 13, 2005; Ord. No. 05-42, § 2, adopted Sept. 26, 2005; Ord. No. 06-05, § 1, adopted Jan 23, 2006; Ord. No. 06-59, § 1, adopted Oct. 9, 2006; Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, adopted Jan. 22, 2007; Ord. No. 08-41, § 1, adopted Dec. 8, 2008; Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2010; Ord. No. 11-48, § 1, adopted Oct. 10, 2011; Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, adopted March 11, 2013; Ord. No. 14-01, §§ 3, 4, adopted Jan. 13, 2014; Ord. No. 14-39, §§ 2, 3, adopted Dec. 8, 2014; and Ord. No. 15-14, § 1, adopted Feb. 23, 2015. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, ch. 3. 
State Law reference- Crimes and punishment, RSMo Ch. 556 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Aiding and abetting. 
    Any person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to commit, or aids or abets in the commission of any act declared in this chapter to be in violation of the ordinances of the city, whether individually, or in connection with one or more other persons, or as a principal, agent or accessory, shall be guilty of such offense and every person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly, or willfully induces, causes, coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any provision of this chapter is likewise guilty of such offense, and shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-2. - Assault. 
    A person commits the crime of assault in the third degree if: 
(1)  He attempts to cause or recklessly causes physical injury to another person; 
(2)  With criminal negligence, he causes physical injury to another person by means of a deadly weapon; 
(3)  He purposely places another person in apprehension of immediate physical injury; 
(4)  He recklessly engages in conduct which causes a grave risk of death or serious physical injury to another person; or 
(5)  He knowingly causes physical contact with another person, knowing the other person will regard the contact as offensive or provocative; 
(6)  The person knowingly causes or attempts to cause physical contact with a person with a disability, which a reasonable person, who does not have a disability, would consider offensive or provocative; or 
(7)  The person knowingly attempts to cause or causes the isolation of a person with a disability by unreasonably and substantially restricting or limiting his or her access to other persons, telecommunication devices or transportation for the purpose of isolation. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-3. - Failure to comply with order of a police officer. 
(a)  Fail to comply with the lawful order or request of a police officer in the discharge of the officer's official duties where such failure interfered with, obstructed or hindered the officer in the performance of such duties; 
(b)  Fail to identify himself or herself by name upon request when lawfully detained by a police officer, provided, however, that the person may not be compelled to answer any other inquiry of the police officer; or 
(c)  In any matter within the jurisdiction of any law enforcement officer of this city, knowingly: falsifies, conceals or covers up by any trick, scheme or device, a material fact; makes any materially false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or representation; or makes or uses any false writing or document knowing the same to contain any materially false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or entry. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-4. - Resisting or interfering with arrest. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of resisting or interfering with arrest or investigative stop or detention if, knowing that a law enforcement officer is making an arrest or investigative stop or detention, for the purpose of preventing the officer from effecting the arrest or investigative stop or detention, he: 
(1)  Resists the arrest or investigative stop or detention of himself by using or threatening the use of violence or physical force or by fleeing from such officer; or 
(2)  Interferes with the arrest or investigative stop or detention of another person by using or threatening the use of violence, physical force or physical interference. 
(b)  This section applies to arrests or investigative stops or detentions with or without warrants and to arrests or investigative stops or detentions for any crime or ordinance violation. 
(c)  A person is presumed to be fleeing a vehicle stop if he or she continues to operate a motor vehicle after he or she has seen or should have seen clearly visible emergency lights or has heard or should have heard an audible signal emanating from the law enforcement vehicle pursuing him or her. 
(d)  It is no defense to prosecution under subsection (a) of this section that the law enforcement officer was acting unlawfully in making the arrest or investigative stop or detention. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to bar civil suits for unlawful arrest or investigative stop or detention. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-5. - Fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle to willfully fail or refuse to bring his vehicle to a stop, or who otherwise flees or attempts to elude a pursuing police vehicle, when given visual and audible signals to bring the vehicle to a stop. The signals given by the police officer shall be by emergency light and siren. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-6. - Impersonating officers, agents or employees prohibited. 
    No person shall falsely represent himself to be an officer, agent, employee or a police officer of the city, of the county, or of the state or federal government; and no person, without being lawfully authorized, shall exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of any such officer. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-7. - Escape or attempted escape from custody of confinement and aiding in escape prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of escape from custody or confinement or attempted escape from custody or confinement if, while being held in custody after arrest or confinement after sentencing for any offense, he or she escapes or attempts to escape from such custody or confinement, including but not limited to by means of intentionally removing, altering, tampering, or damaging electronic monitoring equipment which a court has required such person to wear. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to rescue any person from the custody of a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-8. - False reports. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of making a false report if he or she knowingly: 
(1)  Gives false information to any person for the purpose of implicating another person in an offense; 
(2)  Makes a false report to a law enforcement officer that an offense has occurred or is about to occur; or 
(3)  Makes a false report or causes a false report to be made to a law enforcement officer, security officer, fire department or other organization, official or volunteer which deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property that a fire or other incident calling for an emergency response has occurred or is about to occur. 
(b)  It is a defense to a prosecution under subsection (a) of this section that the person retracted the false statement or report before the law enforcement officer or any other person took substantial action in reliance thereon. 
(c)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of retraction under subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-9. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 17 years to loiter, idle, wander or stroll; or to drive or ride in an automobile; play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other places within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, official county time, except on Fridays and Saturdays when the hours shall be 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. of the following day, official county time; provided, however, that the provisions of this section do not apply to a minor accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 17 years to knowingly, or with reason to know, permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander or stroll, or to drive or ride in an automobile, or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots, etc., within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, official county time, except on Fridays and Saturdays when the hours shall be 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. of the following day, official county time; provided, however, that the provisions of this section do not apply to a minor accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor. 
(c)  Any police officer of the city finding a violation of this section shall take the minor into custody and follow the policy and procedure on file in the police department in handling minors on a first offense. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-10. - Parental responsibility. 
(a)  Prohibited acts. No parent shall knowingly permit, encourage, aid or cause a minor or juvenile to: 
(1)  Commit a criminal act; 
(2)  Engage in conduct which would be injurious to the minor's or juvenile's morals or health; or 
(3)  Become delinquent in accordance with the provisions of the juvenile court law of the state. 
(b)  Parents to exercise control over a minor. No parent shall fail to exercise customary and effective control over a minor so as to contribute to, cause, or tend to cause a minor to commit or violate any state, federal and/or municipal ordinance. For the purpose of this subsection, failure to exercise customary and effective control shall include activities which include, but are not limited to a person's property, vehicle, place of employment, or any location a person may be reasonably expected to exercise authority over a child. Prohibited activities shall include, but are not limited to curfew violations, truancy, runaway, incorrigibility, injurious behavior, loitering, smoking, possession of tobacco, profanity, possession of obscene materials, gambling, possession of liquor, and possession of any controlled substance. 
(c)  Notification of minor's arrest. Whenever a minor shall be arrested or detained for the commission of any criminal act within the city, the police department shall immediately notify the minor's parent of the arrest or detention and shall advise the parent of his responsibility under this section. A record of such notification shall be kept by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-11. - Use of tape dialer alarm prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install or have installed within a residence, business, or any other building, within the city limits, a device or tape dialer, which when activated, sends a prerecorded voice message over a telephone cable or wire to the police department of the city. 
(b)  No alarm of this type shall be installed in or routed to the police facility. 
(c)  Any alarm so described in subsection (a) in this section, now installed or routed to the police facility, shall be removed within 90 days after June 25, 1984. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-12. - Failure to provide identity. 
    A person commits the crime of failure to provide identity when, having been lawfully stopped or detained by a law enforcement officer, and having been requested by the officer to provide his or her identification to the officer: 
(1)  That person knowingly refuses to state his or her name and address or to provide documentation of his or her name or address, such as, but not limited to, a driver's license, credit card, or Social Security card; or 
(2)  That person falsely reports his or her name or address to a law enforcement officer. 
    For the purposes of this section, a person has been "lawfully stopped or detained" by a law enforcement officer when the law enforcement officer has briefly stopped and detained the person upon reasonable suspicion to believe that the person has committed, is committing, or is about to commit a crime. "Reasonable suspicion" means specific and articulable facts which, taken together with rational inferences from those facts, would lead a reasonable person to conclude that the person has committed, is committing, or is about to commit a crime. The collective information in the possession of all officers connected to an investigation can be considered in determining whether reasonable suspicion existed for the stop or detention. 
    Failure to provide identity is a class C misdemeanor unless the person falsely reported his or her name or address, in which case it is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-13. - Misuse of 911. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to misuse the emergency telephone service. For the purposes of this section, "emergency" means any incident involving danger to life or property that calls for an emergency response dispatch of police, fire, EMS or other public safety organization, "misuse the emergency telephone service", includes, but is not limited to, repeatedly calling the "911" for nonemergency situations causing operators or equipment to be in use when emergency situations may need such operators or equipment and "repeatedly" means three or more times within a one-month period. 
(b)  No person shall intentionally dial the emergency telephone number "911" or the secondary emergency phone numbers "636-227-2951" and "636-227-2941" repeatedly to report an emergency to city departments knowing that the fact situation which he or she reports does not exist. 
(c)  No person shall intentionally dial the emergency telephone number "911" or the secondary emergency phone numbers "636-227-2951" and "636-227-2941" for purposes of communication not relating to the reporting of an actual emergency and to purposely interrupt the operations of the communications unit. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-14. - Violation of ex parte or full order of protection. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of violation of an ex parte order of protection when they knowingly violate the terms and conditions of an ex parte order of protection granted under RSMo 455.010-455.090. 
(b)  A person commits the crime of violation of a full order of protection when they knowingly violate the terms and conditions of a full order of protection granted under RSMo 455.010-455.090. 
(c)  A violation of the terms and conditions of an ex parte order of protection or a full order of protection with regards to abuse, stalking, disturbing the peace, child custody, or entrance upon the premises of the petitioner's dwelling unit shall be a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed three months or by both such fine and imprisonment. For the purpose of this section, in addition to the notice provided by actual service of the order, a party is deemed to have notice of an order is the law enforcement officer responding to a call of a reported incident of abuse or of violation of an order of protection presented a copy of the order of protection to the respondent. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as creating a private cause of action for damages to enforce the provisions set forth therein. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-15. - Stalking. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of stalking if he or she purposely, through his or her course of conduct, disturbs or follows with the intent to disturb another person. As used herein, the term "disturbs" shall mean to engage in a course of conduct directed at a specific person that serves no legitimate purpose and that would cause a reasonable person under the circumstances to be frightened, intimidated, or emotionally distressed. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to activities of federal, state, county, or municipal law enforcement officers conducting investigations of any violation of federal, state, county, or municipal law. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-16. - Domestic assault. 
    A person commits the offense of domestic assault in the third degree if the act involves a family or household member, including any child who is a member of the family or household, as defined in RSMo 455.010 and: 
(1)  The person attempts to cause or recklessly causes physical injury to such family or household member; 
(2)  With criminal negligence the person causes physical injury to such family or household member by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous instrument; 
(3)  The person purposely places such family or household member in apprehension of immediate physical injury by any means; 
(4)  The person recklessly engages in conduct which creates a grave risk of death or serious physical injury to such family or household member; 
(5)  The person knowingly causes physical contact with such family or household member knowing the other person will regard the contact as offensive; or 
(6)  The person knowingly attempts to cause or causes the isolation of such family or household member by unreasonably and substantially restricting or limiting such family or household member's access to other persons, telecommunication devices or transportation for the purpose of isolation. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-17. - Assault of a law enforcement officer, corrections officer, emergency personnel, highway worker, utility worker, cable worker, probation and parole officer, or police animal. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of assault of a law enforcement officer, corrections officer, emergency personnel, highway worker in a construction zone or work zone, utility worker, cable worker, or probation and parole officer in the third degree if: 
(1)  Such person recklessly causes physical injury to a law enforcement officer, corrections officer, emergency personnel, highway worker in a construction zone or work zone, utility worker, cable worker, or probation and parole officer; 
(2)  Such person purposely places a law enforcement officer, corrections officer, emergency personnel, highway worker in a construction zone or work zone, utility worker, cable worker, or probation and parole officer in apprehension of immediate physical injury; or 
(3)  Such person knowingly causes or attempts to cause physical contact with a law enforcement officer, corrections officer, emergency personnel, highway worker in a construction zone or work zone, utility worker, cable worker, or probation and parole officer without the consent of the law enforcement officer, corrections officer, emergency personnel, highway worker in a construction zone or work zone, utility worker, cable worker, or probation and parole officer. 
(b)  As used in this section, "emergency personnel" means any paid or volunteer firefighter, emergency room or trauma center personnel, or emergency medical technician as defined in subdivisions (15), (16), (17) and (18) of RSMo 190.100. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "corrections officer" includes any jailor or corrections officer of the state or any political subdivision of the state. 
(d)  As used in this section, the term "highway worker", "construction zone" or "work zone" shall have the same meaning as such terms are defined in RSMo 304.580. 
(e)  As used in this section, the term "utility worker" means any employee while in the performance of their job duties, including any person employed under contract, of a utility that provides gas, heat, electricity, water, steam, telecommunications services, or sewer services, whether privately, municipally, or cooperatively owned. 
(f)  As used in this section, the term "cable worker" means any employee including any person employed under contract, of a cable operator, as such term is defined in RSMo 67.2677. 
[(g)]  A person commits the offense of assault on a police animal if he or she knowingly kills or disables, knowingly attempts to kill or disable, or knowingly causes or attempts to cause serious physical injury, to a police animal when that animal is involved in law enforcement investigation, apprehension, tracking, or search, or the animal is in the custody or under the control of a law enforcement officer or fire or rescue personnel. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-18. - Harassment. 
    A person commits the offense of harassment if he or she, without good cause, engages in any act with the purpose to cause emotional distress to another person. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17; Ord. No. 17-20, § 1, 7-10-17) 
Sec. 17-19. - Deceptive business practice. 
    A person commits the offense of deceptive business practice if in the course of engaging in a business, occupation or profession, he recklessly 
(1)  Uses or possesses for use a false weight or measure, or any other device for falsely determining or recording any quality or quantity; 
(2)  Sells, offers or exposes for sale, or delivers less than the represented quantity of any commodity or service; 
(3)  Takes or attempts to take more than the represented quantity of any commodity or service when as buyer he furnishes the weight or measure; 
(4)  Sells, offers or exposes for sale adulterated or mislabeled commodities; 
(5)  Makes a false or misleading written statement for the purpose of obtaining property or credit; 
(6)  Promotes the sale of property or services by false or misleading statement in any advertisement; or 
(7)  Advertises in any manner the sale of property or services with the purpose not to sell such property or service: at the price which he or she offered them, in a quantity sufficient to meet the reasonably expected public demand unless the quantity is specifically stated in the advertisement, or at all. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-20. - Attempting to commit an offense. 
(a)  A person is guilty of attempt to commit an offense when, with the purpose of committing the offense, he does any act which is a substantial step towards the commission of the offense. A "substantial step" is conduct which is strongly corroborative of the firmness of the actor's purpose to complete the commission of the offense. 
(b)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the offense attempted was, under the actual attendant circumstances, factually or legally impossible of commission, if such offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the actor believed them to be. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-21. - Threatening communications. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly send or deliver or cause or intentionally allow to be sent or delivered any letter, e-mail, text message or other Internet or electronic communication or other writing, printing, circular or card or device, with or without a name subscribed thereto or signed with a fictitious name or any mark, threatening to accuse any other person of a crime or offense for any purpose other than to cause the other person to cease ongoing illegal activity or threatening to kill, maim or wound any other person or threatening to commit a crime or offense or do any injury to the person, property, credit or reputation of another, whether or not any money or property is demanded or extorted thereby. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of unlawful posting of certain information over the internet if he or she knowingly posts the name, home address, Social Security number, or telephone number of any person on the internet intending to cause substantial bodily harm or death, or threatening to cause substantial bodily harm or death to such person. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, an offense committed by means of writing, telephonic communication or electronic communication shall be deemed to have occurred at the place from which the communication was made or sent and at the place where the communication was first heard or read by the recipient. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-22. - False imprisonment. 
    A person commits the offense of false imprisonment if he/she knowingly restrains another unlawfully and without consent so as to interfere substantially with his/her liberty. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-23. - Endangering the welfare of a child. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of endangering the welfare of a child if he or she: 
(1)  With criminal negligence acts in a manner that creates a substantial risk to the life, body or health of a child less than 17 years of age; 
(2)  Knowingly encourages, aids or causes a child less than 17 years of age to engage in any conduct which causes or tends to cause the child to come within the provisions of Paragraph (d) of Subdivision (2) of Subsection (1) or Subdivision (3) of Subsection (1) of RSMo 211.031; 
(3)  Being a parent, guardian or other person legally charged with the care or custody of a child less than 17 years of age, he/she recklessly fails or refuses to exercise reasonable diligence in the care or control of such child to prevent him or her from coming within the provisions of Paragraph (c) of Subdivision (1) of Subsection (1) or Paragraph (d) of Subdivision (2) of Subsection (1) or Subdivision (3) of Subsection (1) of RSMo 211.031; or 
(4)  Knowingly encourages, aids or causes a child less than 17 years of age to enter into any room, building or other structure which is a public nuisance as defined in RSMo 215.465 or 579.105. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to mean the welfare of a child is endangered for the sole reason that he or she is being provided non-medical remedial treatment recognized and permitted under the laws of this state. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-24. - Unlawful transactions with a child. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of unlawful transactions with a child if he or she: 
(1)  Being a pawnbroker, junk dealer, dealer in secondhand goods, or any employee of such person, with criminal negligence buys or receives any personal property other than agricultural products from an unemancipated minor, unless the child's custodial parent or guardian has consented in writing to the transaction; 
(2)  Knowingly permits a minor child to enter or remain in a place where illegal activity in controlled substances, as defined in RSMo Ch. 579, is maintained or conducted; or 
(3)  With criminal negligence sells blasting caps, bulk gunpowder, or explosive to a child under the age of 17 years, or fireworks as defined in RSMo 320.110, to a child under the age of 14 years, unless the child's custodial parent or guardian has consented in writing to the transaction. 
(b)  Criminal negligence as to the age of the child is not an element of this offense. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-25. - Identity theft. 
    A person commits the offense of identity theft if he or she knowingly and with the intent to deceive or defraud obtains, possesses, transfers, uses, or attempts to obtain, transfer, or use, one or more means of identification, not lawfully issued for his or her use. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Secs. 17-26-17-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 

Sec. 17-31. - Peace disturbance. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of peace disturbance if: 
(1)  He or she unreasonably and knowingly causes alarm to another person or persons not physically on the same premises by: 
a.  Personally abusive language addressed in a face-to-face manner to a specific individual and uttered under circumstances such that the words have a direct tendency to cause an immediate violent response by a reasonable recipient; or 
b.  Tending to incite a fight. 
(2)  He or she is in a public place or on private property of another without consent and unreasonable and knowingly causes alarm to another person or persons by: 
a.  Personally abusive language addressed in a face-to-face manner to a specific individual and uttered under circumstances such that the words have a direct tendency to cause an immediate violent response by a reasonable recipient; or 
b.  Tending to incite a fight. 
(3)  He or she is in a public place or on private property of another without consent and purposely causes inconvenience to another person or persons by unreasonably and physically obstructing: 
a.  Vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or 
b.  The free ingress or egress to or from a public or private place. 
(4)  He or she unreasonably and knowingly disturbs or alarms another person or persons by creating an obnoxious and offensive odor. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, an offense committed by means of writing, telephonic communication or electronic communication shall be deemed to have occurred at the place from which the communication was made or sent and at the place where the communication was first heard or read by the recipient. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to commit an act of peace disturbance. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-31.1. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  A person shall not commit or engage in an act of disorderly conduct. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section an act of disorderly conduct shall mean: 
(1)  Acting in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby he or she is placed in fear of safety of their life, limb or health; 
(2)  Acting in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby their property is placed in danger of being destroyed; 
(3)  Endangering the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats or abusive conduct; 
(4)  Causing, provoking or engaging in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(5)  Assembling or congregating with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl; 
(6)  Jostling or roughly crowding or pushing any person in any public place; 
(7)  Collecting in bodies or in crowds for unlawful purposes as defined by current or future ordinances of the city; 
(8)  Assembling or congregating with another or others for the purpose or with the intent to engage in gaming; 
(9)  Frequenting any public place with the intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal or fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devises; 
(10)  Assembling for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme or device or trade to obtain any valuable thing from any place or any person; 
(11)  Accosting or attempting to pick up or attempting to force the company of a person upon any female; 
(12)  Uttering in the presence of another any bawdy, lewd or obscene words or epithets; 
(13)  Frequenting any place where gaming or illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed, or tolerated; 
(14)  Acting in a dangerous manner toward others; 
(15)  Using "fighting words" toward any person; 
(16)  Assembling or congregating for the purpose of trouncing upon another; 
(17)  Interfering by acts of violence with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(18)  Interfering with the free and unobstructed use of a public way or place of public nature by another person or other persons; or 
(19)  Using in the presence of another: 
a.  Common words denoting or relating to the questionable parentage of another; 
b.  Any derogatory words relating to the privates of a male, female or hermaphrodite; 
c.  Any derogatory words relating to the productive method of males or females whether or not used in connection with profane language; or 
d.  Any derogatory words relating to the methods of sexual intercourse with relatives or strangers. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-31.2. - Unnecessary noises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Noises prohibited-Unnecessary noise standard. The following acts, among others are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  By the operation of any motor vehicle without a standard muffler; 
(2)  The causing of a screeching noise in the act of placing a motor vehicle in motion with the tires of such motor vehicle; 
(3)  The firing of explosives of any kind, without a special permit from the board of aldermen of the city; or 
(4)  Other noises of intensity generally disagreeable to humans. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-33. - Loud and offensive noise. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to create, cause or maintain any loud, offensive noise within the limits of the city. The creation of noise by any of the following methods shall be deemed loud and offensive: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices, and the like. 
a.  The sound of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except when used as a warning of danger or emergency. 
b.  The sound of any horn or signaling device for an unreasonable period of time. 
c.  The sound of any horn or signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity. 
d.  The use of any horn, whistle, or other signaling device operated by engine exhaust. 
e.  The use of any horn or signaling device when traffic is for any reason stopped. 
f.  Any alarm, bell, siren or whistle which sounds continuously for five or more minutes. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs and similar devices. 
a.  The use, operation, or playing of any radio, phonograph, musical instrument, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other device for the production or reproduction of sound in a manner that is disturbing to the peace, quiet and comfort of inhabitants of an adjacent room, building, property or public rights-of-way. 
b.  The use, operation, or playing of any radio, phonograph, musical instrument, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other device for the production or reproduction of sound in a manner that is plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the radio, phonograph, musical instrument or other device between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. 
c.  The use, operation, or playing of any radio, phonograph, musical instrument, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other device for the production or reproduction of sound in a manner that is plainly audible, outside a building, in any area open to the public or on public rights-of-way for the purpose of commercial advertising or to attract attention of the public to the building or area. 
(3)  Animals, birds and the like. The keeping of any animal or bird which causes frequent or loud continuous sound that disturbs the peace, quiet or comfort of any person more than 20 feet from the animal or bird. 
(4)  Defect in vehicle or load. 
a.  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle engine, except through a muffler or other device equivalent to the original equipment which effectively prevents loud or explosive sounds from being emitted. 
b.  The use of any motor vehicle which is loaded or improperly repaired so as to make when being operated loud grating, grinding, or rattling sounds that disturb the peace, quiet or comfort of any person. 
c.  The loud and excessive sounds created in the loading or unloading of a vehicle or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates or containers. 
d.  The causing of a screeching noise from the tires that occurs while putting a motor vehicle in motion. 
e.  The operation of any motor vehicle without a standard muffler. 
(5)  Schools, churches, courts, hospitals or governmental buildings. The creation of sounds near any school, institution of learning, church, court, hospital or governmental building which disturbs the peace, quiet or comfort of occupants of buildings used by such institutions. 
(6)  Blowers. The operation of any blower, air conditioner, power fan or internal combustion engine which causes sounds in excess of those provided in the permissible noise level standards of this section. Notwithstanding this paragraph, portable generators may be operated during periods when there is no electrical service available from the primary supplier due to natural disaster or power outage. 
(7)  Industrial or commercial operations. The creation of any sound associated with commercial or industrial operations in excess of those provided in the permissible noise level standards of this section. 
(8)  Construction or repair. The outdoor activity of alteration, construction, demolition, erection, excavation, or repair of any building, structure, or property at any time between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except when a catastrophe or emergency situation requires such activity to preserve and protect human life or public health and safety. In the event of a catastrophe or emergency, such activity between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. can only occur after the first 12 hours following the catastrophe or emergency when a permit has been issued by the city administrator, who must determine that such activity is required to preserve and protect human life or public health and safety. The permit is to be for a specific period of time not to exceed three days but may be renewed for a specific period of time not to exceed three days when the city administrator determines that such activity is required to preserve and protect human life or public health and safety. The permit may be renewed as many times as necessary. All activities by government authorities or public utilities are exempt from the hours limitations and permit requirements when (i) the activities are in response to a catastrophe or emergency; and/or (ii) the activities are required for the maintenance or repair of recreational facilities of the city. 
(9)  Explosives and fireworks. The firing of fireworks or explosives of any kind without a permit from the board of aldermen. 
(10)  Noise level standards. Sound in excess of the noise level standards of the county noise control code as presently adopted and hereafter amended as chapter 625 of the county code is hereby adopted as the city noise control code with the following deletions or additions: 
a.  Section 625.020(9) is deleted and will read as follows: "(9) Daylight hours: 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., prevailing local time." 
b.  Section 625.020(10) is deleted and will read as follows: "(10) Director: The city administrator or his authorized agent or deputy." 
c.  Section 625.020(18) is deleted and will read as follows: "(18) Nighttime hours: 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., prevailing local time." 
d.  Section 625.070(5) is deleted. 
e.  Section 625.070 is amended to add: "(11) Activities conducted or approved by the State of Missouri or any governmental subdivision authorized under the laws of Missouri are exempt from the noise level standards of the noise code." 
f.  Sections 625.080, 625.090, 625.100, 625.110, 625.120, 625.160, 625.180, and 625.200 are deleted. 
g.  When any section of the noise code of the county specifies a fine or term of imprisonment, it shall be modified to be the penalty provided in section 1-6, pertaining to the general penalty and continuing violations, of the Code of Ordinances of the city, as presently enacted or hereafter amended. 
(11)  In any court proceeding, the court will accept as evidence any noise level test that is conducted as required by the applicable noise standard of the American National Standards Institute. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-34. - Barking dog. 
    A person shall not permit a dog owned by him or within his custody or under his control to habitually bark, thereby reasonably causing the peace of any person of ordinary temper and disposition to be disturbed. A dog which habitually barks, thereby reasonably causing the peace of any person of ordinary temper and disposition to be disturbed, is declared to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-35. - Disturbance of lawful assembly. 
    No person shall disturb any lawful assembly, either public or private, by making a noise, or by rude or indecent behavior or profane discourses within such assembly or so near the same as to disturb the order or solemnity of the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-36. - Loitering. 
(a)  No person shall loiter on the streets or at the corners thereof or in the vicinity of any place of amusement, a hotel, motel, restaurant, office building, shop or store, or any other place of business; or obstruct corridors, aisles, stairways or doorways so as to prevent free access, passage or movement by members of the public, officers or employees. 
(b)  No person shall by his presence, or by other means, either alone or in consort with others, interfere with or interrupt the conduct of business in offices, shops or stores. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-37. - Funeral protests prohibited, when-Citation of law-Definition. 
(a)  Every citizen may freely speak, write and publish the person's sentiments on all subjects, being responsible for the abuse of the right, but no person shall picket or engage in other protest activities, nor shall any association or corporation cause picketing or other protest activities to occur within 300 feet of any residence, cemetery, funeral home, church, synagogue, or other establishment during or within one hour before or one hour after the conducting of any actual funeral or burial service at that place. 
(b)  As used in this section, "other protest activities" means any action that is disruptive or undertaken to disrupt or disturb a funeral or burial service. 
(c)  As used in this section, "funeral" and "burial service" mean the ceremonies and memorial services held in conjunction with the burial or cremation of the dead, but this section does not apply to processions while they are in transit beyond any 300-foot zone that is established under subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-38. - Unlawful assembly. 
    A person commits the offense of unlawful assembly if he or she knowingly assembles with six or more other persons and agrees with such persons to violate any of the criminal laws of this state or of the United States with force or violence. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-39. - Allowing unruly conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, maintains, leases or is otherwise in possession or control of any real property to permit or allow persons thereon to conduct themselves in a loud or unruly manner so as to cause hurt, injury, annoyance, inconvenience or danger to the public or any member thereof, and it shall be the duty of any such person in possession or control to take such steps as are available to disperse such loud or unruly persons. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-40. - Rioting. 
    A person commits the offense of rioting if he or she knowingly assembles with six or more other persons and agrees with such persons to violate any of the criminal laws of this state or of the United States with force or violence and thereafter, while still so assembled, does violate any of said laws with force or violence. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-41. - Refusal to disperse. 
    A person commits the offense of refusal to disperse if, being present at the scene of an unlawful assembly or at the scene of a riot, he or she knowingly fails or refuses to obey the lawful command of a law enforcement officer to depart from the scene of such unlawful assembly or riot. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-42. - Public drunkenness. 
    A person commits the offense of drunkenness or drinking in a prohibited place if he or she enters any schoolhouse, government building or church house in which there is an assemblage of people, met for a lawful purpose, in an intoxicated and disorderly condition, and disrupts such assembly. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-43. - Obstruction of government operations. 
    A person commits the offense of obstructing government operations if he or she purposely obstructs, impairs, hinders or perverts the performance of a governmental function by the use or threat of violence, force, or other physical interference or obstacle. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Secs. 17-44-17-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Public safety offenses, RSMo Ch. 577. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-51. - Abandonment of airtight or semiairtight containers. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of abandonment of airtight icebox if he abandons, discards, or knowingly permits to remain on premises under his control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or other airtight or semiairtight container which has a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more and an opening of 50 square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with hinge, latch or other fastening device capable of securing such door or lid, without rendering such equipment harmless to human life by removing such hinges, latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semiairtight container located in that part of a building occupied by a dealer, warehouseman or repairman. 
(c)  The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue under subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-52. - Storage of materials, etc., constituting health menace. 
    No person shall store any lumber, wood, coal, rock or other material or substance upon any lot or premises within the city in such a manner as to endanger public health or safety, and each day that the same is so stored in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-53. - Dangerous missiles. 
    No person shall throw any stone or other missile upon or at any vehicle, building or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in any public street, alley or place, or enclosed or unenclosed ground. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-54. - Weapons generally, carrying concealed, other unlawful use. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons, except as otherwise provided by RSMo 571.101 to 571.121, if he/she knowingly: 
(1)  Carries concealed upon or about his/her person a knife, a firearm, a blackjack or any other weapon readily capable of lethal use into any area where firearms are restricted under RSMo 571.107; 
(2)  Sets a spring gun; 
(3)  Discharges or shoots a firearm within the city limits; 
(4)  Exhibits, in the presence of one or more persons, any weapon readily capable of lethal use in an angry or threatening manner; 
(5)  Has a firearm or projectile weapon readily capable of lethal use on his or her person, while he or she is intoxicated, and handles or otherwise uses such firearm or projectile weapon in either a negligent or unlawful manner or discharges such firearm or projectile weapon unless acting in self-defense; 
(6)  Openly carries a firearm or any other weapon readily capable of lethal use, except as provided by subsection (g) of this section; 
(7)  Carries a firearm or any other weapon readily capable of lethal use into any church or place where people have assembled for worship, or into any election precinct on any election day, or into any building owned or occupied by any agency of the federal government, state government, or political subdivision thereof; 
(8)  Carries a firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, or any other weapon readily capable of lethal use into any school, onto any school bus, or onto the premises of any function or activity sponsored or sanctioned by school officials or the district school board; 
(9)  Possesses a firearm while also knowingly in possession of a controlled substance that is sufficient for a felony violation of RSMo 195.202. 
(b)  Subdivisions (1), (7), and (8) of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the persons described in this subsection, regardless of whether such uses are reasonably associated with or are necessary to the fulfillment of such person's official duties except as otherwise provided in this subsection. Subdivisions (3) and (4) of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to or affect any of the following persons, when such uses are reasonably associated with or are necessary to the fulfillment of such person's official duties, except as otherwise provided in this subsection: 
(1)  All state, county and municipal peace officers who have completed the training required by the police officer standards and training commission pursuant to RSMo 590.030 to 590.050, and who possess the duty and power of arrest for violation of the general criminal laws of the state or for violation of ordinances of counties or municipalities of the state, whether such officers are on or off duty, and whether such officers are within or outside of the law enforcement agency's jurisdiction, or all qualified retired peace officers, as defined in RSMo 571.030(12), and who carry the identification defined in RSMo 571.030(13), or any person summoned by such officers to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while actually engaged in assisting such officer; 
(2)  Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries, jails and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or convicted of crime; 
(3)  Members of the Armed Forces or National Guard while performing their official duty; 
(4)  Those persons vested by Article V, Section 1 of the Constitution of Missouri with the judicial power of the state and those persons vested by Article III of the Constitution of the United States with the judicial power of the United States, the members of the federal judiciary; 
(5)  Any person whose bona fide duty is to execute process, civil or criminal; 
(6)  Any federal probation officer or federal flight deck officer as defined under the federal flight deck officer program, 49 U.S.C. Section 44921, regardless of whether such officers are on duty, or within the law enforcement agency's jurisdiction; 
(7)  Any state probation or parole officer, including supervisors and members of the board of probation and parole; 
(8)  Any corporate security advisor meeting the definition and fulfilling the requirements of the regulations established by the Missouri Department of Public Safety under RSMo 590.750; 
(9)  Any coroner, deputy coroner, medical examiner or assistant medical examiner; 
(10)  Any municipal or county prosecuting attorney or assistant prosecuting attorney or any circuit attorney or assistant circuit attorney, municipal, associate or circuit judge, or any person appointed by a court to be a special prosecutor who has completed the firearms safety training course required under RSMo 571.111(2); 
(11)  Any member of a fire department or fire protection district who is employed on a full-time basis as a fire investigator and who has a valid concealed carry endorsement issued prior to August 28, 2013 or a valid concealed carry permit under RSMo 571.111, when such uses are reasonably associated with or are necessary to the fulfillment of such person's official duties; and 
(12)  Upon the written approval of the governing body of a fire department or fire protection district, any paid fire department or fire protection member who is employed on a full-time basis and who has a valid concealed carry endorsement issued prior to August 28, 2013 or a valid concealed carry permit, when such uses are reasonably associated with or are necessary to the fulfillment of such person's official duties. 
(c)  Subdivisions (1), (5), (7), and (8) of subsection (a) of this section do not apply when the actor is transporting such weapons in a non-functioning state or in an unloaded state when ammunition is not readily accessible or when such weapons are not readily accessible. Subdivision (1) of subsection (a) of this section does not apply to any person 19 years of age or older or 18 years of age or older and a member of the United States Armed Forces, or honorably discharged from the United States Armed Forces, transporting a concealable firearm in the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle, so long as such concealable firearm is otherwise lawfully possessed, nor when the actor is also in possession of an exposed firearm or projectile weapon for the lawful pursuit of game, or is in his/her dwelling unit or upon business premises over which the actor has possession, authority or control, or is traveling in a continuous journey peaceably through the city. Subdivision (8) of subsection (a) of this section does not apply if the firearm is otherwise lawfully possessed by a person while traversing school premises for the purposes of transporting a student to or from school, or possessed by an adult for the purposes of facilitation of a school-sanctioned firearm-related event or club event. 
(d)  Subdivisions (1), (7), and (8) of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any person who has a valid concealed carry permit issued pursuant to RSMo 571.101 to 571.121, a valid concealed carry endorsement issued before August 28, 2013, or a valid permit or endorsement to carry concealed firearms issued by another state or political subdivision of another state. 
(e)  Subdivisions (3), (4), (5), (7), and (8) of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to persons who are engaged in a lawful act of defense pursuant to RSMo 563.031. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall make it unlawful for a student to actually participate in school-sanctioned gun safety courses, student military or ROTC courses, or other school-sponsored firearm-related events, provided the student does not carry a firearm or other weapon readily capable of lethal use into any school, onto any school bus or onto the premises of any other function or activity sponsored or sanctioned by school officials or the district school board. 
(g)  Any person who has a valid concealed carry permit issued pursuant to RSMo 571.101 to 571.121., or a concealed carry endorsement issued prior to August 28, 2013, or a valid permit or endorsement to carry concealed firearms issued by another state or political subdivision of another state, may openly carry a firearm, subject to the restrictions set forth in subsections (a)(4), (5), and (9) of this section. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to permit a person to carry a concealed firearm or openly carry a firearm in the locations listed in subdivisions (1) through (17) of subsection (a) of section 17-55 of this Code. Any person openly carrying a firearm within the city limits shall display his or her concealed carry endorsement or permit upon demand of a law enforcement officer. Any person openly carrying a firearm who fails to display his or her concealed carry endorsement or permit upon demand of a law enforcement officer may be issued a citation for an amount not to exceed $35.00. 
(h)  For purposes of this section, "knife" includes any dagger, dirk, stiletto, or bladed hand instrument that is readily capable of inflicting serious physical injury or death by cutting or stabbing a person. "Knife" does not include any ordinary pocket knife with no blade more than four inches in length. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-55. - Carrying weapons prohibited-Penalty for violation. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this section, punishable as hereinafter provided, for any person to carry any concealed firearm, into: 
(1)  Any police, sheriff or highway patrol office or station without the consent of the chief law enforcement officer in charge of that office or station. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of the office or station shall not be an offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. 
(2)  Within 25 feet of any polling place on any election day. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of the polling place shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. 
(3)  The facility of any adult or juvenile detention or correctional institution, prison or jail. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of any adult, juvenile detention or correctional institution, prison or jail shall not be an offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. 
(4)  Any courthouse solely occupied by the circuit, appellate or supreme court, or any courtrooms, administrative offices, libraries or other rooms of any such court whether or not such court solely occupies the building in question. This subdivision shall also include, but not be limited to, any juvenile, family, drug or other court offices, any room or office wherein any of the courts or offices listed in this subdivision are temporarily conducting any business within the jurisdiction of such courts or offices, and such other locations in such manner as may be specified by supreme court rule pursuant to subdivision (6) of this subsection. Nothing in this subdivision shall preclude those persons listed in subsection (b)(1) of section 17-54 while within their jurisdiction and on duty, those persons listed in subsections (b)(2) and (3) of section 17-54, or such other persons who serve in a law enforcement capacity for a court as may be specified by supreme court rule pursuant to subdivision (6) of this subsection from carrying a concealed firearm within any of the areas described in this subdivision. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of any of the areas listed in this subdivision shall not be an offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. 
(5)  Any meeting of the board of aldermen, except that nothing in this subdivision shall preclude a member of the body holding a valid concealed carry permit or endorsement from carrying a concealed firearm at a meeting of the body which he or she is a member. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises shall not be an offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. 
(6)  Any building owned, leased or controlled by the city identified by signs stating that carrying firearms is prohibited and posted at the entrance to the building. This subsection shall not apply to any building used for public housing by private persons, highways or rest areas, firing ranges, and private dwellings owned, leased or controlled by the city. Persons violating this subsection may be denied entrance to the building, ordered to leave the building and, if employees of the city, be subjected to disciplinary measures for violation. 
(7)  Any establishment licensed to dispense intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises, which portion is primarily devoted to that purpose, without the consent of the owner or manager. The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to the licensee of said establishment. The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to any bona fide restaurant open to the general public having dining facilities for not less than 50 persons and that receives at least 51 percent of its gross annual income from the dining facilities by the sale of food. This subdivision does not prohibit the possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of the establishment and shall not be an offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. Nothing in this subdivision authorizes any individual who has been issued a concealed carry permit or endorsement to possess any firearm while intoxicated. 
(8)  Any area of an airport to which access is controlled by the inspection of persons and property. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of the airport shall not be an offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. 
(9)  Any place where the carrying of a firearm is prohibited by federal law. 
(10)  Any higher education institution or elementary or secondary school facility without the consent of the governing body of the higher education institution or a school official or the district school board, unless the person with the concealed carry endorsement or permit is a teacher or administrator of an elementary or secondary school who has been designated by his or her school district as a school protection officer and is carrying a firearm in a school within that district, in which case no consent is required. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of any higher education institution or elementary or secondary school facility shall not be an offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. 
(11)  Any portion of a building used as a child care facility without the consent of the manager. Nothing in this subdivision shall prevent the operator of a child care facility in a family home from owning or possessing a firearm or a driver's license or non-driver's license containing a concealed carry permit or endorsement. 
(12)  Any riverboat gambling operation accessible by the public without the consent of the owner or manager pursuant to rules promulgated by the gaming commission. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of a riverboat gambling operation shall not be an offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. 
(13)  Any gated area of an amusement park. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of the amusement park shall not be an offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. 
(14)  Any church or other place of religious worship without the consent of the minister or person or persons representing the religious organization that exercises control over the place of religious worship. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises shall not be an offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. 
(15)  Any private property whose owner has posted the premises as being off-limits to concealed firearms by means of one or more signs displayed in a conspicuous place of a minimum size of 11 inches by 14 inches with the writing thereon in letters of not less than one inch. The owner, business or commercial lessee, manager of a private business enterprise, or any other organization, entity or person may prohibit persons holding a concealed carry permit or endorsement from carrying concealed firearms on the premises and may prohibit employees, not authorized by the employer, holding a concealed carry permit or endorsement from carrying concealed firearms on the property of the employer. If the building or the premises are open to the public, the employer of the business enterprise shall post signs on or about the premises if carrying a concealed firearm is prohibited. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises shall not be an offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. An employer may prohibit employees or other persons holding a concealed carry permit or endorsement from carrying a concealed firearm in vehicles owned by the employer. 
(16)  Any sports arena or stadium with a seating capacity of 5,000 or more. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises shall not be an offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. 
(17)  Any hospital accessible by the public. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of a hospital shall not be an offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  Carrying of a concealed firearm in a location specified in subdivisions (1)-(17) of subsection (a) of this section by any individual who holds a Missouri lifetime or extended concealed carry permit shall not be a criminal act but may be subject the person to denial to the premises or removal from the premises. If such person refuses to leave the premises and a peace officer is summoned, such person may be issued a citation for an amount not to exceed $100.00 for the first offense. If a second citation for a similar violation occurs within a six-month period, such person shall be fined an amount not to exceed $200.00. If a third citation for a similar violation is issued within one year of the first citation, such person shall be fined an amount not to exceed $500.00 and shall have his or her Missouri lifetime or extended concealed carry permit revoked and such person shall not be eligible for a Missouri lifetime or extended concealed carry permit or a concealed carry permit issued under RSMo 571.101 to 571.121 for a period of three years. Upon conviction of charges arising from a citation issued under this subsection, the court shall notify the sheriff of the county which issued the Missouri lifetime or extended concealed carry permit. The sheriff shall suspend or revoke the Missouri lifetime or extended concealed carry permit. 
(2)  If the violator does not hold a current valid concealed carry endorsement issued pursuant to state law, upon conviction of a charge of violating this section the defendant shall be punished as provided in section 1-6 of this Code. 
(3)  Employees of the city may, in addition to any other punishment herein, be subject to disciplinary action for violating any of the provisions of sections 17-54 or 17-55. 
(c)  Nothing in this subsection shall preclude those persons listed in subsection (b)(1) of section 17-54, while within their jurisdiction and on duty, from carrying a firearm within the areas described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-56. - Turkey shoots. 
    No person shall own, operate, manage, produce, hold, put on or participate in a turkey shoot of any kind, at anytime, anywhere within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-57. - Fireworks. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall sell, use, manufacture, display or possess fireworks, as defined in section 1-2, within the city at any time, except as otherwise provided. 
(b)  Exceptions. The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to the sale or use of blank cartridges for theatrical purposes or for signal purposes in athletic or sports events, nor to public demonstrations or displays of fireworks; provided, however, such public demonstrations or displays of fireworks must be conducted under the supervision of the chief of police and the police department after application is made in writing and approved by the chief of police and the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-58. - Rockets, missiles and projectiles. 
    No person shall construct, use, discharge, fire, launch or explode rockets, missiles or other similar projectiles within the city unless a written permit for such specific purpose has been obtained from the board of aldermen. In granting any such permit, the board of aldermen may prescribe such conditions and regulations for the activity permitted as they may deem necessary for the preservation and the protection of the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-59. - Fires, reckless or negligent burning or exploding. 
(a)  No person shall burn garbage, refuse, waste, straw or other combustible materials without a permit from the fire district. A copy of such permit must be supplied to the city within 30 days of the event. This section shall not apply to barbecue pits used for the cooking of food. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of reckless burning or exploding if he or she recklessly starts a fire or causes an explosion and thereby damages or destroys the property of another. 
(c)  A person commits the offense of negligent burning or exploding if he or she with criminal negligence causes damage to property, woodlands, or grasslands of another by (1) starting a fire or causing an explosion; or (2) allowing a fire burning on lands in his or her possession or control onto the property of another. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-60. - Littering. 
(a)  No person shall throw, dump, deposit or place or cause to be thrown, dumped, deposited or placed upon any highway, road, street, alley, waterway, right-of-way, parking lot or private property: 
(1)  Any tacks, nails, wire, scrap metal, glass, crockery, sharp stones or other substances injurious to the feet of persons or animals or the tires of vehicles. 
(2)  Any paper, rubbish, garbage or debris of any and all kinds. 
(3)  Any mud, dirt, sand, gravel, rock, stone or other excavated material or substance dug, scooped, blasted or removed from the earth on any lot or tract of land; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any excavation in the highways for which a permit has been issued by the city. 
(4)  Any and all substances and materials which cause or may cause a hazard or obstruction to the movement of traffic. 
(b)  No person shall throw, dump, deposit or place; or cause to be thrown, dumped, deposited or placed such materials and substances in such a manner as to cause the same to roll, flow or wash upon any highway, road, street, alley or right-of-way of the same. 
(c)  No person, when moving or hauling any such materials and substances upon any highway, road, street, alley or right-of-way of the same, shall allow such substances and materials to blow, spill, drop or otherwise come to rest over and upon such highway, road, street, alley or right-of-way. 
(d)  Any person who, by reason of accident, violates this section shall be held blameless of such violation upon an affirmative showing that he: 
(1)  Immediately cleaned and cleared away the materials or substance involved; 
(2)  Immediately made a reasonable and conscientious effort to clean and clear; or 
(3)  By reason of such accident was rendered incapable of cleaning and clearing away the materials or substances involved. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-61. - Manufacture, possession, etc., of controlled and other substances. 
(a)  Manufacture, possession, etc., prohibited. No person shall manufacture, possess, have under his/her control, sell, prescribe, administer, dispense, distribute or compound any substance scheduled in RSMo Ch. 195 or 579, including, but not limited to controlled substances, counterfeit substances and synthetic cannibinoid. 
(b)  Possession of certain apparatus prohibited. No person shall possess any apparatus, device or instrument for the unauthorized use of any controlled substance. 
(c)  Exceptions. The provisions and prohibitions of this section shall not apply to any person who is specifically authorized by the laws of the state to manufacture, possess, have under his control, sell, prescribe, administer, dispense, distribute or compound any controlled or counterfeit substance, nor to any person who is authorized under the laws of the state to possess any apparatus, device or instrument for the use of any controlled substance. 
(d)  Definitions. The terms "controlled substance", "counterfeit substance" and "synthetic cannabinoid" shall be defined as follows, in accordance with RSMo 195.010: 
(5)  "Controlled substance", a drug, substance, or immediate precursor in Schedules I through V listed in RSMo 195.005 to 195.425; 
(7)  "Counterfeit substance", a controlled substance which, or the container or labeling of which, without authorization, bears the trademark, trade name, or other identifying mark, imprint, number or device, or any likeness thereof, of a manufacturer, distributor, or dispenser other than the person who in fact manufactured, distributed, or dispensed the substance; 
(40)  "Synthetic cannabinoid", includes unless specifically excepted or unless listed in another schedule, any natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture, or preparation that contains any quantity of a substance that is a cannabinoid receptor agonist, including but not limited to any substance listed in paragraph (11) of subdivision (4) of subsection 2 of section 195.017 and any analogues, homologues; isomers, whether optical, positional, or geometric; esters; ethers; salts; and salts of isomers, esters, and ethers, whenever the existence of the isomers, esters, ethers, or salts is possible within the specific chemical designation, however, it shall not include any approved pharmaceutical authorized by the United States Food and Drug Administration. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-62. - Smoking of tobacco and other substances in all recreation facilities in the city with exception of park and golf course grounds, prohibited; penalty. 
(a)  With the exception of posted designated areas, if provided, no person shall smoke tobacco or any other substance of any form or by any method, nor shall any person hold or carry any lighted cigarette, cigar or pipe in any of the recreation facilities in the city, with the exception of park and golf course grounds, or in any area of the city hall. 
(b)  The city engineer is directed to erect "no smoking" signs in areas where smoking is prohibited. 
(c)  Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided for violating this Code, provided that the fine for the first such offense shall be $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-63. - Prohibition of the sale of tobacco to a minor. 
(a)  No person shall sell any tobacco product or distribute any tobacco product or rolling papers to any minor. 
(b)  Any person who violates this section shall be fined: 
(1)  For the first offense, $100.00; 
(2)  For the second offense, $250.00; and 
(3)  For a third and subsequent offense, $1,000.00. 
(c)  The owner of an establishment at which tobacco products or rolling papers are sold at retail or through vending machines shall cause to be prominently displayed in a conspicuous place at every display from which tobacco products are sold and on every vending machine where tobacco products are purchased a sign that shall: 
(1)  Contain in red lettering at least one-half-inch high on a white background the following: "It is a violation of state law for cigarettes or other tobacco products to be sold to or be in the possession of any person under the age of 18."; and 
(2)  Include a depiction of a pack of cigarettes at least two inches high defaced by a red diagonal diameter of a surrounding red circle, and the words "Under 18." 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in tobacco product distribution to persons under 18 years of age. 
(e)  A person selling tobacco products or rolling papers or distributing tobacco product samples shall require proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient if any ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance that such perspective purchaser or recipient may be under the age of 18. 
(f)  If a sale is made by an employee of the owner of an establishment in violation of this section, the employee shall be guilty of an offense established in subsection (a). If a vending machine is in violation of this section, the owner of the establishment shall be guilty of an offense established in subsection (a). If a sample is distributed by an employee of a company conducting the sampling, such employee shall be guilty of an offense established in subsection (a). 
(g)  Reasonable reliance on proof of age or on the appearance of the purchaser or recipient shall be a defense to any action for a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-64. - Protests and picketing. 
(a)  Acts constituting picketing. A person is engaged in picketing if a person with or without a sign is posted at, before or about a property or building on a definite route in front of, or about a particular property or building. 
(b)  Interference with public business and public buildings. It shall be interference with public business and public buildings and shall constitute a violation of this Code to: 
(1)  Conduct at or in any public building and/or facility owned, operated or controlled by the city, picketing or protest so as to willfully deny to any public official, public employee or any invitee on such premises, the lawful rights of such official, employee or invitee to enter, or to use the facilities or to leave any such building. 
(2)  Willfully impeding any public official or employee in the lawful performance of duties or activities through the use of restraint, abduction, coercion or intimidation by force and violence or a threat thereof. 
(3)  Willfully refuse or fail to leave any such public building and/or facility upon being requested to do so by the city administrator or his designee, if such person is committing, threatening or threatens to commit or incites others to commit any act which did or would, if completed, disrupt, impair, interfere with or obstruct the lawful admissions, processes, procedures or functions being carried out in such public building. 
(4)  Willfully impede, disrupt, or hinder the normal proceedings of any meeting or session conducted by any judicial or legislative body or official at any public building by any act of intrusion to the chamber or other areas designated for the use of the body or official conducting such meeting or session or by any act designate to intimidate, coerce or hinder any member of such body or any official engaged in the performance of duties at such meeting or session. 
(5)  Willfully impede, disrupt, or hinder by any act or intrusion into the chamber or other areas designated for the use of any executive body or official, the normal proceedings of such body or official. 
(6)  Willfully impede, disrupt, or hinder by any act or intrusion in the operation of any event or function in any park or property owned by the city. 
    This section notwithstanding peaceful picketing, protests and demonstrations not violating this section shall be allowed at the following locations: 
Facility Area The Point at Ballwin Commons Bricked paved plaza area along building front Ballwin Golf Course Southernmost end of parking lot along a 20-foot-wide strip extending width of lot Vlasis Park/Police Station Any or all of the following locations: 
(a) Holloway and Park Drive to Log Home 
(b) Peace memorial, inside sidewalk 
(c) Kehrs Mill at Seven Tails (southwest corner) 
(d) Ballpark Drive at Kehrs Mill (southeast corner) Outdoor Pool Sidewalk/walkway on the east side of the pool beginning with the south end of the pool fence and ending at the north corner of the fence New Ballwin Park Sidewalk between the street and street trees on either side of the park entrance driveway Government Center Kehrs Mill at Seven Trails (southeast corner) to edge of pavement  
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-65. - Ballwin clean air act. 
(a)  Prohibition of smoking in indoor areas and sports arenas. Smoking shall be prohibited in all indoor areas and sports arenas within the city, including, but not limited to the following places: 
(1)  Aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums; 
(2)  Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in business and non-profit entities patronized by the public, including but not limited to professional offices, banks, and laundromats; 
(3)  Bars; 
(4)  Bingo facilities; 
(5)  All public and private colleges, universities, and other educational and vocational institutions; 
(6)  Elevators; 
(7)  Facilities primarily used for exhibiting a motion picture, stage, drama, lecture, musical recital, or other similar performance; 
(8)  Health care facilities, including health care clinics, doctor's offices or other health care related facilities; 
(9)  Licensed child care and adult day care facilities; 
(10)  Polling places; 
(11)  All enclosed facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased or operated by the city, shall be subject to the provisions of this section; 
(12)  Restaurants and food service establishments; 
(13)  Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other common use areas; 
(14)  Retail stores; 
(15)  Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly under the control of the agency, board, commission, committee or council of the city when a public meeting is in progress. 
(b)  Prohibition of smoking in place of employment. Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities within places of employment without exception. This includes common work areas, auditoriums, bars, restaurants, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, and all other enclosed facilities. 
    This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date of this section and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment. 
(c)  Exceptions. The following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of this section: 
(1)  Private homes, private residences and private vehicles; 
(2)  a.  Membership associations that were in existence and in operation on November 30, 2004; provided, however, that smoking shall only be allowed in membership associations in which all of the duties with respect to the operation of such association, including, but not limited to the preparation of food and beverages, the service of food and beverages, reception and secretarial work of the membership association are performed by members of such membership association who are at least 18 years of age and who do not receive compensation of any kind from the membership association or any other entity for the performance of such duties. In addition, the membership association shall not allow any person under the age of 18 years of age to be present on the membership association premises at any time when smoking is permitted. 
b.  Membership associations may retain and utilize non-members for professional services such as accounting and legal services and other services that are not generally within the scope of the day-to-day operation of the membership associations. 
(d)  Declaration of establishments as nonsmoking. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that an entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of this section is posted. 
(e)  Posting of signs. 
(1)  "No smoking" signs or the international "no smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every public place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this section, by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of that place. 

(2)  Every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this section shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(3)  All ashtrays and other smoking paraphernalia shall be removed from any premises where smoking is prohibited by this section by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of the area. 
(f)  Retaliation. No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, or customer because that employee, applicant, or customer exercises any rights afforded by this section, or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this section. 
(g)  Enforcement. 
(1)  This section shall be enforced by Ballwin police officers, code enforcement inspectors, or by an authorized designee of the city administrator, and shall henceforth be referred to as the "enforcement officer". 
(2)  Notice of the provisions of this section shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the city. 
(3)  Any citizen may initiate a complaint by notice to an enforcement officer. 
(4)  Any employee who desires to register a complaint under this section may initiate enforcement with the enforcement officer without fear of retaliation. 
(5)  An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this section shall inform persons violating this section of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(h)  Violation and penalties. 
(1)  A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a penalty of $100.00 for a first violation, and $250.00 for each subsequent violation. 
(2)  A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment who fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by: 
a.  A penalty of $250.00 for a first violation; 
b.  A penalty of $500.00 for each additional violation. 
(3)  Each day on which a violation of this section occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
(i)  Effective date. 
(1)  This section shall be become effective, 60 days from and after the date of its passage and approval, and smoking will not be permitted for all places of employment, with the exception of bars and food service establishments that were licensed to serve alcoholic beverages for consumption by the drink on or before December 1, 2004. 
(2)  Smoking will not be permitted in all bars and food service establishments that were licensed to serve alcoholic beverages for consumption by the drink on or before December 1, 2004, effective January 2, 2006. 
(3)  Smoking will not be permitted for all places of employment, including bars and food service establishments that were licensed to serve alcoholic beverages for consumption by the drink on or after December 1, 2004, and this section shall be become effective, 60 days from and after the date of its passage and approval. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-66. - Possession of tobacco products by a minor. 
(a)  No person less than 18 years of age shall possess, attempt to purchase, attempt to receive samples or possess cigarettes or other tobacco products unless such person is an employee of or a seller of cigarettes or tobacco products and is in such possession to effect a sale in the course of employment, or an employee of the division of liquor control engaged in the enforcement of the State of Missouri state statutes. 
(b)  Any person less than 18 years of age shall not misrepresent his or her age to purchase cigarettes or tobacco products or to receive samples thereof. 
(c)  Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be penalized as follows: 
(1)  For the first violation, the person is guilty of an infraction and shall have any cigarettes or tobacco products confiscated. 
(2)  For a second and any subsequent violation, the person is guilty of an infraction and shall have any cigarettes or tobacco products confiscated and shall complete a tobacco education/smoking cessation program. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-67. - Tampering with water supply. 
    A person commits the offense of tampering with a water supply if he or she purposely: 
(1)  Poisons, defiles or in any way corrupts the water of a well, spring, brook, stream, creek, pond, lake, or reservoir used for domestic or municipal purposes; or 
(2)  Diverts, dams up and holds back from its natural course and flow any spring, brook, stream, creek or other water supply for domestic or municipal purposes, after said water supply shall have once been taken for use by any person or persons, corporation, town or city for their use; or 
(3)  Places or causes to be placed the carcass or offal of any dead animal into any well, spring, brook, stream, creek, pond, or lake. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-68. - Possession, manufacture, transport, repair, sale of certain weapons. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if such person knowingly possesses, manufactures, transports, repairs, or sells: 
(1)  An explosive weapon; 
(2)  An explosive, incendiary or poison substance or material with the purpose to possess, manufacture or sell an explosive weapon; 
(3)  A gas gun; 
(4)  A bullet or projectile which explodes or detonates upon impact because of an independent explosive charge after having been shot from a firearm; 
(5)  Knuckles; or 
(6)  Any of the following in violation of federal law: 
a.  A machine gun; 
b.  A short barreled rifle or shotgun; 
c.  A firearm silencer; or 
d.  A switchblade knife. 
(b)  A person does not commit an offense under this section if his/her conduct involved any of the items in subdivisions (1) to (5) of subsection (a), the item was possessed in conformity with federal law, and the conduct: 
(1)  Was incident to the performance of official duty by the Armed Forces, National Guard, a governmental law enforcement agency or a penal institution; 
(2)  Was incident to engaging in a lawful commercial or business transaction with an organization enumerated in paragraph (1) of this subsection; 
(3)  Was incident to using an explosive weapon in a manner reasonably related to a lawful industrial or commercial enterprise; 
(4)  Was incident to displaying the weapon in a public museum or exhibition; or 
(5)  Was incident to using with the weapon in a manner reasonably related to a lawful dramatic performance. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-69. - Defacing firearm. 
    A person commits the offense of defacing a firearm if he/she knowingly defaces any firearm. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-70. - Fraudulent purchase of firearm. 
(a)  As used in this section, the following terms shall mean: 
    Ammunition. Any cartridge, shell, or projectile designed for use in a firearm. 
    Licensed dealer. A person who is licensed under 18 U.S.C. Section 923 to engage in the business of dealing in firearms. 
    Materially false information. Any information that portrays an illegal transaction as legal or a legal transaction as illegal. 
    Private seller. A person who sells or offers for sale any firearm, as defined in RSMo 571.010, or ammunition. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of fraudulent purchase of a firearm if such person: 
(1)  Knowingly solicits, persuades, encourages or entices a licensed dealer or private seller of firearms or ammunition to transfer a firearm or ammunition under circumstances which the person knows would violate the laws of this state or the United States; or 
(2)  Provides to a licensed dealer or private seller of firearms or ammunition what the person knows to be materially false information with intent to deceive the dealer or seller about the legality of a transfer of a firearm or ammunition; or 
(3)  Willfully procures another to violate the provisions of subdivisions (1) or (2) of this subsection. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to criminal investigations conducted by the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, authorized agents of such investigations, or to a peace officer, as defined in RSMo 542.261, acting at the explicit direction of the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-71. - Unlawful transfer of weapons. 
    A person commits the offense of unlawful transfer of weapons if he/she: 
(1)  Knowingly sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers a blackjack to a person less than 18 years old without the consent of the child's custodial parent or guardian or recklessly, as defined in RSMo 562.016, sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers any firearm to a person less than 18 years old without the consent of the child's custodial parent or guardian; provided that this does not prohibit the delivery of such weapons to any peace officer or member of the Armed Forces or National Guard while performing his/her official duty; or 
(2)  Recklessly, as defined in RSMo 562.016, sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers a firearm or ammunition for a firearm to a person who is intoxicated. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-72. - Possession of firearm unlawful for certain persons. 
    A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of a firearm if such person knowingly has any firearm in his or her possession and: 
(1)  Such person has been convicted of a felony under the laws of this state, or of a crime under the laws of any state or of the United States which, if committed within this state, would be a felony; or 
(2)  Such person is a fugitive from justice, is habitually in an intoxicated or drugged condition, or is currently adjudged mentally incompetent. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-73. - Failure to supervise minor. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Alcoholic beverages. Any beverage constituting intoxicating liquor, light wines, malt liquor or non-intoxicating beer, as those terms are defined in chapter 3 of this Code. 
    Controlled substance. Any drug, substance or immediate precursor defined or described as such in Section 195.010, RSMo. (2000) as may be amended or revised from time to time. 
    Delivery of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances. The gift or exchange of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance from one person to another. 
    Minor. Any person under the age of 21 years. 
    Parent. A natural or adoptive parent, or a guardian, or the adult designee of either of them. 
    Party, gathering or event. An assemblage or a group of persons for a social occasion or for a social activity. 
    Person in control of the premises. An adult who owns, leases, rents or is otherwise the lawful occupant of any premises or the adult designee thereof. 
    Practitioner. Any medical professional or other person as defined or described in Section 195.010, RSMo. (2000) as may be amended or revised from time to time. 
(b)  Use of premises for consumption of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or negligently permit, allow or host, on or in a premises under his or her control, the consumption of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances by a minor; except that this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  The delivery of alcoholic beverages to a minor or the consumption of alcoholic beverages by a minor in connection with the performance of any bona fide religious service under the supervision of an adult, with the consent of the person in control of the premises. 
(2)  The delivery of an alcoholic beverage to a minor by that minor's parent and under the direct supervision of the parent. 
(3)  The possession or consumption of or the delivery to a minor of a controlled substance prescribed for that minor by a practitioner when such delivery by that minor's parent or by the person in control of the premises, provided that he or she has obtained the prior consent of that minor's parent. 
(c)  Rental of a premises. It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, employee or contractor thereof to rent any room, rooms, apartment or any building or portion of a building to a minor or to any adult when it is reasonably foreseeable that said adult, or his or her adult designee, will leave the said premises or reasonably foreseeable that said premises may be used for a gathering at which alcoholic beverages or controlled substances may be in possession of or consumed by minors except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(d)  Duty to disperse-Police services, fees for police services. 
(1)  Any person in control of a premises at which alcoholic beverages or controlled substances are in the possession of or are being consumed by minors, or his or her adult designee, shall cause all persons in or on said premises who are not lawful residents thereof to disperse not more than 15 minutes after personally receiving an order to do so issued by a peace officer. 
(2)  When a party, gathering or event occurs on private property and a police officer at the scene determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, the person or persons responsible for the party, gathering or event will be held liable for the cost of providing police services during a second or follow-up response by the police after a first warning to the person or persons responsible for the party, gathering or event. The second or follow-up response may also result in the arrest and/or citation of violators pursuant to state law or other provisions of this Code. 
(3)  The police services fee shall include the cost of personnel and equipment but shall not exceed $500.00 for a single incident provided, however, that the city does not waive its right to seek reimbursement for actual costs exceeding $500.00 through other legal remedies. The amount of such fees shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person responsible for the party, gathering or event. If such persons are minors, their parents or guardians shall be responsible for such debt. Any person owing such fees to the city shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for recovery of such fees, including reasonable attorney's fees. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person or persons convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be fined an amount not to exceed $500.00 for each offense; except that for third and subsequent violations by the same person or persons, the fine shall not be less than $1,000.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Secs. 17-74-17-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 

Sec. 17-81. - Unlawful use. 
    It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance or an imitation controlled substance in violation of this division or as defined by RSMo Ch. 195, in violation of RSMo Ch. 195 or 579. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-82. - Advertisement. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-83. - Determination. 
    In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
(2)  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance or imitation controlled substance; 
(3)  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this division; 
(4)  The proximity of the object to controlled substances or imitation controlled substances; 
(5)  The existence of any residue of controlled substances or imitation controlled substances on the object; 
(6)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons who he knows, or should reasonably know, intending to use the object to facilitate a violation of this division; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to direct violation of this division shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia; 
(7)  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
(8)  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use; 
(9)  National or local advertising concerning its use; 
(10)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
(11)  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
(12)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
(13)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; 
(14)  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-84. - Limitations on possession and sale of methamphetamine precursor drugs. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of unlawful sale, distribution, or purchase of over-the-counter methamphetamine precursor drugs if he or she knowingly: 
(1)  Sells, distributes, dispenses, or otherwise provides any number of packages of any drug product containing detectable amounts of ephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or pseudoephedrine, or any of their salts, optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers, in a total amount greater than nine grams to the same individual within a 30-day period, unless the amount is dispensed, sold, or distributed pursuant to a valid prescription; or 
(2)  Purchases, receives, or otherwise acquires within a 30-day period, other than pursuant to a lawful transaction by a pharmacy with its suppliers, any number of packages of any drug product containing any detectable amount of ephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or pseudoephedrine, or any of their salts or optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers in a total amount greater than nine grams, without regard to the number of transactions, unless the amount is purchased, received, or acquired pursuant to a valid prescription; or 
(3)  Purchases, receives, or otherwise acquires within a 24-hour period, other than pursuant to a lawful transaction by a pharmacy with its suppliers, any number of packages of any drug product containing any detectable amount of ephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or pseudoephedrine, or any of their salts or optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers in a total amount greater than three and six-tenths grams, without regard to the number of transactions, unless the amount is purchased, received, or acquired pursuant to a valid prescription; or 
(4)  Dispenses or offers drug products that are not excluded from Schedule V in subsection 17 or 18 of RSMo 195.017, and that contain detectable amounts of ephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or pseudoephedrine, or any of their salts, optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers, without ensuring that such products are located behind a pharmacy counter where the public is not permitted and that such products are dispensed by a registered pharmacist or pharmacy technician under subsection 11 of RSMo 195.017; or 
(5)  Holds a retail sales license issued under RSMo Ch. 144, and knowingly sells or dispenses packages that do not conform to the packaging requirements of RSMo 195.418, except that any person who violates the packaging requirements of RSMo 195.418, and is considered the general owner or operator of the outlet where ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine products are available for sale shall not be penalized if he or she documents that an employee training program was in place to provide the employee who made the unlawful retail sale with information on the state and federal regulations regarding ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine. 
(b)  A pharmacist, intern pharmacist, or registered pharmacy technician commits the offense of unlawful sale, distribution, or purchase of over-the-counter methamphetamine precursor drugs if he or she knowingly: 
(1)  Sells, distributes, dispenses, or otherwise provides any number of packages of any drug product containing detectable amounts of ephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or pseudoephedrine, or any of their salts or optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers, in a total amount greater than three and six-tenth grams to the same individual within a 24-hour period, unless the amount is dispensed, sold, or distributed pursuant to a valid prescription; or 
(2)  Sells, distributes, dispenses or otherwise provides to an individual under 18 years of age without a valid prescription any number of packages of any drug product containing any detectable quantity of pseudoephedrine, its salts, isomers, or salts of optical isomers, or ephedrine, its salts or optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers. 
(c)  A person commits the offense of unlawful marketing of ephedrine or pseudoephedrine if he or she knowingly markets, sells, distributes, advertises, or labels any drug product containing ephedrine, its salts, optical isomers and salts of optical isomers, or pseudoephedrine, its salts, optical isomers and salts of optical isomers, for indication of stimulation, mental alertness, weight loss, appetite control, energy or other indications not approved under the pertinent federal over-the-counter drug final monograph or tentative final monograph or approved new drug application. 
(d)  A person commits the offense of possession of methamphetamine precursors if he or she knowingly possesses one or more chemicals listed in subsection 2 of RSMo 195.400, reagents, solvents, or any other chemicals proven to be precursor ingredients of methamphetamine or amphetamine, as established by expert testimony, with the intent to manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, or otherwise alter that chemical to create a controlled substance or a controlled substance analogue in violation of RSMo Ch. 579 or 195. Possession of more than 24 grams of ephedrine or pseudoephedrine shall be prima facie evidence of intent to violate this subsection. This subsection shall not apply to any practitioner or to any product possessed in the course of a legitimate business. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-85. - Inhalation or inducing others to inhale solvent fumes to cause certain reactions, prohibited-exceptions. 
    No person shall intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any solvent, particularly toluol, amyl nitrite, butyl nitrite, cyclohexyl nitrite, ethyl nitrite, pentyl nitrite and propyl nitrite and their iso-analogues or induce any other person to do so for the purpose of causing a condition of, or inducing symptoms of, intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational behavior, exhilaration, paralysis, stupefaction, or dulling of senses or nervous system, or for the purpose of, in any manner, changing, distorting or disturbing the audio, visual or mental processes; except that this section shall not apply to the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purposes. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-86. - Inducing, or possession with intent to induce, symptoms by use of solvents and other substances, prohibited. 
(a)  As used in this section "alcohol beverage vaporizer" means any device which, by means of heat, a vibrating element, or any method, is capable of producing a breathable mixture containing one or more alcoholic beverages to be dispensed for inhalation into the lungs via the nose or mouth or both. 
(b)  No person shall intentionally or willfully induce the symptoms of intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational behavior, exhilaration, paralysis, stupefaction, or dulling of the senses or nervous system, distortion of audio, visual or mental processes by the use or abuse of any of the following substances: 
(1)  Solvents, particularly toluol; 
(2)  Ethyl alcohol; 
(3)  Amyl nitrite and its iso-analogues; 
(4)  Butyl nitrite and its iso-analogues; 
(5)  Cyclohexyl nitrite and its iso-analogues; 
(6)  Ethyl nitrite and its iso-analogues; 
(7)  Pentyl nitrite and its iso-analogues; and 
(8)  Propyl nitrite and its iso-analogues. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to substances that have been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration as therapeutic drug products or are contained in approved over-the-counter drug products or administered lawfully pursuant to the order of an authorized medical practitioner. 
(d)  No person shall intentionally possess any solvent, particularly toluol, amyl nitrite, butyl nitrite, cyclohexyl nitrite, ethyl nitrite, pentyl nitrite and propyl nitrite and their iso-analogues for the purpose of using it in the manner prohibited by section 17-85 and this section. 
(e)  No person shall possess or use an alcoholic beverage vaporizer. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the legal consumption of intoxicating liquor. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-87. - Possession or purchase of solvents to aid others in violations of sections 17-85 and 17-86. 
    No person shall intentionally possess, buy, sell or transfer any solvent, particularly toluol, amyl nitrite, butyl nitrite, cyclohexyl nitrite, ethyl nitrite, pentyl nitrite and propyl nitrite and their iso-analogues, for the purpose of inducing or aiding any other person to violate the provisions of sections 17-85 and 17-86 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Secs. 17-88-17-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 17-101. - Affixing advertisements to public places. 
    No person shall paint, post, place, hang, suspend or affix any advertisement, card, poster, sign, banner or streamer of any nature or for any purpose; nor cause the same to be done on or to any curbstone, flagstone or any other portion of any street or sidewalk; upon any tree or lamppost standing or erected on any public street, alley or other public place; upon any pole erected upon any public street, alley or other public place, which pole is used to carry telephone wires or cables, electric light wires or other electric conductors; or to any hydrant, bridge or other public structure within the city; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall apply to any official notice required by law or ordinance to be posted by public officers. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-102. - Removal and destruction of official notices and signs. 
    No person shall deface, destroy, tear down or remove any official notice or bulletin or any official sign or signal posted or placed in conformity with law or ordinance, except an officer of the city in the proper discharge of his duties. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-103. - Tampering with public record. 
    No person shall, without proper authority, take, remove, mutilate or destroy any record, document, book or paper on file or kept on record in any public office of the city; nor shall any person retain any record, document, book, paper or property of the city after lawful demand for the return thereof has been made by an official or duly authorized agent of the city. 
    A person commits the offense of tampering with a public record if, with the purpose to impair the verity, legibility or availability of a public record, he or she knowingly makes a false entry or alteration thereto or if he or she knowingly without authority destroys or conceals any public record. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-104. - Trespassing. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of trespass if he or she enters unlawfully or knowingly remains unlawfully in a building or inhabitable structure or upon real property, or climbs or skateboards upon a city structure that has been posted with notice prohibiting such climbing or skateboarding at the direction of the city administrator. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of trespass of a school bus if he or she knowingly and unlawfully enters any part of or unlawfully operates any school bus. For the purposes of this subsection, the terms "unlawfully enters" and "unlawfully operates" refer to any entry or operation of a school bus which is not: 
(1)  Approved of and established in a school district's written policy on access to school buses; or 
(2)  Authorized by specific written approval of the school board. 
(c)  As used in this section, a person "enters unlawfully or remains unlawfully" in or upon premises when he or she is not licensed or privileged to do so. A person who, regardless of his or her purpose, enters or remains in or upon premises which are at the time open to the public does so with license and privilege unless he or she defies a lawful order not to enter or remain, personally communicated to him or her by the owner of such premises or by other authorized person. A license or privilege to enter or remain in a building which is only partly open to the public is not a license or privilege to enter or remain in that part of the building which is not open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-105. - Stealing. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of stealing if he or she appropriates property or services of another with the purpose to deprive him or her thereof, either without his or her consent or by means of deceit or coercion. 
(b)  A person shall not be deemed to have stolen video service if the video company provides unsolicited services or fails to change or disconnect service within ten days after receiving written notice to do so by its customer. 
(c)  A person does not commit an offense under this section if, at the time of the appropriation, he or she: 
(1)  Acted in the honest belief that he or she had the right to do so; or 
(2)  Acted in the honest belief that the owner, if present, would have consented to the appropriation. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-106. - Receiving stolen property. 
    A person commits the crime of receiving stolen property if for the purpose of depriving the owner of a lawful interest therein, he receives, retains or disposes of property of another knowing that it has been stolen, or believing that it has been stolen. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-107. - Destruction or removal of property. 
(a)  No person shall cut, remove, deface or in any manner injure, damage, molest, destroy, disturb or interfere with real or personal property owned or controlled by the city. 
(b)  No person shall cut, destroy, remove, disturb or injure any plant, flower, shrub, tree or bush growing upon any property owned or controlled by the city. 
(c)  No person shall willfully deface, injure, tamper with, break, disturb, interfere with, damage or destroy any property, real or personal, belonging to or under the control of another. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-108. - Failure to return rented personal property. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of stealing leased or rented property if, with the intent to deprive the owner thereof, such person: 
(1)  Purposely fails to return leased or rented personal property to the place and within the time specified in an agreement in writing providing for the leasing or renting of such personal property; 
(2)  Conceals or aids or abets the concealment of the property from the owner; 
(b)  Sells, encumbers, conveys, pawns, loans, abandons or gives away the leased or rented property or any part thereof without the written consent of the lessor, or without informing the person to whom the property is transferred to that the property is subject to a lease; 
(c)  Returns the property to the lessor at the end of the lease term, plus any agreed upon extensions, but does not pay the lease charges agreed upon in the written instrument, with the intent to wrongfully deprive the lessor of the agreed upon charges. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall apply to all forms of leasing and rental agreements including, but not limited to, contracts which provide the consumer options to buy the leased or rented personal property, lease-purchase agreements and rent-to-own contracts. For the purpose of determining if a violation of this section has occurred, leasing contracts which provide options to buy the merchandise are owned by the owner of the property until such time as the owner endorses the sale and transfer of ownership of the leased property to the lessee. 
(e)  Evidence that a lessee used a false, fictitious, or not current name, address or place of employment in obtaining the property or that a lessee fails or refuses to return the property or pay the lease charges to the lessor within seven days after written demand for the return has been sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address the person set forth in the lease agreement, or in the absence of the address, to the person's last known place of residence, shall be evidence of intent to violate the provisions of the section, except that if a motor vehicle has not been returned within 72 hours after the expiration of the lease or rental agreement, such failure to return the motor vehicle shall be prima facie evidence of the intent of the offense of stealing leased or rented property. Where the leased or rented property is a motor vehicle, if the motor vehicle has not been returned within 72 hours after the expiration of the lease or rental agreement, the lessor may notify the local law enforcement agency of the failure of the lessee to return such motor vehicle, and the local law enforcement agency shall cause such motor vehicle to be put into any appropriate state and local computer system listing stolen motor vehicles. Any law enforcement officer which stops such a motor vehicle may seize the motor vehicle and notify the lessor that he/she may recover such motor vehicle after it is photographed and its vehicle identification number is recorded for evidentiary purposes. Where the leased or rented property is not a motor vehicle, if such property has not been returned within the seven-day period prescribed in this subsection, the owner of the property shall report the failure to return the property to the local law enforcement agency, and such law enforcement agency may within five days notify the person who leased or rented the property that such person is in violation of this section, and that failure to immediately return the property may subject such person to arrest for the violation. 
(f)  This section shall not apply if such personal property is a vehicle and such return is made more difficult or expensive by a defect in such vehicle which renders such vehicle inoperable if the lessee shall notify the lessor of the location of such vehicle and such defect before the expiration of the lease or rental agreement or within ten days after proper notice. 
(g)  Any person who has leased or rented personal property of another who destroys such property so as to avoid returning it to the owner commits the offense of property damage pursuant to section 17-107 in addition to being in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-109. - Tampering with fire hydrants prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall tamper with any fire hydrant, fireplug or other device available for connecting a fire hose to a water main without obtaining written authority to do so from firefighting authorities having jurisdiction in the area within which such device is located and from the owner of such device. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to employees of the city acting in behalf of the city, to the owner of such device or the agents and employees of such owner, and any firefighting personnel engaged in any activity related to firefighting or the maintenance and operation of firefighting equipment. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-110. - Award. 
    An award of $50.00 may be made to a person giving information which leads to the recovery of stolen city property, or which leads to the recovery of damages in cases of vandalism to city property upon the recommendation of the city administrator and approval by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-111. - Passing bad checks. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of passing a bad check when he or she: 
(1)  With the purpose to defraud, makes, issues or passes a check or other similar sight order or any other form of presentment involving the transmission of account information for the payment of money knowing that it will not be paid by the drawee or that there is no such drawee; or 
(2)  Makes, issues or passes a check or other similar sight order or any other form of presentment involving the transmission of account information for the payment of money, knowing that there are insufficient funds in or on deposit with that account for the payment of such check, sight order or other form of presentment involving the transmission of account information in full and all other checks, sight orders or other forms of presentment involving the transmission of account information upon such funds then outstanding, or that there is no such account or no drawee and fails to pay the check or sight order or other form of presentment involving the transmission of account information within ten days after receiving actual notice in writing that it has not been paid because of insufficient funds or credit with the drawee or because there is no such drawee. 
(b)  As used in subparagraph (2) of subsection (a) of this section, "actual notice in writing" means notice of the non-payment which is actually received by the defendant. Such notice may include the service of summons or warrant upon the defendant for the initiation of the prosecution of the check or checks which are the subject matter of the prosecution if the summons or warrant contains information of the ten-day period during which the instrument may be paid and that payment of the instrument within such ten-day period will result in dismissal of the charges. The requirement of notice shall also be satisfied for written communications which are tendered to the defendant and which the defendant refuses to accept. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-112. - Possession of prohibited theft devices. 
    It shall be unlawful to possess any theft detection shielding device, theft detection device remover or other tool, instrument, article, box or bag adapted, modified, constructed, designed or commonly used for committing or facilitating offenses involving theft or shoplifting, with the intent to use such item in committing a theft, stealing or shoplifting, or with knowledge that some person has the intent to use the same in committing a theft, stealing or shoplifting. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-113. - Tampering. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of tampering if he/she: 
(1)  Tampers with property of another for the purpose of causing substantial inconvenience to that person or to another; 
(2)  Unlawfully rides in or upon another's automobile, airplane, motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle; 
(3)  Tampers or makes connection with property of a utility; or 
(4)  Tampers with, or causes to be tampered with, any meter or other property of an electric, gas, steam or water utility, the effect of which tampering is either: 
a.  To prevent the proper measuring of electric, gas, steam or water service; or 
b.  To permit the diversion of any electric, gas, steam or water service. 
(b)  In any prosecution under paragraph (4) of subsection (a), proof that a meter or any other property of a utility has been tampered with, and the person or persons accused received the use or direct benefit of the electric, gas, steam or water service with one or more of the effects described in paragraph (4) of subsection (a), shall be sufficient to support an inference which the trial court may submit to the trier of fact from which the trier of fact may conclude that there has been a violation of such subdivision by the person or persons who use or receive the direct benefit of the electric, gas, steam or water service. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-114. - Tampering with computer data. 
    A person commits the offense of tampering with computer data if he or she knowingly and without authorization or without reasonable grounds to believe that he or she has such authorization: 
(1)  Modifies or destroys data or programs residing or existing internal to a computer, computer system, or computer network; 
(2)  Modifies or destroys data or programs or supporting documentation residing or existing external to a computer, computer system, or computer network; 
(3)  Discloses or takes data, programs or supporting documentation, residing or existing internal or external to a computer, computer system, or computer network; 
(4)  Discloses or takes a password, identifying code, personal identification number, or other confidential information about a computer system or network that is intended to or does control access to the computer system or network; 
(5)  Accesses a computer, a computer system, or a computer network, and intentionally examines information about another person; or 
(6)  Receives, retains, uses, or discloses any data he or she knows or believes was obtained in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-115. - Tampering with computer equipment. 
    A person commits the offense of tampering with computer equipment if he or she knowingly and without authorization or without reasonable grounds to believe that he or she has such authorization: 
(1)  Modifies, destroys, damages, or takes equipment or data storage devices used or intended to be used in a computer, computer system, or computer network; or 
(2)  Modifies, destroys, damages, or takes any computer, computer system, or computer network. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-116. - Tampering with computer users. 
    A person commits the offense of tampering with computer users if he or she knowingly and with authorization or without reasonable grounds to believe that he or she has such authorization: 
(1)  Accesses or causes to be accessed any computer, computer system, or computer network; or 
(2)  Denies or causes the denial of computer system services to an authorized user of such computer system services. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-117. - Financial exploitation of the elderly and persons with disabilities. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of financial exploitation of an elderly person or a person with a disability if such person knowingly obtains control over the property of the elderly person or person with a disability with the intent to permanently deprive the person of the use, benefit or possession of his/her property thereby benefiting the offender or detrimentally affecting the elderly person or person with a disability by: 
(1)  Deceit; 
(2)  Coercion; 
(3)  Creating or confirming another person's impression which is false and which the offender does not believe to be true; 
(4)  Failing to correct a false impression which the offender previously has created or confirmed; 
(5)  Preventing another person from acquiring information pertinent to the disposition of the property involved; 
(6)  Selling or otherwise transferring or encumbering property, failing to disclose a lien, adverse claim or other legal impediment to the enjoyment of the property, whether such impediment is or is not valid, or is or is not a matter of official record; 
(7)  Promising performance which the offender does not intend to perform or knows will not be performed; or 
(8)  Undue influence, which means the use of influence by someone who exercise authority over an elderly person or person with a disability in order to take unfair advantage of that person's vulnerable state of mind, neediness, pain, or agony, and which includes but is not limited to the improper or fraudulent use of a power of attorney, guardianship, conservatorship, or other fiduciary authority. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful in violation of this section for any person receiving or in the possession of funds of a Medicaid eligible elderly person or person with a disability residing in a facility licensed under Chapter 198 to fail to remit to the facility in which the Medicaid eligible person resides all money owing the facility resident from any source, including, but not limited to, social security, railroad retirement, or payments from any other source disclosed as resident income contained in the records of the Department of Social Services, Family Support Division or its successor. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose liability on a person who has made a good faith effort to assist the elderly person or person with a disability in the management of his or her property, but through no fault of his or her own has been unable to provide such assistance. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall limit the ability to engage in bona fide estate planning, to transfer property, and to otherwise seek to reduce estate and inheritance taxes; provided that such actions do not adversely impact the standard of living to which the elderly person or person with a disability has become accustomed at the time of such actions. 
(e)  It shall not be a defense to financial exploitation of an elderly person or person with a disability that the accused reasonably believed that the victim was not an elderly person or person with a disability. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-118. - Fraudulent use of a credit or debit device. 
    A person commits the offense of fraudulent use of a credit device or debit device if he or she uses a credit device or debit device for the purpose of obtaining services or property knowing that: 
(1)  The device is stolen, fictitious or forged; 
(2)  The device has been revoked or canceled; 
(3)  For any other reason his or her use of the device is unauthorized; or 
(4)  Uses a credit device or debit device for the purpose of paying property taxes and knowingly cancels such charges or payment without just cause. It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection if a person cancels such charges or payment after obtaining a property tax receipt to obtain license tags from the Missouri Department of Revenue. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-119. - Fraudulently stopping payment of an instrument. 
    A person commits the offense of fraudulently stopping payment of an instrument if her or she, with the purpose to defraud, stops payment on a check, draft, or debit device used in payment for the receipt of good or services. It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section if a person stops payment on a check, draft or debit device and fails to make good the check, draft or debit device transaction, or fails to return or make and comply with reasonable arrangements to return the property for which the check, draft or debit device was used in the same or substantially the same condition as when received within ten days after notice in writing from the payee that the check, draft or debit device has not been paid because of a stop payment order by the issuer to the drawee. "Notice in writing" under this section means notice deposited as certified or registered mail in the United States mail and addressed to the issuer as it appears on the dishonored check, draft or debit device transaction or to his or her last known address, containing a statement that failure to make good the check, draft or debit device transaction within ten days of receipt of the notice may subject the issuer to prosecution hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-120. - Fraudulent procurement of a credit or debit device. 
    A person commits the offense of fraudulent procurement of a credit or debit device if he or she: 
(1)  Knowingly makes or causes to be made, directly or indirectly, a false statement regarding another person for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a credit or debit device; or 
(2)  Knowingly obtains a means of identification of another person without the authorization of that person and uses that means of identification to obtain, or attempt to obtain, credit, goods or services in the name of the other person without the consent of that person. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-121. - Alteration or removal of item numbers with intent to deprive lawful owner. 
    A person commits the offense of alteration or removal of item numbers if he or she with the purpose of depriving the owner of a lawful interest therein: 
(1)  Destroys, removes, covers, conceals, alters, defaces or causes to be destroyed, removed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced the manufacturer's original serial number or other distinguishing owner-applied number or mark on any item which bears a serial number attached by the manufacturer or distinguishing number or mark applied by the owner of the item for any reason whatsoever; 
(2)  Sells, offers for sale, pawns or uses as security for a loan any item on which the manufacturer's original serial number or other distinguishing owner-applied number or mark has been destroyed, removed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced; or 
(3)  Buys, receives as security for a loan or in pawn, or in any manner receives or has in his/her possession any item on which the manufacturer's original serial number or other distinguishing owner-applied number or mark has been destroyed, removed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-122. - Unlawful entry into a motor vehicle. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of unlawful entry into a motor vehicle if the person enters a motor vehicle, or any part of a motor vehicle, without the expressed consent of the owner or the person in lawful possession of the motor vehicle. 
(b)  As used in this section, "enters" includes, but is not limited to, inserting: 
(1)  Any part of the body; or 
(2)  Any object connected with the body. 
(Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 4-24-17) 
Secs. 17-123-17-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Sexual offenses, RSMo 566.010 et seq.; prostitution, RSMo 567.010 et seq. 

Sec. 17-131. - Indecent exposure. 
    A person commits the offense of indecent exposure if such person: 
(1)  Exposes his or her genitals under circumstances in which he/she knows that his/her conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm, or to a child less than 15 years of age for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of any person including the child; 
(2)  Has sexual contact in the presence of a third person or persons under circumstances in which he or she knows that such conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm; 
(3)  Has sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse in a public place in the presence of a third person; or 
(4)  Coerces or induces a child less than 15 years of age to expose the child's genitals for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of any person including the child, or coerces or induces a female child less than 15 years of age to expose her breasts in person or through the Internet or other visual transmission for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of any person including the child. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-132. - Invasion of privacy. 
(a)  No person shall look, peer or peep into or be found loitering around or within view of any window of a private dwelling house not on his or her own property. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly view, photograph, film, videotape, or produce or otherwise create an image of another person, without that person's consent, while such other person is in a state of nudity and is in a place where one would have a reasonable expectation that they could disrobe in privacy without being concerned that their undressing was being viewed, photographed or filmed by another. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly photograph, film, videotape, or produce or otherwise create an image of another person under or through the clothing worn by that other person for the purpose of viewing the body of or the undergarments worn by that other person without that person's consent. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-133. - Prostitution prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms mean: 
(1)  Promoting prostitution. A person promotes prostitution if, acting other than as a prostitute or a patron of a prostitute, he knowingly: 
a.  Causes or aids a person to commit or engage in prostitution; 
b.  Procures or solicits patrons for prostitution; 
c.  Provides persons or premises for prostitution purposes; 
d.  Operates or assists in the operation of a house of prostitution or a prostitution enterprise; 
e.  Accepts or receives or agrees to accept or receive something of value pursuant to an agreement or understanding with any person whereby he participates or is to participate in proceeds of prostitution activity; or 
f.  Engages in any conduct designed to institute, aid or facilitate an act or enterprise of prostitution; 
(2)  Prostitution. A person commits prostitution if he engages or offers or agrees to engage in sexual conduct with another person in return for something of value to be received by the person or by a third person; 
(3)  Patronizing prostitution. A person patronizes prostitution if: 
a.  Pursuant to a prior understanding, he gives something of value to another person as compensation for that person or a third person having engaged in sexual conduct with him or with another; 
b.  He or she gives or agrees to give something of value to another person on an understanding that in return therefor that person or a third person will engage in sexual conduct with him or with another; or 
c.  He or she solicits or requests another person to engage in sexual conduct with him or with another, or to secure a third person to engage in sexual conduct with him or with another, in return for something of value; 
(4)  Sexual conduct occurs when there is: 
a.  Sexual intercourse which means any penetration, however slight, of the female sex organ by the male sex organ, whether or not an emission results; 
b.  Deviate sexual intercourse which means any sexual act involving the genitals of one person and the mouth, hand, tongue or anus of another person; or 
c.  Sexual contact which means any touching, manual or otherwise, of the anus or genitals of one person by another, done for the purpose of arousing or gratifying sexual desire of either party; 
(5)  Something of value means any money or property, or any token, object or article exchangeable for money or property. 
(b)  No person shall promote prostitution, engage in prostitution or patronize prostitution within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  The penalties for promoting prostitution, engaging in prostitution or patronizing prostitution shall be as stated in section 1-6 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-134. - Sexual misconduct prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of sexual misconduct if he or she solicits or requests another person to engage in sexual conduct under circumstances in which he or she knows that such request or solicitation is likely to cause affront or alarm. 
(b)  All terms used in this section are as defined in section 17-133(a). 
(c)  The penalty for sexual misconduct shall be as stated in section 1-6 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-135. - Prostitution houses deemed public nuisances. 
(a)  Any room, building or other structure regularly used for any activity prohibited by this article is a public nuisance. 
(b)  The city prosecuting attorney may, in addition to all other sanctions, prosecute a suit in equity to enjoin the nuisance as provided in RSMo 567.080. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-136. - Certain offenders not to reside within 1,000 feet of a school or child-care facility. 
(a)  Any person who has been found guilty of: 
(1)  Since 2004 violating any of the provisions of RSMo Ch. 566, or the provisions of RSMo 568.020, Incest; RSMo 568.045, Endangering the Welfare of a Child in the First Degree; Subsection (2) of RSMo 568.080, as it existed prior to January 1, 2017 or RSMo 573.200, Use of a Child in a Sexual Performance; RSMo 568.090, as it existed prior to January 1, 2017 or RSMo 573.205, Promoting a Sexual Performance by a Child; RSMo 573.023, Sexual Exploitation of a Minor; RSMo 573.025, Promoting Child Pornography in the First Degree; RSMo 573.035, Promoting Child Pornography in the Second Degree; RSMo 573.037, Possession of Child Pornography; or RSMo 573.040, Furnishing Pornographic Material to Minors; or 
(2)  Since 2008 any offense in any other jurisdiction which, if committed in this state, would be a violation listed in this Section; 
shall not reside within 1,000 feet of any public school as defined in RSMo 160.011, or any private school giving instruction in a grade or grades not higher than the 12th grade, or any child-care facility that is licensed under RSMo Ch. 215, or any child-care facility as defined in RSMo 215.201, that is exempt from state licensure but subject to state regulation under RSMo 215.252, and holds itself out to be a child-care facility, where the school or facility is in existence at the time the individual begins to reside at the location. 
(b)  If such person has already established a residence and a public school, a private school, or child-care facility is subsequently built or placed within 1,000 feet of such person's residence, then such person shall, within one week of the opening of such public school, private school, or child-care facility, notify the county sheriff where such public school, private school, or child-care facility is located that he or she is now residing within 1,000 feet of such public school, private school, or child-care facility and shall provide verifiable proof to the sheriff that he or she resided there prior to the opening of such public school, private school, or child-care facility. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, "resides" means sleeps in a residence, which may include more than one location and may be mobile or transitory. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-137. - Certain offenders not to physically be present or loiter within 500 feet of a child care facility-Violation-Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who, since 2009, has been found guilty of: 
(1)  Violating any of the provisions of RSMo Ch. 566, or the provisions of RSMo 568.020, Incest; RSMo 568.045, Endangering the Welfare of a Child in the First Degree; Subsection (2) of RSMo 568.080, as it existed prior to January 1, 2017 or RSMo 573.200, Use of a Child in a Sexual Performance; RSMo 568.090, as it existed prior to January 1, 2157 or RSMo 573.205, Promoting a Sexual Performance by a Child; RSMo 573.023, Sexual Exploitation of a Minor; RSMo 573.025, Promoting Child Pornography in the First Degree; RSMo 573.035, Promoting Child Pornography in the Second Degree; RSMo 573.037, Possession of Child Pornography; or RSMo 573.040, Furnishing Pornographic Material to Minors; or 
(2)  Any offense in any other jurisdiction which, if committed in this state, would be a violation listed in this section; 
shall not knowingly be physically present in or loiter within 500 feet of or to approach, contact, or communicate with any child under 18 years of age in any child care facility building, on the real property comprising any child care facility when persons under the age of 18 years are present in the building, on the grounds, or in the conveyance, unless the offender is a parent, legal guardian, or custodian of a student present in the building or on the grounds. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "child care facility" shall include any child care facility licensed under RSMo Ch. 215, or any child care facility that is exempt from state licensure but subject to state regulation under RSMo 215.252 and holds itself out to be a child care facility. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-138. - Additional restrictions on certain offenders. 
(a)  Not to be present within 500 feet of school property, exception-Permission required for parents or guardians who are offenders, procedure. Any person who has been found guilty of: 
(1)  Since 2006 violating any of the provisions of RSMo Ch. 566, or the provisions of RSMo 568.020, Incest; RSMo 568.045, Endangering the Welfare of a Child in the First Degree; Subsection (2) of RSMo 568.080, as it existed prior to January 1, 2017 or RSMo 573.200, Use of a Child in a Sexual Performance; RSMo 568.090, as it existed prior to January 1, 2017 or RSMo 573.205, Promoting a Sexual Performance by a Child; RSMo 573.023, Sexual Exploitation of a Minor; RSMo 573.025, Promoting Child Pornography; RSMo 573.040, Furnishing Pornographic Material to Minors; or 
(2)  Since 2008 any offense in any other jurisdiction which, if committed in this state, would be a violation listed in this Section; 
shall not be present in or loiter within 500 feet of any school building, on real property comprising any school, or in any conveyance owned, leased or contracted by a school to transport students to or from school or a school-related activity when persons under the age of 18 years are present in the building, on the grounds, or in the conveyance, unless the offender is a parent, legal guardian, or custodian of a student present in the building and has met the conditions set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  No parent, legal guardian or custodian who has been found guilty of violating any of the offenses listed in subsection (a) of this section shall be present in any school building, on real property comprising any school, or in any conveyance owned, leased or contracted by a school to transport students to or from school or a school-related activity when persons under the age of 18 years are present in the building, on the grounds or in the conveyance unless the parent, legal guardian or custodian has permission to be present from the superintendent or school board or in the case of a private school from the principal. In the case of a public school, if permission is granted, the superintendent or school board president must inform the principal of the school where the sex offender will be present. Permission may be granted by the superintendent, school board, or in the case of a private school from the principal for more than one event at a time, such as a series of events, however, the parent, legal guardian or custodian must obtain permission for any other event he/she wishes to attend for which he/she has not yet had permission granted. 
(c)  Certain offenders not to be present or loiter within 500 feet of a public park or swimming pool . 
(1)  Any person who, since 2009, has been found guilty of: 
a.  Violating any of the provisions of RSMo Ch. 566, or the provisions of RSMo 568.020, Incest; RSMo 568.045, Endangering the Welfare of a Child in the First Degree; Subsection (2) of RSMo 568.080, as it existed prior to January 1, 2017 or RSMo 573.200, Use of a Child in a Sexual Performance; RSMo 568.090, as it existed prior to January 1, 2017 or RSMo 573.205, Promoting a Sexual Performance by a Child; RSMo 573.023, Sexual Exploitation of a Minor; RSMo 573.025, Promoting Child Pornography; or RSMo 573.040, Furnishing Pornographic Material to Minors; or 
b.  Any offense in any other jurisdiction which, if committed in this state, would be a violation listed in this section; shall not knowingly be present in or loiter within 500 feet of any real property comprising any public park with playground equipment or a public swimming pool. 
(d)  Enticement of a child. 
(1)  No person 21 years of age or older shall persuade, solicit, coax, entice, or lure, whether by words, actions or through communication via the Internet or any electronic communication, any person who is less than 15 years of age for the purpose of engaging in sexual conduct. 
(2)  It is not a defense to a prosecution for a violation of this subsection that the other person was a peace officer masquerading as a minor. 
(e)  Age misrepresentation. No person shall knowingly misrepresent his or her age with the intent to use the Internet or any electronic communication to solicit engagement in sexual conduct involving a minor. 
(f)  Certain offenders not to serve as athletic coaches, managers or trainers. 
(1)  Any person who, since 2009, has been found guilty of: 
a.  Violating any of the provisions of RSMo Ch. 566, or the provisions of RSMo 568.020, Incest; RSMo 568.045, Endangering the Welfare of a Child in the First Degree; Subsection (2) of RSMo 568.080, as it existed prior to January 1, 2017 or RSMo 573.200, Use of a Child in a Sexual Performance; RSMo 568.090, as it existed prior to January 1, 2017 or RSMO 573.205, Promoting a Sexual Performance by a Child; RSMo 573.023, Sexual Exploitation of a Minor; RSMo 573.025, Promoting Child Pornography; or RSMo 573.040, Furnishing Pornographic Material to Minors; or 
b.  Any offense in any other jurisdiction which, if committed in this state, would be a violation listed in this section; shall not serve as an athletic coach, manager or athletic trainer for any sports team in which a child less than 17 years of age is a member. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-139. - Registered sexual offender, Halloween-related activities. 
    Any person first required to register as a sexual offender under RSMo 589.400 to 589.425, since 2008 shall be required on October 31 of each year to: 
(1)  Avoid all Halloween-related contact with children; 
(2)  Remain inside his or her residence between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 10:30 p.m. unless required to be elsewhere for just cause, including, but not limited to employment or medical emergencies; 
(3)  Post a sign at his or her residence stating "No candy or treats at this residence"; and 
(4)  Leave all outside residential lighting off during the evening hours after 5:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Secs. 17-140-17-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - LODGING AND ACCOMMODATIONS 

Sec. 17-156. - Registration of guests. 
    The owner, proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any hotel, motel, lodginghouse, roominghouse or other place where transients are accommodated shall, at all times, keep a standard hotel register in which shall be written the names of all the guests or persons renting or occupying rooms in such house, which register shall be signed by the person renting a room or by someone under his direction. After such registration has been made, the manager of the house or his agent shall write the number of the room such guest or person is to occupy, together with the time when such room is rented so as to identify the room occupied by the person registering. All of the foregoing shall be done before any guest is permitted to occupy a room. Such register shall be at all times open to inspection by any guest of the house wherein such register is kept and by any executive, administrative or peace officer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-157. - Registration under fictitious name. 
    No person shall write, cause to be written or knowingly permit to be written in any register in any hotel, motel, lodging place, roominghouse or other place whatsoever where transients are accommodated in the city any other or different name or designation than the true name of the person so registered therein, or the name by which such person is generally known. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-158. - Unlawful occupancy. 
    Persons of the opposite sex, except husband and wife or parent and child, shall not jointly and privately occupy any room in any dwelling unit, apartment, lodginghouse, motel or any other place where transients are accommodated. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-159. - Occupancy by persons of opposite sex. 
    No proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any hotel, motel, lodginghouse, roominghouse or other place where transients are accommodated shall rent or assign rooms for joint, private occupancy by persons of the opposite sex unless such persons shall be registered as husband and wife or as parent and child. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-160. - Reasonable doubt of lawful relationship. 
    No proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any hotel, motel, lodginghouse, roominghouse or other place where transients are accommodated shall rent or assign rooms to persons of the opposite sex for joint, private occupancy if, notwithstanding the lawful appearance of the registration, he has reasonable cause to believe that such persons are not husband and wife nor parent and child. If such transients are unknown to him, he shall not receive them as guests without first requiring some reasonable evidence of a lawful relationship. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-161. - Letting room more than once per night. 
    No proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any place where transients are accommodated for sleeping or lodging purposes shall let any room more than once between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the next day, except to bona fide travelers with baggage. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Secs. 17-162-17-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PORNOGRAPHY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Pornography, RSMo Ch. 573. 

Sec. 17-180. - Definitions. 
    When used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set out herein: 
    Child pornography. Any obscene material or performance depicting sexual conduct, sexual contact or a sexual performance and which has a minor as one of its participants or portrays a minor as an observer of such conduct, contact or performance, including but not limited to any visual depiction meeting the criteria established in RSMo 573.010(4)(b)a-c and 573.010(27). 
    Explicit sexual material. Any pictorial or three-dimensional material depicting human masturbation, deviate sexual intercourse, sexual intercourse, direct physical stimulation or unclothed genitals, sadomasochistic abuse, or emphasizing the depiction of post pubertal human genitals, but excluding works of art or of anthropological significance. 
    Furnish. To issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or otherwise provide. 
    Indecent. Language or material that depicts or describes, in terms patently offensive as measured by contemporary community standards, sexual or excretory activities or organs. 
    Material. Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture film, videotape or videotape production, or pictorial representation, or any recording or transcription, or any mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction, or stored computer data, or anything which is or may be used as a means of communication. "Material" includes undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates, stored computer data, and other latent representational objects. 
    Minor. Any person less than 18 years of age. 
    Nudity or state of nudity. The showing of the human genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or the female breast with less than a fully opaque fabric covering of any part of the nipple or areola. Body paint shall not qualify as fabric. 
    Obscene. Any material, comment, request, suggestion, proposal, or performance if, taken as a whole, and judged with reference to its impact on ordinary adults: 
(1)  Applying contemporary community standards, its predominant appeal is to prurient interest in sex; and 
(2)  With respect to the average person, applying contemporary community standards, it depicts or describes sexual conduct in a patently offensive way; and 
(3)  It lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
    Performance. Any play, motion picture film, videotape, dance or exhibition performed before an audience of one or more. 
    Pornographic for minors. Any material or performance if the following apply: 
(1)  The average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find that the material or performance, taken as a whole, has a tendency to cater or appeal to a prurient interest of minors; 
(2)  The material or performance depicts or describes nudity, sexual conduct, the condition of human genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, or sadomasochistic abuse in a way which is patently offensive to the average person applying contemporary adult community standards with respect to what is suitable for minors; and 
(3)  The material or performance, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value for minors. 
    Promote. To manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail, deliver, transfer, transmute, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same, by any means including a computer. 
    Sadomasochistic abuse. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person as an act of sexual stimulation or gratification. 
    Sexual conduct. Actual or simulated, normal or perverted acts of human masturbation; deviate sexual intercourse; sexual intercourse; or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or the breast of a female in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification; or any sadomasochistic abuse or acts including animals or any latent objects in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-181. - Promoting pornography. 
    A person commits the crime of promoting pornography for minors or obscenity if, knowing its contents or character, he: 
(1)  Promotes or possesses with the purpose to promote any obscene material for pecuniary gain; 
(2)  Produces, presents, directs or participates in any obscene performance for pecuniary gain; 
(3)  Promotes or possesses with the purpose to promote any material pornographic for minors for pecuniary gain; 
(4)  Produces, presents, directs or participates in any performance pornographic for minors for pecuniary gain; or 
(5)  Promotes, possesses with the purpose to promote, produces, presents, directs or participates in any performance that is pornographic for minors via computer, electronic transfer, Internet or computer network if the person made the matter available to a specific individual known by the defendant to be a minor. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-182. - Promoting child pornography. 
A  person commits the crime of promoting child pornography if, knowing its contents and character, he: 
(1)  Sells, delivers, exhibits or otherwise makes available, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver, exhibit, or otherwise make available any child pornography; or 
(2)  Buys, procures or possesses child pornography with the purpose to furnish it to others. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-183. - Possession of child pornography. 
    A person commits the crime of possession of child pornography if he knowingly: 
(1)  Possesses or controls any obscene material that has a minor as one of the participants or portrays as an observer of sexual conduct, sexual contact or a sexual performance a minor; or 
(2)  Possesses or controls any material that shows a minor participating or engaged in sexual conduct. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-184. - Furnishing pornographic materials to minors. 
    A person commits the crime of furnishing pornographic material to minors if, knowing its contents and character, he: 
(1)  Furnishes any material pornographic for minors, knowing that the person to whom it is furnished is a minor or acting in reckless disregard of the likelihood that such person is a minor; or 
(2)  Produces, presents, directs or participates in any performance pornographic for minors that is furnished to a minor knowing that any person viewing such performance is a minor or acting in reckless disregard of the likelihood that a minor is viewing the performance. Furnishes, produces, presents, directs, participates in any performance or otherwise makes available material that is pornographic for minors via computer, electronic transfer, Internet or computer network if the person made the matter available to a specific individual known by the defendant to be a minor. 
(3)  It is not a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section that the person being furnished the pornographic material is a peace officer masquerading as a minor. 
(4)  Video cassettes or other video reproduction devices, and the jackets, cases or coverings of such video reproduction devices, shall not be rented or sold to a person less than 17 years of age and at any place of business in the city shall be displayed and maintained in a separate area not accessible to persons less than 17 years of age, if they are pornographic for minors or if: 
a.  Taken as a whole and applying contemporary community standards, the average person would find that it has a tendency to cater or appeal to morbid interest in violence for persons less than 17 years of age; and 
b.  It depicts violence in a way which is patently offensive to the average person applying contemporary adult community standards with respect to what is suitable for persons less than 17 years of age; and 
c.  Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value for persons less than 17 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-185. - Evidence in obscenity and child pornography cases. 
(a)  In any prosecution under this article, evidence shall be admissible to show: 
(1)  What the predominant appeal of the material or performance would be for ordinary adults or minors. 
(2)  The literary, artistic, political or scientific value of the material or performance. 
(3)  The degree of public acceptance in this state and in the local community. 
(4)  The appeal to prurient interest in advertising or other promotion of the material or performance. 
(5)  The purpose of the author, creator, promoter, furnisher or publisher of the material or performance. 
(b)  Testimony of the author, creator, promoter, furnisher, publisher, or expert testimony, relating to factors entering into the determination of the issues of obscenity or child pornography, shall be admissible. 
(c)  In any prosecution for possession of child pornography or promoting child pornography, the determination that the person who participated in the child pornography was younger than 18 years of age may be made as set forth in RSMo 568.100, or reasonable inferences drawn by a judge or jury after viewing the alleged pornographic material shall constitute sufficient evidence of the child's age to support a conviction. 
(d)  In any prosecution for promoting child pornography, no showing is required that the performance or material involved appeals to prurient interest, that it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value, or that it is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the community as a whole. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-186. - Public display of explicit sexual material. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of public display of explicit sexual material if he or she recklessly: 
(1)  Exposes, places, exhibits, or in any fashion, displays explicit sexual material in any location, whether public or private, and in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character distinguished by normal unaided vision as viewed from a street, highway, public sidewalk, or the property of others, or from any portion of the person's store, the exhibitor's store or property when items and materials other than this material are offered for sale or rent to the public; or 
(2)  Fails to take prompt action to remove such a display from property in his possession after learning of its existence. 
(b)  For purposes of this section each day there is a violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-187. - Sexual exploitation of a minor. 
    A person commits the offense of sexual exploitation of a minor if such person knowingly or recklessly photographs, films, videotapes, produces, or otherwise creates obscene material with a minor or child pornography. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-188. - Use of child in sexual performance. 
    A person commits the offense of use of a child in a sexual performance if, knowing the character and content thereof, the person employs, authorizes, or induces another person less than 18 years of age to engage in a performance which includes sexual conduct or, being a parent, legal guardian, or custodian of such a person less than 18 years of age, consents to their participation in such sexual performance. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-189. - Promoting sexual performance by a child. 
    A person commits the offense of promoting a sexual performance by a child if, knowing the character and content thereof, the person promotes a performance which includes sexual conduct by a person less than 18 years of age or produces or directs any performance which includes sexual conduct by a person less than 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-190. - Failure to report child pornography. 
    A person commits the offense of failure to report child pornography if he or she, being a commercial film or photographic print processor, computer provider, installer or repair person, or any internet service provider who has knowledge of or observes, within the scope of the person's professional capacity or employment, any film, photograph, videotape, negative, slide, or computer-generated image or picture depicting a person under 18 years of age engaged in an act of sexual conduct, fails to report such instance to the city police department as soon as practicably possible. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-191. - Failure to report child pornography. 
    A person commits the offense of failure to report child pornography if he or she, being a commercial film or photographic print processor, computer provider, installer or repair person, or any internet service provider who has knowledge of or observes, within the scope of the person's professional capacity or employment, any film, photograph, videotape, negative, slide, or computer-generated image or picture depicting a person under 18 years of age engaged in an act of sexual conduct, fails to report such instance to the city police department as soon as practicably possible. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-192. - Obscene or indecent commercial messaging. 
    A person commits the offense of obscene or indecent commercial messaging if he or she, by means of a telephone communication for commercial purposes, makes directly or by means of an electronic recording device, any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal which is obscene or indecent, or knowingly permits any telephone or telephone facility connected to a local exchange telephone under such person's control to be used for obscene or indecent commercial messaging, in either case regardless of whether such person placed or initiated the telephone communication. This section is not applicable to a telecommunications company as defined in RSMo 386.020, over whose facilities the prohibited communication is made by someone else. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Secs. 17-193-17-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES CONCERNING TOBACCO, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE AND VAPOR PRODUCTS 

Sec. 17-201. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Alternative nicotine product. Any non-combustible product containing nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, absorbed, dissolved, or ingested by any other means. Alternative nicotine product does not include any vapor product, tobacco product or any product regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. 
    Distribute. A conveyance to the public by sale, barter, gift or sample. 
    Minor. A person under the age of 18 years. 
    Proof of age. A driver's license or other generally accepted means of identification that contains a picture of the individual and appears on its face to be valid. 
    Rolling papers. Paper designed, manufactured, marketed or sold for use primarily as a wrapping or enclosure for tobacco which enables a person to roll loose tobacco into a smokeable cigarette. 
    Sample. A tobacco product, alternative nicotine product, or vapor product distributed to members of the general public at no cost or at nominal cost for product promotional purposes. 
    Sampling. The distribution to members of the general public of tobacco product, alternative nicotine product, or vapor product samples. 
    Tobacco products. Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco, but does not include alternative nicotine products, or vapor products. 
    Vapor product. Any non-combustible product containing nicotine that employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from nicotine in a solution or other form. Vapor product includes any electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any vapor cartridge or other container of nicotine in a solution or other form that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device. Vapor product does not include any alternative nicotine product or tobacco product. 
    Vending machine. Any mechanical, electric or electronic self-service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-202. - Unlawful to sell or distribute tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or rolling papers to minors-Vending machine requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, provide or distribute tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or rolling papers to persons under 18 years of age. 
(b)  All vending machines that dispense tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or rolling papers shall be located within the unobstructed line of sight and under the direct supervision of an adult responsible for preventing persons less than 18 years of age from purchasing any tobacco product, alternative nicotine product, vapor product, or rolling papers from such machine or shall be equipped with a lock-out device to prevent the machines from being operated until the person responsible for monitoring sales from the machines disables the lock. Such locking device shall be of a design that prevents it from being left in an unlocked condition and which will allow only a single sale when activated. A locking device shall not be required on machines that are located in areas where persons less than 18 years of age are not permitted or are prohibited by law. An owner of an establishment whose vending machine is not in compliance with the provisions of this subsection shall be subject to the penalties contained in subsection (e) of this section. A determination of non-compliance may be made by a local law enforcement agency or the division of liquor control. Nothing in this section shall apply to a vending machine if located in a factory, private club or other location not generally accessible to the general public. 
(c)  No person or entity shall sell, provide or distribute any tobacco product, alternative nicotine product, or vapor product, or rolling papers to any minor or sell any individual cigarettes to any person in this state. This subsection shall not apply to the distribution by family members on property that is not open to the public. 
(d)  Any person, including, but not limited to, a sales clerk, owner or operator, who violates subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this section or section 17-63 of this article shall be penalized as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, $25.00; 
(2)  For the second offense, $100.00; and 
(3)  For a third and subsequent offenses, $250.00. 
(e)  Any owner of the establishment where tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or rolling papers are available for sale who violates subsection (c) of this section shall not be penalized pursuant to this section if such person documents the following: 
(1)  An in-house or other tobacco compliance employee training program was in place to provide the employee with information on the state and federal regulations regarding sales of tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products to minors. Such training program must be attended by all employees who sell tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products to the general public; 
(2)  A signed statement by the employee stating that the employee has been trained and understands the state laws and federal regulations regarding the sale of tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products to minors; and 
(3)  Such in-house or other tobacco compliance training meets the minimum training criteria, which shall not exceed a total of 90 minutes in length, established by the division of liquor control. 
(f)  The exemption in subsection (e) of this section shall not apply to any person who is considered the general owner or operator of the outlet where tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or rolling papers are available for sale if: 
(1)  Four or more violations per location of subsection (c) of this section occur within a one-year period; or 
(2)  Such person knowingly violates or knowingly allows his/her employees to violate subsection (c) of this section. 
(g)  If a sale is made by an employee of the owner of an establishment in violation of this article, the employee shall be guilty of an offense established in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section. If a vending machine is operated in violation of section 17-63, the owner of the establishment shall be guilty of an offense established in subsections (c) and (d) of this section. If a sample is distributed by an employee of a company conducting the sampling, such employee shall be guilty of an offense established in subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(h)  A person cited for selling, providing or distributing any tobacco product, alternative nicotine product or vapor product to any individual less than 18 years of age in violation of subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this section shall conclusively be presumed to have reasonably relied on proof of age of the purchaser or recipient, and such person shall not be found guilty of such violation if such person raises and proves as an affirmative defense that such individual presented a driver's license or other government-issued photo identification purporting to establish that such individual was 18 years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-203. - Minors prohibited from purchase or possession of tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products or rolling papers-Misrepresentation of age. 
(a)  No person less than 18 years of age shall purchase, attempt to purchase or possess cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or rolling papers unless such person is an employee of a seller of cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products and is in such possession to effect a sale in the course of employment or an employee of the division of liquor control for enforcement purposes pursuant to subsection (5) of RSMo 407.934. 
(b)  Any person less than 18 years of age shall not misrepresent his/her age to purchase cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or rolling papers. 
(c)  Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be penalized as follows: 
(1)  For the first violation, the person is guilty of an infraction and shall have any cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or rolling papers confiscated; 
(2)  For a second violation and any subsequent violations, the person is guilty of an infraction, shall have any cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or rolling papers confiscated and shall complete a tobacco education or smoking cessation program, if available. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-204. - Retail sales tax license required for sale of tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products or rolling papers-Display of sign required where. 
    No person shall sell cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or rolling papers unless the person has a retail sales tax license. 
(a)  The owner of an establishment at which tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or rolling papers are sold at retail or through vending machines shall cause to be prominently displayed in a conspicuous place at every display from which tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products are sold and on every vending machine where tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products are purchased a sign that shall: 
(1)  Contain in red lettering at least one-half inch high on a white background the following: 
"IT IS A VIOLATION OF STATE LAW FOR CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS, OR VAPOR PRODUCTS TO BE SOLD OR OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO ANY PERSON UNDER THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN OR FOR SUCH PERSON TO PURCHASE, ATTEMPT TO PURCHASE OR POSSESS CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS, OR VAPOR PRODUCTS"; and 
(2)  Include a depiction of a pack of cigarettes at least two inches high defaced by a red diagonal diameter of a surrounding red circle and the words "Under 18." 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-205. - Restrictions on sales of individual packs. 
(a)  No person or entity shall sell individual packs of cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, rolling papers, or smokeless tobacco products unless such packs satisfy one of the following conditions prior to the time of sale: 
(1)  It is sold through a vending machine; or 
(2)  It is displayed behind the checkout counter or it is within the unobstructed line of sight of the sales clerk or store attendant from the checkout counter. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 17-206. - Proof of age required, when defense to action for violation is reasonable reliance on proof-Liability. 
(a)  A person or entity selling tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or rolling papers or distributing tobacco product, alternative nicotine product, or vapor product samples shall require proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient if an ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance that such prospective purchaser or recipient may be under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  The operator's or chauffeur's license issued pursuant to the provisions of RSMo 302.177, or the operator's or chauffeur's license issued pursuant to the laws of any state or possession of the United States to residents of those states or possessions, or an identification card as provided for in RSMo 302.181, or the identification card issued by any uniformed service of the United States, or a valid passport shall be presented by the holder thereof upon request of any agent of the division of liquor control or any owner or employee of an establishment that sells tobacco, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or rolling papers for the purpose of aiding the agent, owner or employee to determine whether or not the person is at least 18 years of age when such person desires to purchase or possess tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or rolling papers. Upon such presentation, the owner or employee of the establishment shall compare the photograph and physical characteristics noted on the license, identification card or passport with the physical characteristics of the person presenting the license, identification card or passport. 
(c)  No person shall, without authorization from the department of revenue, reproduce, alter, modify or misrepresent any chauffeur's license, motor vehicle operator's license or identification card. 
(d)  Reasonable reliance on proof of age or on the appearance of the purchaser or recipient shall be a defense to any action for a violation of subsections (a), (b) and (c) of section 17-63 of this article. No person shall be liable for more than one violation of subsections (b) and (c) of section 17-63 on any single day. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-13-17) 
Chapter 18 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; administration, ch. 2; department of parks and recreation, § 2-236; amusements, ch. 4; speed limit in parks and recreational areas, § 15-490; planning and development, ch. 19; subdivisions, ch. 25; open space in subdivisions, § 25-121 et seq.; trailers and recreational vehicles, ch. 28; use regulations in public activity districts, app. A, art. VIIIA, § 2. 
State Law reference- Recreational systems, RSMo 67.750 et seq.; parks generally, RSMo 79.390; municipal parks and recreation generally, RSMo 90.010 et seq.; issuance of bonds for public parks, RSMo 95.405. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - When parks open. 
    Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to the public every day of the year during designated hours. The opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted therein for public information and shall be as follows: 
George Vlasis Park 6:00 a.m.-11:00 p.m. New Ballwin Park 6:00 a.m.-11:00 p.m. Holloway Park 6:00 a.m.-11:00 p.m. Golf course 6:00 a.m.-dusk  
(Code 1973, § 17-1) 
Sec. 18-2. - Authority to close portions of parks. 
    Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the director of parks and recreation or his designee at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the director of parks and recreation may find reasonably necessary. 
(Code 1973, § 17-2) 
Sec. 18-3. - Presence in certain areas and during certain hours prohibited without permission. 
    No person shall be in any park or section or part of any park except during the hours designated for its use, or which has been declared closed to the public, unless he shall have a written permit authorizing his presence. 
(Code 1973, § 17-3) 
Sec. 18-4. - Park operating policy. 
    The director of parks and recreation shall have the authority to extend the hours of use of any of the park facilities beyond the designated hours upon proper written application and approval by the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1973, § 17-3.1) 
Sec. 18-5. - Reservation of specific park areas. 
    A permit for the use of a specific park area may be obtained by applying to the department of parks and recreation in advance of the date for which the use of a specific area is sought. Persons issued a permit for the use of a specific park area shall have preference to the use of the specific area reserved upon the dates and during the times indicated on the permit. 
    Permits for specific park areas for tournaments or organized league play shall also be obtained from the department of parks and recreation as set forth in the preceding paragraph. Tournaments for commercial purposes shall not be permitted without the expressed approval of the board of aldermen of the city. For the purposes of this paragraph, commercial purposes means for the personal or financial benefit of those conducting the tournament, as opposed to charitable or other eleemosynary purposes. 
    The tennis courts at Vlasis Park may be reserved in accordance with a reservation policy to be developed by the department of parks and recreation. The fee to reserve a tennis court shall be $10.00 per court per hour. Payment of the reservation fee shall be due in full at the time of the application. 
(Code 1973, § 17-4; Ord. No. 2333, § 1, 8-23-93; Ord. No. 08-12, § 1, 5-12-08) 
Sec. 18-6. - Reassignment of reserved areas. 
    Park areas for which reservations have been made and for which permits have been granted will be marked and held until the time designated on the permit. If the person to and for whom a permit has been granted and reservation made has not arrived and occupied the reserved area at the time indicated upon the permit, such area may be reassigned by the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1973, § 17-5) 
Sec. 18-7. - Revocation of reservations. 
    The director of parks and recreation and any park attendant or police officer shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any park rule or ordinance or upon good cause shown. 
(Code 1973, § 17-6) 
Sec. 18-8. - Permits to be exhibited when requested. 
    No person in a park shall fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the city clerk which he claims to have upon request of the director of parks and recreation or any park attendant or police officer who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance, rule or regulation of the park. 
(Code 1973, § 17-7) 
Sec. 18-9. - User fees. 
(a)  Golf Course. 
Weekday Weekend Resident $13.00 $14.00 Resident Senior/Jr. $11.00 $12.00 Non-Resident $16.00 $16.00 Non-Resident Senior/Jr. $15.00 $16.00  
Fees for permanent tee times shall be established each season administratively. 
(b)  Ballwin Golf Club: 
Day Resident Rate Nonresident Rate Monday-Thursday $200.00 $200.00 Friday $500.00 $500.00 Saturday $600.00 $600.00 Sunday $500.00 $500.00  
(c)  Bandwagon portable stage. Fees for use of the portable stage are as follows: 
(1)  Portable stage without extensions: 
$600.00 per day for four hours or less use. Additional hours in excess of four per day shall incur a fee of $75.00 per hour. 
(2)  Portable stage with extensions: 
$750.00 per day for four hours or less use. Additional hours in excess of four per day shall incur a fee of $75.00 per hour. 
The rental rate for the portable stage by nonprofit eleemosynary organizations: 
  owning property within the City of Ballwin; or 
  providing services to the public from a permanent location within the City of Ballwin 
shall be one-half of the normal portable stage rental rate. Rental of the bandwagon portable stage shall be limited to an area not greater than ten miles from the nearest boundary of the city. 
(d)  Park Pavilion reservations: 
Facility Resident Rate Nonresident Rate Ferris Park $30.00 $50.00 New Ballwin $30.00 $50.00 Vlasis (2) $45.00 $60.00 The Pointe $45.00 $60.00  
(e)  Ball field rentals. Fee for the use of each ball field is as follows: $50.00 per field per permit. 
(f)  Special junior golf/outdoor pool season pass. Junior golf/outdoor pool season pass (Memorial day thru Labor Day) 
Residents\$225.00 
Non-residents\275.00 
(g)  Mobile message boards. Fees for use of the city's mobile message boards shall be established administratively in order to promote social and community events. The city's mobile message boards may not be leased by a third party for a commercial purpose. User fees established under this subsection may be waived by city staff, if appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2240, 2-24-92; Ord. No. 2282, § 1, 11-23-92; Ord. No. 2357, § I, 1-10-94; Ord. No. 2410, § 1, 9-26-94; Ord. No. 2434, § 1, 3-27-95; Ord. No. 2479, § 1, 11-13-95; Ord. No. 2509, § 1, 3-25-96; Ord. No. 2570, § 1, 2-10-97; Ord. No. 2652, § 1, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 2671, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 99-55, §§ 1, 2, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 01-51, § 1, 7-23-01; Ord. No. 03-14, § 4, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 05-36, § 1, 8-8-05; Ord. No. 06-12, § 3, 2-13-06; Ord. No. 07-34, § 1, 11-12-07; Ord. No. 08-11, § 1, 5-12-08; Ord. No. 09-49, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 2-8-10; Ord. No. 10-15, § 1, 5-24-10; Ord. No. 11-39, § 1, 9-12-11; Ord. No. 12-02, § 1, 1-9-12; Ord. No. 16-06, § 1, 2-22-16) 
Sec. 18-10. - Community center user fees. 
(1)  Facility use fees. 
Daily Multiple Annual Resident 
(Discount) Nonresident 
(Base) Resident Nonresident Resident Nonresident Youth (3-18) $4.00 $7.00 $70.00 $120.00 $180.00 $300.00 Adult $5.00 $7.00 $90.00 $120.00 $330.00 $525.00 Seniors $4.00 $7.00 $70.00 $120.00 $180.00 $330.00 Sr. Couple: N/A N/A N/A N/A $240.00 $440.00 Single +One N/A N/A N/A N/A $430.00 %675.00 Family $15.00 N/A N/A N/A $480.00 $750.00 Employee N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A  
Membership Type Annual Corporate Rate Youth (Age: 3-18) $200.00 Adult $365.00 Seniors $200.00 Senior Couple $265.00 Single +One $475.00 Family $530.00 Employee N/A  
(2)  Corporate Membership fees for West County Chamber Area: (Not a Ballwin Business) 
Annual Corporate Fee 5-10 employees $250.00 11-25 employees $500.00 26-50 employees $1,000.00 51+ employees $2,000.00  
Employees of Ballwin businesses may sign up individually; however, other businesses in the area outside of the city must have a minimum of five employees to join with the corporate rate with the business paying the applicable corporate joining fee. 
(3)  Facility rental rates. 
Resident Non-Resident a. Aerobics Room $20.00 $30.00 b. 1/2 Meeting Room $30.00 $50.00 c. Full Meeting Room $45.00 $80.00 d. 1/2 Gym Court $30.00 $45.00 e. Full Court $50.00 $90.00 f. Full Gym (2 courts) $100.00 $180.00  
*After hour meeting room rentals require a $100.00 deposit due at the time of rental. 
(4)  Facility rental rates for an eight-hour period of time after normal business hours. 
Resident organization: 1-100 people $800.00 101-500 people $800.00 plus $5.00 per person Over 100 Damage deposit $300.00 Nonresident organization: 1-100 people $1,000.00 101-500 people $1,000.00 plus $6.00 person Over 100 Damage deposit $300.00  
(5)  Natatorium rental only. 
Residents 
(per hour) Nonresidents 
(per hour) 1-50 $75.00 $115.00 51-100 $120.00 $180.00 101-150 $160.00 $240.00 151-200 $200.00 $300.00 201-300 $300.00 $450.00  
(6)  Babysitting service. 
Monthly rider on debit membership $19.95 Daily admission pass holder $3.00 Daily nonpass holder $4.00  
(7)  School rental fees. School rental fees are for a two-hour period, and includes the non-exclusive use of the game room and gymnasium, and the exclusive use of the indoor pool and meeting rooms. Rental times shall only be available to qualifying accredited school groups Monday through Friday, between the times of 12:00 p.m. and 3:00 p.m. An additional hour may be added at a cost of $100.00, however, use of the pool shall be limited to two hours. 
Non-Resident Participants Resident $ 360.00 1-50 $ 240.00 510.00 51-75 340.00 710.00 76-100 470.00 1010.00 101-150 670.00 1310.00 151-200 870.00  
    Damage deposit: $200.00 for residents and non-residents. 
    The city administrator is hereby authorized to establish a system of discounted rates for families and individuals that join the community center during the first six months of operation, which discount shall not exceed 20 percent of the fees established by this section and which shall expire six months from the opening date of the center. The city administrator is also authorized to establish a pass cards system for residents of the city for a fee not to exceed $500.00. 
(8)  Walking pass. A walking pass shall be available to residents in the form of a ten visit pass at a cost of $15.00 for the ten visits. Walking passes are valid on weekdays only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m., and shall permit the user access to the track at the Pointe at Ballwin Commons. Walkers shall be issued an identification band to wear upon admission. 
(9)  Special employee fees. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section 18-10, employees of the city i.e., full-time and benefit eligible part time employees, and those eligible under the official policy manual of the city shall be entitled to obtain the following passes for use in connection with certain city facilities: 
a.  Point plus employee family pass-$175.00. 
b.  Golf only employee family pass-$80.00. 
c.  Combined point plus and golf employee family pass-$255.00. 
(Ord. No. 2504, §§ 1, 2, 3-11-96; Ord. No. 2564, § 2, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2652, §§ 2, 3, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 00-55, §§ 1, 2, 10-23-00; Ord. No. 02-02, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 02-33, § 1, 6-24-02; Ord. No. 03-14, §§ 1, 2, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 03-27, § 1, 5-12-03; Ord. No. 05-20, § 1, 4-11-05; Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 2-25-08; Ord. No. 09-01, § 2, 1-12-09; Ord. No. 13-40, § 2, 10-28-13) 
Sec. 18-11. - Definition of senior. 
    The term "senior" shall mean an individual aged 62 or older, when used with respect to the availability and use of the recreational facilities and programs of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2578, § 1, 2-24-97) 
Sec. 18-12. - Bank draft system. 
    Fees for the community center may be paid according to the following monthly schedule for annual passes purchased by direct debit to an existing account. Direct debits accounts shall include a $2.00 per month charge for the service. A $10.00 activation fee shall be charged as a one-time expense to process the new pass. The activation fee shall be paid along with the first month's payment at the time of registration. 
Annual pass (monthly direct debit rates) 
( 1/12 of a year plus $2.00) Resident Nonresident Youth $14.50 $22.83 Adult $24.92 $37.42 Senior $14.50 n/a Senior couple $18.67 n/a Family $35.33 $54.08  
(Ord. No. 2652, § 4, 11-25-97) 
Sec. 18-13. - Use of facilities by outside contractors and instructors; policies. 
    The purpose of this policy is to establish guidelines and regulations for outside private instructors and contractors use of The Pointe at Ballwin Commons and other city facilities. 
(1)  No person or business shall sell or offer to sell any item for commercial gain in or upon the grounds of The Pointe at Ballwin Commons without permission from the director of parks and recreation, or his representative. 
(2)  No person shall utilize any City of Ballwin facility to conduct any private or group instruction or conduct a service for private or commercial gain without first obtaining written permission from the Director of Parks and Recreation, City of Ballwin, or his representative. Permission shall be issued only to applicants meeting the requirements established by this policy. 
(3)  The general guidelines for private contractors for teaching is as follows: 
a.  Complete a City of Ballwin business license application and pay applicable fee. 
b.  Instructor must possess current CPR and First Aid certification. 
c.  Instructor must possess $1,000,000.00 liability insurance, naming the City of Ballwin as an additional insured. 
d.  The city will collect all lesson fees and will be responsible for paying the contractor. 
  Twenty-five percent of the instructor's lesson fee will be retained by the city as a commission; or 
  Twenty-five percent of instructor's lesson fee must be paid to the city. 
e.  All certifications associated with a specific activity must be kept current and verifiable. 
f.  Instructor is restricted to teaching one person at a time, and during designated times only. 
(4)  Requirements for aquatics and weight training: 
a.  Swimming. Current certification in lifeguard training or emergency water safety. Also, current water safety instructor training. 
b.  Diving. Safety certification through U.S. Diving and registered coach with a U.S. Diving Team. 
c.  Weight training. Contractor shall be restricted to one person at a time. May not teach during times the weight room is being used for conducting classes or circuit training. Must have a four-year degree in exercise science of approved combination of training and education. 
(Ord. No. 99-10, § 1, 2-22-99) 
Sec. 18-14. - North Pointe Aquatic Center. 
(a)  Facility use fees. 
Daily Multiple Annual Resident (Discount) Non-Resident (Base) Resident Non-Resident Resident Non-Resident Youth (3-18) $4.00 $7.00 N/A N/A $85.00 $135.00 Adult $5.00 $7.00 N/A N/A $110.00 $190.00 Seniors $4.00 $7.00 N/A N/A $85.00 $135.00 Senior Couple N/A N/A N/A N/A $135.00 $205.00 Single +One N/A N/A N/A N/A $180.00 $300.00 Family N/A N/A N/A N/A $210.00 $320.00 Employee N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A  
(b)  Pointe plus pass. Provides admission to the Pointe at Ballwin Commons (community center) and the North Pointe Aquatic Center for one year. 
Annual Resident Non-Resident Youth (3-18) $220.00 $355.00 Adult $380.00 $570.00 Seniors $220.00 $381.00 Senior Couple $300.00 $520.00 Single +One $560.00 $735.00 Family $625.00 $815.00 Employee $0.00 N/A  
(c)  Pool rental rates. Rates are for a two-hour period from 8:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. only. 
RENTAL RATES 
VIP/RESIDENT RENTAL 1 to 50 51 to 100 1 to 100 101 to 200 Comp Pool $275.00 $300.00 N/A $325.00 Leisure Area $365.00 $395.00 Comp Pool and Slides $365.00 $395.00 Lazy River $430.00 $465.00 Entire Complex $990.00 $1075.00  
REGULAR RENTAL 1 to 50 51 to 100 1 to 100 101 to 200 Comp Pool $330.00 $360.00 N/A $390.00 Leisure Area $440.00 $475.00 Comp Pool and Slides $440.00 $475.00 Lazy River $515.00 $560.00 Entire Complex $1185.00 $1290.00  
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 3, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 03-65, § 1, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 05-20, § 2, 4-11-05; Ord. No. 06-12, § 2, 2-13-06; Ord. No. 09-01, § 1, 1-12-09; Ord. No. 09-49, § 2, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 13-40, § 1, 10-28-13) 
Sec. 18-15. - Active duty military personnel. 
    Active duty military personnel shall be entitled to purchase a multiple 20-visit card to The Pointe at Ballwin Commons community center, as follows: 
Resident $33.00 
Non-Resident $45.00 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 1, 2-14-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-08, § 1, adopted Feb. 14, 2005, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as § 18-14. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as § 18-15, at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 18-16-18-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONDUCT IN PARKS 

Sec. 18-26. - Damaging property. 
    No person in a city park shall: 
(1)  Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove any building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, railing, paving or paving material, water line or other public utility or parts or appurtenances thereof; sign, notice or placard whether temporary or permanent; monument, stake, post or other boundary marker; or other structure or equipment, facility or park property or appurtenance whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2)  Dig or remove any soil, rock, stone, sand, shrub, tree or plant, straw, leaves, down timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tools, equipment, blasting or other means of agency. 
(3)  Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon or across such lands, except on special written permit. 
(4)  Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant, or injure the bark thereof; or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant; or attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant; or dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas; or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area. 
(5)  Tie or hitch a horse or other animal to any tree or plant. 
(6)  Hunt, molest, harm, chase, tease, trap, kill or shoot at any animal, reptile or bird. 
(7)  Remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal; or the eggs, nest, or young of any bird or reptile. 
(8)  Give or offer, or attempt to give to any animal or bird any noxious substances. 
(Code 1973, § 17-57) 
Sec. 18-27. - Traffic. 
    No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the director of parks and recreation. 
(2)  Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with the posted directions thereat and with the instructions of any attendant who may be present. 
(Code 1973, § 17-59) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 15. 
Sec. 18-28. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-13, § 1, adopted April 27, 2009, repealed the former § 18-28, and enacted a new section in Chapter 15, § 15-456.1. The former § 18-28 pertained to bicyclists, scooter operators, roller bladers, roller skaters and skateboarders and derived from § 17-60 of the 1973 Code; Ord. No. 06-19, § 1, 3-27-06. 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 15. 
Sec. 18-29. - Bathing and swimming. 
    No person shall swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor, and in compliance with park regulations. 
(Code 1973, § 17-61) 
Cross reference- Swimming pools, ch. 26. 
Sec. 18-30. - Picnic areas and use. 
    No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Picnic or lunch in places other than those designated for that purpose, and attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all; visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end. 
(2)  Fail to observe and respect written permits issued for a specific period by the parks and recreation department, upon request for use of a particular picnic area, firepit or structure, in advance of the day reservation is applicable. 
(3)  Close off any picnic area, firepit or structure provided for recreational use or for the comfort of visitors in the park to the exclusion of other persons in any manner, nor shall any person use such area and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded. 
(4)  Leave a picnic area before a fire is completely extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Code 1973, § 17-63) 
Sec. 18-31. - Camping. 
    No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Camp without a permit in other than specifically designated camping areas for organized camping provided by the director of parks and recreation and used by groups of persons under adequate supervision. 
(2)  Set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping except as authorized by the issuance of a written permit from the director of parks and recreation. 
(3)  Leave anywhere in the park overnight any camp trailer, camp wagon or other movable vehicle except such equipment left on designated parking areas when associated with camping groups holding authorized permits for such camping. 
(Code 1973, § 17-64) 
Sec. 18-32. - Rough or dangerous games restricted. 
    No person in a park shall take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or model airplanes, except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation or upon the approval of the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1973, § 17-65) 
Sec. 18-33. - Horseback riding. 
    No person in a park shall ride a horse except on designated bridle trails. Where permitted, horses shall be thoroughly broken, properly restrained, ridden with due care and shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended, nor shall they be hitched to any rock, tree or shrub. 
(Code 1973, § 17-66) 
Sec. 18-34. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No person in a park shall sell or offer for sale any beverage having any alcoholic content, except at city-sponsored events or as otherwise approved by the director of parks and recreation. 
(b)  No person shall bring any beverage having an alcoholic content into a park when signs are erected prohibiting such beverages. 
(Code 1973, § 17-67) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 3. 
Sec. 18-35. - Fireworks and explosives. 
    No person in a park shall bring or have in his possession, or set off or otherwise cause to explode, discharge or burn, any firecracker, torpedo, rocket or other fireworks or explosives of flammable material; nor shall any person throw them into any such area from any land or highway adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or article that, in conjunction with any other substance or compound, would be dangerous. 
(Code 1973, § 17-68) 
Cross reference- Explosives, ch. 9; fireworks, § 17-57. 
Sec. 18-36. - Domestic animals. 
(a)  No person shall permit the running of a dog at large in a park. 
(b)  All dogs or other domesticated animals in those areas of a park where such animals are permitted shall be restrained by a leash, at all times, no more than six feet in length and held by a competent person as defined in section 1-2. 
(c)  No person shall bring any vicious animal of any kind into a park at any time, even though restrained as described above. 
(d)  No person shall bring any animal into areas of a park that have been marked by signs bearing the words "No animals allowed in this area." 
(Code 1973, § 17-69) 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, ch. 5. 
Sec. 18-37. - Fires. 
    No person shall build or attempt to build a fire in a park except in an approved container and under such regulations as may be designated by the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1973, § 17-72) 
Sec. 18-38. - Going onto ice. 
    No person shall go onto the ice on any body of water in any park. 
(Code 1973, § 17-74) 
Sec. 18-39. - Merchandising, advertising and signs. 
(a)  No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any article or thing, except persons operating concessions as authorized by the board of aldermen. 
(2)  Announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire, except persons operating concessions as authorized by the board of aldermen. 
(3)  Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatsoever without the written authorization of the director of parks and recreation. 
(b)  No person shall erect or cause to be erected any sign whatsoever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park. 
(Code 1973, § 17-76) 
Sec. 18-40. - Closed areas. 
    No person shall enter an area or roadway which is barricaded and closed to public access, unless authorized by the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1973, § 17-78) 
Sec. 18-41. - Distributing leaflets, tracts, booklets, handbills or petitions in designated areas by permit. 
    No person shall in a park distribute leaflets, tracts, handbills, booklets, petitions; or display signs, banners or devices adopted to bring into public notice any person or movement, unless: 
(1)  The person obtains from the city administrator's office a permit identifying such person by name and address and posts a cash bond of $50.00 to insure that all trash, debris or paper is removed or properly disposed of in the park. 
(2)  The permit shall authorize such activity only in George Vlasis Park during the normal hours of operation of the park in one or more of the following areas: 
a.  Holloway and Park Drive to Log Home; 
b.  Peace memorial, inside sidewalk; 
c.  Kehrs Mill at Seven Tails (southwest corner); 
d.  Ballpark Drive at Kehrs Mill (southeast corner). 
(3)  The permit shall authorize such activity in New Ballwin Park during the normal hours of operation of the park on or along the approximately along the concrete sidewalk on the east side of the park running parallel to New Ballwin Road. The permit shall authorize such activity at the golf course/pool complex during the normal hours of operation of the facility along the approximately 300 feet of asphalt pathway from the double doors on the east side of the golf course club house to the point at the pool complex where the asphalt meets the parking lot. 
(4)  The person obtaining the permit shall keep the area neat and sanitary and shall remove all material distributed from the park area or properly dispose of such materials in trash containers provided in the park and will forfeit to the city the cash bond upon failure to properly maintain the area in a neat and sanitary manner. 
(5)  No person shall solicit alms or contributions in a park for any purpose, whether public or private. 
(Code 1973, § 17-81; Ord. No. 2329, §§ 1, 2, 7-26-93; Ord. No. 05-30, § 2, 6-13-05) 
Sec. 18-42. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-30, § 3, adopted June 13, 2005, repealed § 18-42, which pertained to special park events and derived from Ord. No. 2323, § 1, adopted July 12, 1993; Ord. No. 2329, § 3, adopted July 26, 1993; Ord. No. 04-28, § 1, adopted June 28, 2004. 
Secs. 18-43-18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSES 

Sec. 18-61. - Green fees; payment required. 
(a)  Except for those persons who may be specifically exempted, no person shall play upon any golf courses owned or operated by the city without first paying the green fees required of such player by the city. 
(b)  The fees for the use of the municipal golf course for winter rates, per nine and 18 holes, shall be 50 percent less than the regular rates established in the table below. 
(c)  The schedule for the winter rates shall be determined annually, based on weather conditions, by the golf professional. 
(d)  The fees for the use of the municipal golf course for the prime golf season for nine and 18 holes are established as follows: 
Rates Resident Resident 
Senior Non- 
Resident Non- 
Resident 
Senior Resident 
Junior Non- 
Resident 
Junior Weekday 9 holes $9.00 $8.00 $15.00 $14.00 $8.00 $14.00 Weekday 18 holes 16.00 14.00 25.00 24.00 14.00 24.00 Weekend 9 holes 10.00 9.00 15.00 15.00 9.00 15.00 Weekend 18 holes 18.00 16.00 25.00 25.00 16.00 25.00  
(e)  Cart rental fees shall be $6.00 per person per nine holes. Single riders shall not be allowed, provided, however, single use shall be allowed when no other alternative for sharing or using a golf cart exists. Golf cart fees shall apply for cart use whether or not a rider is a player or an observer. These fees shall apply on a year round basis. 
(Code 1973, § 17-100; Ord. No. 2270, § I, 9-28-92; Ord. No. 2479, § 2, 11-13-95; Ord. No. 2564, § 3, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 00-21, §§ 1, 2, 4-10-00; Ord. No. 04-45, § 1, 11-8-04; Ord. No. 06-12, § 1, 2-13-06) 
Sec. 18-62. - Receipts required. 
    No person shall play or start play upon any golf course owned or operated by the city unless such person has secured a receipt for each round. Such receipt shall be held for the starter or course marshal and shall be shown upon demand to any person authorized to inspect the same. 
(Code 1973, § 17-101) 
Sec. 18-63. - Trespassing prohibited. 
    No person shall trespass upon any golf course owned or operated by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 17-102) 
Cross reference- Trespassing generally, § 17-104. 
Sec. 18-64. - Vehicles prohibited. 
    No person other than city employees and officials and their designees shall operate any vehicle on the golf courses, with the exception of golf carts rented to users of the courses in accordance with the rules established for the use of such carts. 
(Code 1973, § 17-103) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 15. 
Sec. 18-65. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of sections 18-63 and 18-64 shall not apply to employees of the city while engaged in performing their official duties, nor to employees of contractors with the city who are engaged in and performing their duties under a contract with the city. 
(Code 1973, § 17-104) 
Secs. 18-66-18-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TREE BOARD 

Sec. 18-86. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a board for the planting, maintenance and removal of trees and shrubs on public right-of-way and property. The board shall be known as the Ballwin Tree Board. 
(Ord. No. 2185, § 1, 6-24-91) 
Sec. 18-87. - Organization. 
    The committee shall consist of six members. The members shall be the aldermen serving on the parks and recreation committee of the board of aldermen, the mayor and the director of parks and recreation. 
(Ord. No. 2185, § 1, 6-24-91) 
Sec. 18-88. - Duties. 
    The committee shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Establish policies and procedures for the planting, maintenance, preservation and removal of trees and shrubs on public right-of-way and property. 
(2)  Prepare and recommend a budget for the planting, management, preservation and removal of trees and shrubs on public right-of-way and property. 
(3)  Prepare and submit to the board of aldermen an annual report with recommendation to the board of aldermen for the management of trees and shrubs on public right-of-way and property. 
(4)  Perform such other duties as may be requested by the mayor and approved by a majority of the members of the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 2185, § 1, 6-24-91) 
Sec. 18-89. - Members to serve without compensation. 
    No member of the committee or voluntary worker shall receive compensation for services performed on behalf of the city as a member of this board except for the salary paid to the director of parks and recreation. 
(Ord. No. 2185, § 1, 6-24-91) 
ARTICLE V. - DEER CONTROL POLICY AND HUNTING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 18-90. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have these prescribed meanings: 
    Archery device: Any longbow or compound bow. 
    Crossbow: A device for discharging quarrels, bolts, or arrows, formed of a bow set crosswise on a stock, usually drawn by means of a mechanism and discharged by the release of a trigger. 
    Firearm: 
(1)  The term "firearm" , as is used in this article, means any rifle, shotgun, weapon or similar mechanism by whatever name known, which is designed to expel a projectile or projectiles through a gun barrel, tube, pipe, cylinder or similar device by the action of any explosive. The term "firearm" shall not apply to devices used exclusively for commercial, industrial or vocational purposes. 
(2)  The term "projectile weapon" means any bow, crossbow, pellet gun, slingshot or other weapon that is not a firearm, which is capable of expelling a projectile that could inflict serious physical injury or death by striking or piercing a person. 
    Under the influence: Under the influence shall be defined by the state regulation applied to motor vehicle operation. 
(Ord. No. 12-37, § 1, 10-8-12) 
Sec. 18-91. - Regulations. 
    Establishing regulations of hunting within the corporate limits of the City of Ballwin during deer hunting season set by the department of conservation or such other specific time authorized by the City of Ballwin. 
(1)  Discharging or releasing arrows from archery devices within the city limits is limited to hunting permitted under this article. Crossbows are not permitted under this article. 
(2)  Prior to any hunting activity under this section, the property owner shall notify the Ballwin Police Department of his or her intent to hunt on his or her property. The notification shall include the names of all property owners, the address of the proposed hunt property, the dates of the proposed hunt, and the names of all proposed hunters. In addition to the foregoing, the property owner shall complete a notification of intent to hunt form and return said form to the police department prior to engaging in or permitting any hunting activity on his or her property. 
(3)  Prior to the engagement of any hunting activity, the property owner shall provide to the city, a certificate of insurance or indemnity bond providing evidence of a policy of liability insurance and/or indemnity bond in an amount not less than $2,000,000.00 per occurrence insuring or bonding the property owner and/or the designated hunter. The indemnity of the property owner and the hunter may be combined to reach the minimum limits mandated by this subsection. Said liability insurance and/or indemnity bond shall provide insurance coverage and/or indemnity for all claims for damages resulting from any act of negligence of the designated hunter or by any agent, assign, employee, independent contractors, or licensee of the designated hunter. 
(4)  All current laws of the State of Missouri as regards to the regulations of hunting shall be obeyed within the corporate limits of Ballwin. 
(5)  The hunt shall conform to all state regulations as defined by the Missouri Department of Conservation. 
(6)  Permission to hunt. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person carrying an archery device of any type, to knowingly enter into the premises of another, or to discharge any of the aforesaid devices while on the premises or property of another without first having obtained permission in writing from the owner, lessee, or person in charge of such premises or property. The duly obtained written permission shall be carried on the person of the hunter requesting and receiving such permission. This section shall not apply to a person carrying or discharging such a device while in the immediate presence of the owner, lessee, or person in charge of said premises or property. 
b.  In addition to the requirements set forth herein, it shall be at the discretion of the owner, lessee, or person in charge of any premises or property to set the parameters under which any person may hunt upon any such premises or property under the control of the owner, lessee, or person in charge. 
c.  Each hunter on any property, upon which the permission to hunt has been granted, shall be held responsible for the actions of such other persons to whom such permission has been granted for the same time period by the landowner, lessee, or person in charge. 
d.  No person without lawful authority, or without the expressed or implied consent of the owner, lessee or his/her agent, shall enter any building or enter upon any enclosed or improved real estate, lot or parcel of ground in the City of Ballwin; or being upon the property of another shall fail or refuse to leave such property when requested to do so by owner, lessee, or person in charge of said property. 
e.  Contiguous neighbors must be notified in writing by the property owner and the property owner must be able to show the appropriate documentation of receipt of the notification of the approximate date and time period of the hunt. For purposes of this subsection, "contiguous" shall mean any adjoining property that shares a common property line (or point) with the lot on which the proposed hunt shall occur. Lots separated by streets, common areas, or other public thoroughfares shall not be considered contiguous. 
(7)  In addition to any requirements imposed by Missouri Department of Conservation regulations, any individual who successfully harvests a deer during a hunt must report the hunter's name, sex of the deer, and the location of the harvest within two business days by calling the Ballwin Police Department during normal business hours or by delivering written notification to the police chief. 
(8)  Prior to discharging an archery device intended to be used for hunting, it shall be the hunter's responsibility to permanently mark each arrow or other projectile with his or her Missouri Department of Conservation identification number. 
(9)  Nothing in this deer control policy shall authorize the parking or standing of vehicles on private property without the consent of the property owner or to park a vehicle in any manner otherwise prohibited by the City Code. All hunters shall park their vehicles on the same property on which they are hunting. 
(10)  Prior to hunting within the city limits of Ballwin, every individual seeking to hunt shall provide a certificate of completion of an archery device hunter safety course as approved or provided by the Missouri Department of Conservation. 
(11)  Hunting shall not be allowed on property owned or controlled by the City of Ballwin. 
(Ord. No. 12-37, § 1, 10-8-12) 
Sec. 18-92. - Specific actions prohibited/required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any archery device across any street, sidewalk, road, highway or playground. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge an archery device at or in the direction of any person, vehicle, dwelling, house, church, school, playground or building that is within the range of discharge including a safety margin of at least 75 feet. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful any person to discharge an archery device within 150 yards of any church, school, or playground. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge an archery device, within 30 yards of any dwelling, building, structure, or vehicle, unless the hunter has previously received express authority to discharge the archery device within 30 yards from the owner of the dwelling, building, structure, or vehicle. 
(d)  No arrow or other projectile used to hunt deer pursuant to the deer control policy may be discharged or projected at such an angle or distance as to land on public or private property other than the property on which the hunt has been authorized. 
(e)  No arrow or other projectile used to hunt deer pursuant to the deer control policy may be discharged or projected at such an angle or distance as to land within 75 feet of any front yard property line. 
(f)  No arrow or other projectile used to hunt deer pursuant to the deer control policy may be discharged or projected at such an angle or distance as to land within 50 feet of any street or public right-of-way. 
(g)  All hunting shall be conducted from an elevated position that is at least ten feet in height and faces the interior of the property. The elevated position (deer stand) shall be located in such a way as to direct arrows towards the interior of the property and to prevent any arrow from landing any closer than 25 feet from any side or rear property line. 
(h)  No hunting is authorized on tracts of land under one acre in area, except that adjacent property owners may combine their parcels to satisfy the property line discharge restrictions contained in subsections (e) and (g) herein. All other provisions of the deer control policy shall apply to combined lots. 
(i)  It shall unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years old to hunt deer within the city limits of Ballwin. 
(j)  No person shall possess, consume or be under the influence of alcohol or any other controlled substance while engaged in hunting activities within the city limits of Ballwin. 
(Ord. No. 12-37, § 1, 10-8-12) 
Sec. 18-93. - Deer retrieval. 
(a)  Any person who harvests or injures any deer while hunting shall make a reasonable search to retrieve the deer and take it into his or her possession. 
(b)  This section does not authorize the act of trespass. 
(c)  It shall be the hunter's responsibility to immediately notify any property owner, other than the specific property owner who previously authorized the hunt, of the fact that an injured or dead deer is located on his or her property. 
(d)  It shall be the hunter's responsibility to obtain the permission of any property owner upon which an injured or dead deer is located prior to engaging in a reasonable search and retrieval of the deer. 
(e)  In the event that a hunter cannot obtain the permission of a property owner to conduct a reasonable search and retrieval of an injured or dead deer, the hunter shall immediately notify the Missouri Department of Conservation and the Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 12-37, § 1, 10-8-12) 
Sec. 18-94. - Field cleaning. 
(a)  Any person who harvests any deer while hunting shall follow all Missouri Department of Conservation guidelines regarding field dressing and processing the animal. 
(b)  Any person who harvests any deer while hunting shall take all precautionary measures to avoid field dressing the deer in a public or conspicuous location. 
(c)  Any person who field dresses or otherwise processes a deer shall properly dispose of the discarded organs and/or body parts in plastic bags in private trash depositories, or by other appropriate means. Nothing contained herein shall authorize the illegal dumping of solid waste or authorize the illegal dumping of bio-hazardous waste. 
(d)  The transportation of a carcass along any public right-of-way is prohibited, unless it is covered or hidden from public view. 
(Ord. No. 12-37, § 1, 10-8-12) 
Chapter 19 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; administration, ch. 2; department of administration, § 2-221; buildings and structures, ch. 7; flood hazard areas, ch. 10; grading, mining, filling and clearing, ch. 11; housing, ch. 13; parks and recreation, ch. 18; sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 21; signs, ch. 22; streets and sidewalks, ch. 24; subdivisions, ch. 25; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning, RSMo Ch. 89. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Zoning ordinances saved from repeal. 
    Nothing contained in this Code or in the ordinance enacting this Code shall be construed to repeal or affect the zoning ordinance of the city, being Ordinance No. 557, as amended from time to time, or any other zoning ordinance of the city not specifically repealed. 
(Code 1973, § 30-1; Ord. No. 1042, § 3, 5-14-73) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 557, as amended, is in App. A in this volume. 
Secs. 19-2-19-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 08-05, §§ 1-10, adopted January 28, 2008, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as article II at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 19-26. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the "City of Ballwin Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 1-28-08) 
Sec. 19-27. - Findings and purposes. 
(a)  Findings. Whereas, the City of Ballwin finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources. 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater. 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation. 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks. 
(5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff. 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams. 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem. 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat. 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat. 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity. 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(b)  Purposes. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create buffer zones along the streams of City of Ballwin for the protection of water resources; and, 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 1-28-08) 
Sec. 19-28. - Definitions. 
    Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by section 19-30(a)(1)), lying adjacent to the stream. 
    Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
    Land development means any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
    Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
    Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
    Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
    Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
    Permit means the permit issued by the City of Ballwin required for undertaking any land development activity 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Protection area, or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
    Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
    Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by section 19-30(a)(2) extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
    Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
1.  All natural watercourses depicted by a solid or dashed blue line on the most current United States Geological Survey (U.S.G.S.) 7.5 Minute Series (Topographic) Maps for Missouri; or 
2.  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more. 
    Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. Where no established top-of-bank can be determined, the stream bank will be the "ordinary high water mark" as defined by the Corps of Engineers in Title 33 of the Code of Federal Regulation, Part 328.3. 
    Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 3, 1-28-08) 
Sec. 19-29. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 19-28 of this article. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer or floodplain requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(1)  Grandfather provisions. This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
a.  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this article. 
b.  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
c.  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this article. 
d.  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of this article. 
(2)  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
a.  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
- a stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
- public water supply intake or public wastewater structures or stormwater outfalls; 
- intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
- public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
- unpaved foot trails and paths; 
- activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
b.  Public sewer line easements. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in Item 4.2.(1), above. 
c.  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
d.  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
e.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the City of Ballwin on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the City of Ballwin to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
f.  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
g.  Any activities approved under a 404 permit issued by the Corps of Engineers and 401 water quality certification issued by the Missouri Department of Natural Resources. 
After the effective date of this article, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 19-30(b) below. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 4, 1-28-08) 
Sec. 19-30. - Land development requirements. 
(a)  Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  For streams depicted as a solid blue line on the U.S.G.S. map, an undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. For all other streams subject to this article, an undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(b)  Variance procedures. Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this article, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the City of Ballwin finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the City of Ballwin may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)  Except as provided above, the City of Ballwin shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the board of aldermen. The City of Ballwin shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within City of Ballwin. The City of Ballwin shall post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. 
Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this article prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
b.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in the ordinance would create an extreme hardship. 
Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this article, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(3)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
f.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.  A storm water management site plan, if applicable; and, 
h.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(4)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; and, 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 5, 1-28-08) 
Sec. 19-31. - Compatibility with other regulations and requirements. 
    This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 6, 1-28-08) 
Sec. 19-32. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
    Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and, 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and, 
(3)  Any other documentation that the City of Ballwin may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. A note to reference the vegetated buffer shall state: "There shall be no clearing, grading, construction or disturbance of vegetation except as permitted by Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance No. 08-05. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 7, 1-28-08) 
Sec. 19-33. - Responsibility. 
    Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon City of Ballwin, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 8, 1-28-08) 
Sec. 19-34. - Inspection. 
    The City of Ballwin may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the City of Ballwin in making such inspections. The City of Ballwin shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
    No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 9, 1-28-08) 
Sec. 19-35. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
    Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the City of Ballwin determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City of Ballwin shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the City of Ballwin may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
a.  Stop work order. The City of Ballwin may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The City of Ballwin may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The City of Ballwin may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the City of Ballwin may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the City of Ballwin shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the City of Ballwin has taken one or more of the actions described above, the City of Ballwin may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the City of Ballwin may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in Ballwin Municipal Court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 10, 1-28-08) 
Chapter 20 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; administration, ch. 2; police department, § 2-251; emergency management, ch. 8; conditions of license for auction and estate sales, § 14-293; authority of driver of emergency vehicle, § 15-4; enforcement of traffic ordinances, § 15-31 et seq.; duty of drivers upon approach of emergency vehicle, § 15-257; offenses relating to police, § 17-3 et seq.; false reports, § 17-8. 
State Law reference- City police and fire departments, RSMo Ch. 85 et seq.; powers of arrest, RSMo 544.216. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Police report fee. 
Police report fee\$7.00 
(Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 7-14-08) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 08-23, § 1, adopted July 14, 2008, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as § 20-1 at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 20-2-20-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-26. - Composition. 
    The police department of the city shall be comprised of the following persons: 
(1)  A chief of police; and 
(2)  Commissioned employees and clerical employees as may be appointed from time to time by the chief of police with the consent and approval of the city administrator, but only in such number as may be authorized from time to time by the board of aldermen. 
(Code 1973, § 19-17) 
Sec. 20-27. - Police duty manual. 
    Departmental regulations are further defined and specified in the police duty manual as maintained in the office of the chief of police. 
Sec. 20-28. - Police sales. 
(a)  All property seized and held for evidence, after final disposition of the cause in which such property was used as evidence, and all lost property in the possession of the police department, which is of such a nature that its possession or sale is unlawful, shall be destroyed under the supervision of the chief of police. If lost property in the possession of the police department is not claimed by its rightful owner within a period of 90 days or if property seized or held is proven to be stolen property and the owner is unknown or the owner does not claim such property within 30 days after the disposition of the cause in which the property has been used as evidence, then such property shall be sold under the direction of the chief of police, provided that the possession or sale of such property is lawful. 
(b)  Such sales shall be held from time to time, as may be determined by the chief of police, and a notice thereof containing a general description of the articles to be sold shall be published in a local community newspaper. 
(c)  All proceeds of such sales, less the actual expense of such sales, including costs of publication, shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 19-1) 
Secs. 20-29-20-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CHIEF OF POLICE 

Sec. 20-46. - Head of department; responsibilities generally. 
    The chief of police shall be the head of the police department and shall devote his entire time to the duties of his office. He shall supervise and manage the department and shall be responsible for the efficient and effective administration and performance of the duties, powers and functions vested in him and in the department by law and ordinance. 
(Code 1973, § 19-42) 
Sec. 20-47. - Powers generally. 
    The chief of police shall have power at all times to serve and execute all warrants, subpoenas, writs or other process; to make an arrest, with proper process, for any offense against the laws of the city or the state; and to keep the offender in a proper place to prevent his escape until a trial can be had before the proper officer, unless such offender shall give good and sufficient bond for his appearance for trial. The chief of police shall also have power to make arrests without process in all cases in which any offense against the laws of the city or the state shall be committed in his presence; and he shall perform all other duties and have all powers provided for by laws or ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 19-43) 
Sec. 20-48. - Duties generally. 
    The duties of the chief of police shall be outlined in the job description retained in the office of the city administrator. 
(Code 1973, § 19-44) 
Secs. 20-49-20-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEPARTMENTAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 20-65.1. - Use of authority. 
    Officers of the police department shall at all times administer the law in a just, impartial and reasonable manner and shall not accord to some more reasonable treatment than others. They shall recognize the limitations of their authority and at no time use the power of their office for their own personal advantage. 
(Code 1973, § 19-50) 
Sec. 20-65.2. - Manner of performing duty. 
    All members of the police department shall discharge their duties with coolness and firmness. In time of peril they shall act together and assist each other in the restoration of peace and order. Any member who refuses or fails to assist another officer in the performance of his legal duty or who shirks from responsibility or danger shall be judged guilty of cowardice and gross neglect of duty and looked upon as unworthy of being an officer of the department. 
(Code 1973, § 19-51) 
Sec. 20-65.3. - General conduct. 
    No member of the police department, whether on duty or off duty, shall be insubordinate by word, act or demeanor, but shall be governed by the ordinary and reasonable rules of good conduct and behavior, and shall commit no act which would tend to bring reproach or discredit upon the department or the city. 
(Code 1973, § 19-52) 
Sec. 20-65.4. - Neglect of duty generally. 
    A member of the police department shall be considered guilty of neglect of duty if he: 
(1)  Neglects or without sufficient cause omits promptly and diligently to attend to, or carry out, anything which is his duty as a member of the department; 
(2)  Fails to work his assignments in accordance with orders or leaves his assignment point, or the place of duty to which he has been ordered, without proper permission or sufficient cause; 
(3)  When knowing where an offender is to be found, fails to report the same or to make reasonable efforts to apprehend him; 
(4)  Fails to report any matter which it is his duty to report; 
(5)  Fails to report anything which he knows concerning a criminal charge, or fails to disclose any evidence which he, or any person within his knowledge, can give for or against any prisoner or defendant to a criminal charge; 
(6)  Omits to make any necessary entry in an official document or book; 
(7)  Neglects, or without sufficient cause, omits to carry out any instruction of a physician selected by the department; or 
(8)  While absent from duty on account of sickness, does anything calculated to retard a return to duty. 
(Code 1973, § 19-53) 
Sec. 20-65.5. - Obedience to orders and rules of department. 
    All members of the police department shall promptly obey all lawful orders and conform to the rules of the department. Willful disobedience of orders or rules will result in severe disciplinary action. 
(Code 1973, § 19-54) 
Sec. 20-65.6. - Duty on countermand of orders. 
    When an order of a commanding officer countermands or changes a previous order or rule, members of the police department should call the attention of the commanding officer to such conflict before complying with the new order. If the commanding officer, giving such an order, renews the order originally given, it shall stand and the responsibility shall be his. 
(Code 1973, § 19-55) 
Sec. 20-65.7. - Outside activities restricted. 
    No member of the police department shall engage in any outside activity that is in any way related to or influenced by his connection with the department without the consent of the chief of police. An officer must not allow other employment or activities to interfere in any degree with the proper performance of his duties as a police officer. 
(Code 1973, § 19-56) 
Sec. 20-65.8. - Political activity. 
    No member of the police department shall use official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering with any election. While retaining the right to vote as he pleases and expressing privately his political opinions, he shall take no active part in any political campaign. 
(Code 1973, § 19-57) 
Sec. 20-65.9. - Public talks. 
    Before attending conventions, meetings or seminars and prior to filling any speaking engagement as an official representative of the police department, any member of the department shall secure the permission of the chief of police and shall have all speech material approved by him. 
(Code 1973, § 19-58) 
Sec. 20-65.10. - Personal appearance-Generally. 
    While on duty or while off duty and in uniform in a public place all members of the police department shall be neatly and cleanly attired and clean and tidy in personal appearance. 
(Code 1973, § 19-59) 
Sec. 20-65.11. - Same-In court. 
    Any member of the police department who attends court as a witness shall appear neatly attired, either in uniform or otherwise. He shall not appear in court for this purpose in everyday work clothing. 
(Code 1973, § 19-60) 
Sec. 20-65.12. - Manner of testifying in court. 
    Members of the police department, while in court, shall avoid any indication of bias, prejudice or anger. They shall testify in a clear and distinct manner. Questions shall be answered promptly, truthfully and without trace of evasion. Personal behavior shall be exemplary both while in court awaiting call and while on the witness stand. 
(Code 1973, § 19-61) 
Sec. 20-65.13. - Uniform regulations. 
(a)  All officers shall keep their uniforms clean and neat at all times. The blouse coat shall be fully buttoned at all times when worn on duty, and the hat or cap shall be worn squarely on the head. All members shall wear the badge while on duty, and it shall be worn on the outermost garment in a conspicuous place over the left breast. 
(b)  During the winter or during inclement weather, only dark brown or black or dark blue accessories may be worn with the uniform. Any accessory that does not harmonize with the uniform shall not be worn. 
(Code 1973, § 19-62) 
Sec. 20-65.14. - National colors and anthem. 
    All members of the police department shall follow the prescribed procedure in paying respect to the national colors and national anthem. They shall acquaint themselves with the procedure and follow it when in uniform or out of uniform. 
(Code 1973, § 19-63) 
Sec. 20-65.15. - Courtesy. 
    All members of the police department shall be courteous, civil and respectful toward each other and toward all persons on all occasions. 
(Code 1973, § 19-64) 
Sec. 20-65.16. - Language. 
    Members of the police department shall refrain from the use of profane, obscene or insolent language while acting in an official capacity or while in any public place where such action would reflect unfavorably upon the police department or the city. 
(Code 1973, § 19-65) 
Sec. 20-65.17. - Immoral or indecent conduct. 
    No member of the police department shall engage in any immoral or indecent conduct, associate with prostitutes or frequent any place of questionable character, unless in the performance of police duty. 
(Code 1973, § 19-66) 
Sec. 20-65.18. - Truthfulness. 
    No member of the police department shall willfully depart from the truth or make misleading statements in the conduct of any business of the department, nor when appearing in any capacity as a member of the department. If by departmental rules and regulations he is not allowed to divulge information, then he shall say nothing. 
(Code 1973, § 19-67) 
Sec. 20-65.19. - Drinking. 
(a)  Members of the police department shall not receive or drink any intoxicating liquor or beer while on duty nor have the odor of intoxicating liquor or beer on their breath while on duty. 
(b)  Members of the police department, while off duty, shall not use intoxicating liquor to the extent that they become unfit for duty, as they are subject to call any time that their services are needed. 
(Code 1973, § 19-68) 
Sec. 20-65.20. - Gambling. 
    No member of the police department shall play any game of chance in the offices of the department, nor shall he visit any place wherein it is believed that any law or regulation pertaining to gambling is being violated, except in the actual performance of his duty as a police officer. 
(Code 1973, § 19-69) 
Sec. 20-65.21. - Use of tobacco. 
    Members of the police department shall, while on duty, refrain from the use of tobacco. 
(Code 1973, § 19-70) 
Sec. 20-65.22. - Use of drugs. 
    No member of the police department, while on or off duty, shall use any drug or substance, including prescription drugs, to such an extent that it affects his ability to perform his duty. 
(Code 1973, § 19-71) 
Sec. 20-65.23. - Discrimination. 
    No member of the police department shall refer to any person in a derogatory manner because of race, color, religion, gender, disability, creed, sexual preference, or national origin. 
(Code 1973, § 19-72) 
Sec. 20-65.24. - Assaults. 
    No member of the police department shall assault any other member of the department. 
(Code 1973, § 19-73) 
Sec. 20-65.25. - Neglecting or refusing to pay just debts. 
    No member of the police department shall contract any debt or liability which he is unable or unwilling to pay, nor shall he neglect or refuse to discharge honorably and promptly all indebtedness, claims and judgments and satisfy all executions that may be held against him. 
(Code 1973, § 19-74) 
Sec. 20-65.26. - Loans. 
    Members of the police department shall not lend money to a superior or borrow money from or accept any gift from a member of the department inferior in rank. 
(Code 1973, § 19-75) 
Sec. 20-65.27. - Prohibited obligations. 
    Members of the police department shall not place themselves under obligation, pecuniary or otherwise to: 
(1)  Any person who operates an establishment at which intoxicating beverages are sold; 
(2)  Any person who holds a license concerning the granting or renewal of which the department may have to report or give evidence; 
(3)  Any person engaged in any illegal or immoral activity; or 
(4)  Any lawyer, bondsman or any other person who represents persons charged with criminal offenses. 
(Code 1973, § 19-76) 
Sec. 20-65.28. - Acceptance of fines or bond. 
    Members of the police department shall not accept money as bond or in payment of fines, except as provided by departmental order; and in every case where such bond or fine is accepted, then a receipt must be given and signed by the officer accepting such fine or bond. 
(Code 1973, § 19-77) 
Sec. 20-65.29. - Soliciting gratuities. 
    No member of the police department shall solicit theater passes, money, drinks, gifts or other gratuities and shall avoid doing anything which would have the appearance of using his position for the purpose of obtaining special consideration. 
(Code 1973, § 19-78) 
Sec. 20-65.30. - Rewards and presents. 
    Members of the police department shall not receive or share in any present, fee, testimonial, gift, gratuity or other payment other than their regular salary without the consent of the chief of police. 
(Code 1973, § 19-79) 
Sec. 20-65.31. - Collections. 
    Members of the police department shall not circulate subscription papers, sell tickets or collect money from citizens or others for any charitable or other purpose whatsoever without the approval of the chief of police. 
(Code 1973, § 19-80) 
Sec. 20-65.32. - Soliciting for attorneys. 
    No member of the police department shall solicit for or recommend any attorney or bondsman nor advise any prisoner whom to engage; nor shall he convey any communication between prisoner and attorney without the consent of the commanding officer. 
(Code 1973, § 19-81) 
Sec. 20-65.33. - Recommendations. 
    Members of the police department, in their capacity as such, shall not write, sign or give any testimonial or other recommendation with the object of obtaining employment for any person or of supporting an application for the granting of a license of any kind without the approval of the chief of police. 
(Code 1973, § 19-82) 
Sec. 20-65.34. - Reporting for duty. 
    All members of the police department shall be punctual in reporting for duty daily at the specified time. They shall be required, whenever possible, to give advance notice if they are going to be delayed for any reason. Any failure to report promptly and properly equipped for duty shall be deemed a serious neglect of duty. 
(Code 1973, § 19-83) 
Sec. 20-65.35. - Punctuality at court. 
    Any member of the police department required to be in court by departmental order or subpoena shall be prompt in attendance and shall remain until excused by competent authority. 
(Code 1973, § 19-84) 
Sec. 20-65.36. - Reporting in and out of service. 
    Each member of the police department shall notify the dispatcher of the station whenever he goes out of service for any reason. He shall give the location and reason for being out of service. As soon as he is again available for calls, he shall notify the officer in charge of the station that he is again in service. Members of the department shall not be out of service except in line of duty or as otherwise provided by departmental regulations. 
(Code 1973, § 19-85) 
Sec. 20-65.37. - Subject to call. 
    Every member of the police department shall be subject to call in time of emergency; otherwise, he shall be assigned to a regular tour of duty which may be changed from time to time to equalize the working hours of all members of the department. 
(Code 1973, § 19-86) 
Sec. 20-65.38. - Absence from duty without leave. 
    No member of the police department shall be absent from duty, except in the case of sickness or during leave of absence granted under the regulations of the department, without the consent of the commanding officer, who in turn shall notify the chief of police. 
(Code 1973, § 19-87) 
Sec. 20-65.39. - Malingering. 
    Members of the police department shall not feign or exaggerate any sickness or injury, the effect of which would be to evade departmental duties. 
(Code 1973, § 19-88) 
Sec. 20-65.40. - Substitution prohibited without permission. 
    No member of the police department shall absent himself from duty during the prescribed hours for his tour of duty, nor shall any member of the department be allowed to serve as a substitute without the permission of his commanding officer who must be advised in advance as to who the substitute will be. 
(Code 1973, § 19-89) 
Sec. 20-65.41. - Complaints against other officers. 
    Any member of the police department who feels aggrieved at the treatment or orders of a superior officer or the actions of a fellow officer shall communicate his complaint through the regular chain of command. A commanding officer who fails to forward such a complaint through the regular channels shall be guilty of neglect of duty. There shall be no bypassing of the delegated chain of command. This rule shall not prevent any member of the department from carrying his grievance to the highest authority, providing it is done through proper channels. 
(Code 1973, § 19-90) 
Sec. 20-65.42. - False complaints. 
    No member of the police department shall willfully or negligently make any false complaint or statement against any member of the department. 
(Code 1973, § 19-91) 
Sec. 20-65.43. - Criticism and gossip. 
    Members of the police department shall not criticize in public the action or orders of a superior officer or fellow officer. Derogatory remarks either oral or written to anyone outside of the department are prohibited. 
(Code 1973, § 19-92) 
Sec. 20-65.44. - Command responsibility in absence of commanding officer. 
    In the absence of the officer normally in command of a shift, the personnel of that shift shall be under the supervision of the officer delegated to take charge by the chief of police. 
(Code 1973, § 19-93) 
Sec. 20-65.45. - Loitering while on duty. 
    No member of the police department shall loiter in any dwelling, theater, place of business or other building unnecessarily while on active duty. He shall strive at all times to avoid giving the appearance of loafing. 
(Code 1973, § 19-94) 
Sec. 20-65.46. - Presence on certain premises prohibited. 
    No member of the police department, while on duty or in uniform, shall enter any premises licensed under the liquor licensing laws, any other premises where liquors are stored or distributed, or any premises used for illegal or immoral purpose when his presence there is not required in the performance of his duty. 
(Code 1973, § 19-95) 
Sec. 20-65.47. - Reading magazines, etc., on duty. 
    No member of the police department shall read periodicals or magazines of a nonpolice nature while on active duty. 
(Code 1973, § 19-96) 
Sec. 20-65.48. - Sleeping on duty. 
    All members of the police department shall remain awake during their tour of duty. If unable to do so, they shall report to their commanding officer who shall determine the proper course of action. 
(Code 1973, § 19-97) 
Sec. 20-65.49. - Refreshments on duty. 
    Members of the police department shall not leave their place of assignment or report out of service for the purpose of getting coffee or other refreshment without the permission of the officer in charge. He shall see to it that no more than one car is out of service for this purpose at any one time. At no time shall the period of time for refreshment be longer than is reasonable nor more often than established by departmental order. 
(Code 1973, § 19-98) 
Sec. 20-65.50. - Officers to be familiar with laws and ordinances. 
    All members of the police department shall familiarize themselves with all the laws of the state and ordinances of the city which the department is called upon to enforce. 
(Code 1973, § 19-99) 
Sec. 20-65.51. - Duty to keep informed. 
    It shall be the duty of all officers of the police department to read the daily bulletin immediately upon reporting for duty, and they shall acquaint themselves with all the information thereon and make notes of any wants or pickups that will require their attention during their tour of duty. They shall inquire of the officer in charge or the commanding officer about anything that seems to be incomplete or not clear. 
(Code 1973, § 19-100) 
Sec. 20-65.52. - Duty to report existing condition. 
    All members of the police department shall report to their commanding officer the location of all houses where gambling or other illegal activities are believed to be carried on, or houses believed to be resorts of disorderly persons. It shall then be the duty of the commanding officer to see that proper action is taken to secure evidence of such conditions and activities, and when he feels that there is evidence sufficient to convict, he shall then take the proper action. Failure to do so on the part of any officer shall be deemed a serious neglect of duty. 
(Code 1973, § 19-101) 
Sec. 20-65.53. - Reporting defects in street signs and markings. 
    All members of the police department shall immediately report any defects in traffic signs, street signs, signal lights, streets, sidewalks, etc., and any condition which is believed to be hazardous and dangerous to the public safety. 
(Code 1973, § 19-102) 
Sec. 20-65.54. - Action upon receiving report or complaint from citizen. 
    All members of the police department shall be attentive and take suitable action on reports and complaints by a private person. When circumstances make it necessary to refer the matter to another officer or agency, they shall do so promptly and courteously. Members of the department shall fulfill any proper request for information or assistance. They shall at all times avoid giving an impression of evading the performance of their duty or that they are not interested in the problems of persons making reports or asking assistance. Members of the department shall not belittle a seemingly trivial request, a complaint or piece of information, but shall invariably thank the informant or complainant, regardless of the value of the information. 
(Code 1973, § 19-103) 
Sec. 20-65.55. - Duty to give name and badge number when requested. 
    Every member of the police department shall give his name and badge number in a respectful manner to any person who may ask for it. 
(Code 1973, § 19-104) 
Sec. 20-65.56. - Command at investigations. 
    When two or more officers are together at the scene of an investigation or a crime, the senior officer shall be in charge. 
(Code 1973, § 19-105) 
Sec. 20-65.57. - Revealing names of complainants. 
    No member of the police department shall reveal the name of a complainant in a case unless authorized by his commanding officer or in the case of absolute necessity. 
(Code 1973, § 19-106) 
Sec. 20-65.58. - Revealing police information. 
    Members of the police department shall not communicate to a person not a member of the department any information concerning proposed police action or any other information concerning operations or activities of a confidential nature. 
(Code 1973, § 19-107) 
Sec. 20-65.59. - Exhibiting or exposing police records. 
    No member of the police department shall exhibit or expose police records or reports so that they may be read by an individual other than for whom such records are intended, except when it is done with the permission of the chief of police or by special or general order. Each member of the department shall be responsible for the safekeeping of any reports in his possession. 
(Code 1973, § 19-108) 
Sec. 20-65.60. - Care of records and documents; preservation. 
(a)  No member of the police department shall destroy or mutilate any department or city documents or records nor shall he destroy or alter any entry therein, except that the chief of police may direct the destruction of original records after the expiration of the time designated on the city's schedule or after preserving the record by photograph, microphotograph, microfilm or photographic film in a manner as prescribed by state law. 
(b)  Prior to destruction or disposition of the records preserved by photograph, microphotograph, microfilm or photographic film the microphotographed reel shall be inspected to assure completeness of coverage and clarity. A certificate of authenticity shall be obtained from the camera operator stating that the microphotographs are accurate and complete reproductions of the records and that the microfilm meets the standard for archival permanence. In addition, the chief of police shall make a record of the documents destroyed, the method used to destroy the records, and the date of destruction, and shall identify the reel of microphotograph where a copy of the original record may be found, if preserved as specified herein. 
(Code 1973, § 19-109) 
Editor's note- The schedule referred to in the above section, relative to the retention period for original records of the police department, is not set out at length herein but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city. 
Sec. 20-65.61. - Withholding criminal information. 
    No member of the police department receiving or possessing information relative to a criminal offense or case shall retain such facts or information through ulterior motive, desire for personal credit or other reason, but shall report such facts or information in accordance with departmental procedure. 
(Code 1973, § 19-110) 
Sec. 20-65.62. - Relations with the press. 
    No member of the police department shall withhold information from accredited representatives of the press services for any personal reason or solely because of the people involved. Whenever any member of the department is requested for information concerning police action and he is not sure whether it is in the best interests of law enforcement that the information be released at that time, he shall refer the matter to the chief of police for his decision. No officer shall give information to the press services concerning a case that is being investigated by another officer, but it shall be up to the officer conducting the investigation as to how much information can be released pending the completion of the investigation. 
(Code 1973, § 19-111) 
Sec. 20-65.63. - Duty to safeguard suspects and prisoners. 
    All members of the police department shall be cautious in the arrest and detention of prisoners and suspects and shall take all necessary steps to prevent their escape. They shall be extremely careful in determining whether or not the prisoner or suspect is carrying any concealed weapon with which he could inflict injury upon himself, other persons or property. 
(Code 1973, § 19-112) 
Sec. 20-65.64. - Searching prisoners and suspects. 
    All persons shall be searched for concealed weapons before they are placed in any police car for transportation to headquarters. Immediately upon arrival at headquarters they shall be thoroughly searched in the presence of at least one other officer. All property taken from the prisoner or suspect shall be properly listed on the form provided for that purpose. 
(Code 1973, § 19-113) 
Sec. 20-65.65. - Female prisoners. 
    Female prisoners or suspects shall be handled only as is necessary to take them into custody and to determine that weapons are not being concealed. When a more thorough search is desired, then the services of some reliable woman must be secured to make such search. Whenever it is practicable, female prisoners or suspects should be transported and interviewed in the presence of another officer or citizen. 
(Code 1973, § 19-114) 
Sec. 20-65.66. - Use of force restricted. 
    Members of the police department shall not use unnecessary force or violence in making an arrest or in dealing with a prisoner or any person. Prisoners and all citizens shall be treated in a fair and humane manner; they shall not be humiliated, ridiculed, taunted or embarrassed. Officers shall not strike or use any other form of physical force on a prisoner or other person except when it is necessary to prevent an escape, or in self-defense, or to prevent violence to another person or property. Officers shall report each instance of their use of force before going off duty. The use of force necessitates a companion charge of resisting arrest. 
(Code 1973, § 19-115) 
Sec. 20-65.67. - Personal relations with prisoners and suspects. 
    In all his relations with prisoners or suspects, the police officer shall keep in mind that the prisoner or suspect has certain rights which must not be violated. He must be firm without being abusive or brutal. He must not use more force than is necessary to effect an arrest or overcome resistance. He must at all times avoid any appearance of having made a personal matter of the occasion. 
(Code 1973, § 19-116) 
Sec. 20-65.68. - Cases involving minors to be handled by shift commander. 
    All cases involving the detention of a person under the age of 17 years shall be immediately referred to the commanding officer of the shift. It shall be his duty to decide the proper action and disposition. 
(Code 1973, § 19-117) 
Sec. 20-65.69. - Personal use of department property. 
    No member of the police department shall convert to his own use or have any claim in any found property, recovered property or property held as evidence. All such property coming into his possession shall be promptly and properly tagged and placed in a suitable place for safekeeping until properly disposed of in accordance with legal procedure. This section shall not prevent any officer from bidding for any such property that is being sold at a public sale. 
(Code 1973, § 19-118) 
Sec. 20-65.70. - Account for property. 
    Every member of the police department shall account for and make a prompt and true return of any money or property received by him in his official capacity. 
(Code 1973, § 19-119) 
Sec. 20-65.71. - Manner of operating city vehicles. 
    Members of the police department shall operate and maintain any motor vehicle belonging to the city in a careful and prudent manner and shall be responsible for its care and use. They shall take care not to litter the interior, soil or damage the vehicle in any way beyond the point of necessity. 
(Code 1973, § 19-120) 
Sec. 20-65.72. - Duty to report defective motor vehicle. 
    Members of the police department shall submit a report of any damage to a motor vehicle belonging to the department, giving the nature of the damage and a statement as to how it was incurred, if known. They shall immediately report any defective vehicle to the commanding officer so that the defects may be remedied. Under no circumstances shall vehicles be operated that do not meet all legal safety requirements or that are otherwise mechanically defective. 
(Code 1973, § 19-121) 
Sec. 20-65.73. - Use of motor vehicles for personal purposes. 
    No member of the police department shall use department vehicles for other than police purposes, unless expressly permitted to do so by a superior officer. He shall not at any time allow persons other than police personnel to use department vehicles except as may be necessary in having them repaired, cleaned or serviced. 
(Code 1973, § 19-122) 
Sec. 20-65.74. - Carrying unauthorized passengers prohibited. 
    Except for prisoners or suspects who are being transported to or from police headquarters, members of the police department shall not have any person as a passenger except for the following: 
(1)  Another law enforcement agent from some other jurisdiction; 
(2)  A citizen who is rendering a service to the officer; 
(3)  A citizen to whom the officer is rendering a specific service; or 
(4)  Some other person when specific permission has been given by the commanding officer. 
(Code 1973, § 19-123) 
Sec. 20-65.75. - Observance of traffic regulations required. 
    All members of the police department using department vehicles shall ordinarily drive at a moderate rate of speed, taking every precaution to avoid collisions or accidents. They shall observe all traffic and parking regulations insofar as they are consistent with the performance of police duty. Except when on an emergency call or in immediate pursuit, they shall avoid doing anything for which they would penalize another driver. 
(Code 1973, § 19-124) 
Sec. 20-65.76. - Manner of responding to emergency calls. 
    When responding to an emergency call, the driver of a police department vehicle shall exercise judgment and care with regard to safety and life and property. He shall maintain reasonable control of the vehicle at all times. When crossing intersections where traffic is conflicting, he shall sound his siren and have the red light on. He shall not exceed 45 miles per hour except when in immediate pursuit or when instructed to do so by his commanding officer or the dispatcher. 
(Code 1973, § 19-125) 
Sec. 20-65.77. - Use of radio equipment. 
    Each member of the police department shall take every precaution against the abuse and damage to radio equipment and shall immediately report any damaged or defective equipment to the officer in charge. 
(Code 1973, § 19-126) 
Sec. 20-65.78. - Observance of federal communications law required. 
    All members of the police department shall make themselves familiar with the provisions of the federal law pertaining to radio messages and shall exercise every precaution against violating any part thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 19-127) 
Sec. 20-65.79. - Responsibility for individual equipment. 
    Each member of the police department shall be responsible for the proper care of all equipment issued to him for his use. Members may be required to replace any equipment that is lost or destroyed through negligence or carelessness and return all such equipment upon separation from the department. 
(Code 1973, § 19-128) 
Sec. 20-65.80. - Use of force, firearms. 
    Any officer may use such force, including the use of a firearm, as is reasonably necessary to arrest a person who has committed or is charged with the commission of a violent or dangerous felony, or to prevent his escape after arrest. He may also use such force, including the use of a firearm, as is reasonably necessary to protect himself, another officer, a citizen or a prisoner from serious bodily injury. He shall never use his firearm upon a mere suspicion nor to prevent the escape of one who has committed a misdemeanor. Neither shall he at any time ever use his firearm for the sole purpose of intimidation in order to secure compliance to his instructions. In every case where a firearm is used in the performance of police duty, a written report shall be made before going off duty. 
(Code 1973, § 19-129) 
Sec. 20-65.81. - Firearm safety rules. 
    All members of the police department shall at all times observe the established rules of safety in the handling of all types of firearms and shall never remove their revolvers from the holsters and display them in public, except in the actual line of duty. All revolvers carried by members of the department shall be fully loaded while on duty. 
(Code 1973, § 19-130) 
Sec. 20-65.82. - Leaving weapons unattended. 
    No member of the police department shall leave or place unattended any weapon or object adaptable for use as a weapon in any location in the police building normally accessible to a prisoner or suspect. This section shall not apply to fixtures or furnishings which are part of the physical plant. 
(Code 1973, § 19-131) 
Sec. 20-65.83. - Use of certain weapons restricted; personal use of weapons prohibited. 
    The use of submachine guns, rifles, shotguns or gas weapons shall not be permitted except with the approval of the officer in charge of the shift or the chief of police. Under no conditions are weapons belonging to the police department to be used by any officer or person for personal use, such as hunting. 
(Code 1973, § 19-132) 
Sec. 20-65.84. - Lending department firearms. 
    Firearms belonging to the police department shall not be loaned to any private citizen but may be loaned to another law enforcement agency only as provided by departmental order. 
(Code 1973, § 19-133) 
Sec. 20-65.85. - Aiding in breach of regulations. 
    No member of the police department shall aid, abet or knowingly be an accessory to any breach of department regulations. 
(Code 1973, § 19-134) 
Sec. 20-65.86. - Penalty for violation of regulations. 
    Any member of the police department who has failed to comply with or has violated any provision of this article or who is found to have neglected his duty shall be disciplined in accordance with the provisions of this article and the personnel rules of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 19-135) 
Secs. 20-65.87-20-65.100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - POLICE RESERVE FORCE 

Sec. 20-65.101. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a police reserve force for the city. 
(Code 1973, § 19-146) 
Sec. 20-65.102. - Appointment of members. 
    The members of the police reserve force shall be appointed by resolution of the board of aldermen with the recommendation of the chief of police. 
(Code 1973, § 19-147) 
Sec. 20-65.103. - Members to serve without compensation. 
    Members of the police reserve force shall serve as such without compensation. 
(Code 1973, § 19-148) 
Sec. 20-65.104. - Control and supervision of force. 
    The police reserve force shall be under the direct control and supervision of the chief of police. 
(Code 1973, § 19-149) 
Sec. 20-65.105. - Removal. 
    The chief of police shall have the authority to remove, suspend or discharge, with or without cause, any member of the police reserve force of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 19-150) 
Sec. 20-65.106. - Qualifications. 
    Only persons of good character and health, over the age of 21 years and not more than 50 years of age, who have successfully completed such medical, physical, mental and other requirements as may be prescribed by the chief of police, shall be appointed to the police reserve force. 
(Code 1973, § 19-151) 
Sec. 20-65.107. - Uniforms. 
    All members of the police reserve force shall wear identifying uniforms and emblems when carrying out any official duty, task or assignment. 
(Code 1973, § 19-152) 
Sec. 20-65.108. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of all members of the police reserve force of the city to: 
(1)  Be conservators of the peace; 
(2)  Be active and vigilant in the preservation of good order in the city; and 
(3)  Perform such other duties as may be required of them. 
(Code 1973, § 19-153) 
Sec. 20-65.109. - Powers. 
(a)  In performing their lawful duties, members of the police reserve force shall have the power to: 
(1)  Serve and execute all warrants, subpoenas, writs or other process; 
(2)  Make arrests, with proper process, for any offense against the laws of the city or of the state; and 
(3)  Make arrests without process in all cases where any offense against an ordinance of the city or of a law of the state shall be committed in their presence. 
(b)  In addition to the above powers, the police reserve force shall have such other powers as may be provided for by law or ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 19-154) 
Secs. 20-65.110-20-65.120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MUTUAL PROTECTION AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 20-66. - Agreement to cooperate with county and municipalities. 
    The city hereby offers and agrees to cooperate with the county and with each and every municipality within the county for certain common police services under the terms and conditions set forth in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 19-165) 
Sec. 20-67. - When contracts in effect. 
(a)  A contract for mutual police services and cooperation shall be in effect between the city and the county whenever a similar ordinance authorizing such a contract has been enacted by the county council and when a copy of this article is returned to the clerk of the city bearing an endorsement of acceptance over the signatures of the supervisor and clerk of the county. 
(b)  A contract for mutual police services and cooperation shall be in effect between this city and with each municipality within the county which enacts or has enacted a similar ordinance authorizing such a contract and which delivers a copy of such ordinance and a copy of this article to the clerk of the city bearing an endorsement of acceptance over the signatures of the mayor or chairman of the board of trustees and the city or village clerk. 
(Code 1973, § 19-166) 
Sec. 20-68. - Termination of contract. 
    Any contract authorized by this article may be terminated by any of the parties thereto by serving a certified copy of an ordinance terminating such contract upon the clerk of the other contracting party; and such termination shall be effective on the 31st day following the service of a copy of the ordinance of termination. 
(Code 1973, § 19-167) 
Sec. 20-69. - Police to respond to requests for assistance. 
    When and as directed and approved by the office of the chief of police of the city, the members of the police department shall respond to a request for assistance within the boundary limits of any other contracting municipality or of the county. 
(Code 1973, § 19-168) 
Sec. 20-70. - Duty of police when responding to request for assistance. 
    It shall be the duty of the members of the police department of the city to perform police services in any municipality in the county or in any of the unincorporated areas of the county when a contract for such services exists between the city and any other municipality in the county or between the city and the county, when such services have been requested by any such municipality or by the county and when authorized and directed to render such services by the office of the chief of police of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 19-169) 
Sec. 20-71. - Rights of police officers responding to request for assistance by this city. 
    Each police officer of the county or of any municipality in the county performing services in this city in accordance with and under the terms of the contract authorized in this article shall have all the rights, powers, privileges, duties and immunities as the members of the police department of this city; but the members of such other departments of police shall remain in the employ and under the direction, supervision and control of the proper officials and authorities of their respective governmental subdivision. 
(Code 1973, § 19-170) 
Sec. 20-72. - Consideration. 
    The consideration for any contract of the city for mutual police cooperation and assistance shall be the mutual agreements and covenants between the parties thereto, and no compensation, reimbursement or indemnity shall or will be paid by the city to any other contracting governmental subdivision. 
(Code 1973, § 19-171) 
Sec. 20-73. - Equipment to be used at risk of owner; owner to bear responsibility for loss. 
    Any equipment or property utilized by the police department of a governmental subdivision in providing and carrying out police services under the contract authorized in this article shall be used solely at the risk of the governmental subdivision owning the same; and any loss or damage to such property or equipment shall be the responsibility of and be borne by the governmental subdivision owning such property or equipment. 
(Code 1973, § 19-172) 
Sec. 20-74. - Article not to limit tort liability. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to limit the liability of any contracting governmental subdivision or its agents, servants or employees arising out of tortious conduct. 
(Code 1973, § 19-173) 
Sec. 20-75. - City insurance not to cover members of other police forces in city; city police to be covered when serving in other cities. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to afford the protection or coverage of workers' compensation insurance provided by the city to any member of a police department of another governmental subdivision who may be injured or killed or who may die as a result of injuries sustained while performing police services in the city under a contract herein authorized; nor shall anything herein contained be construed to deny the coverage of workers' compensation insurance provided by the city to any of the members of the police department of the city who may be injured or killed or who may die as a result of injuries sustained while serving in any other municipality in the county or in any of the unincorporated areas of the county under a contract herein authorized, with the approval and under the direction of the office of the chief of police of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 19-174) 
Secs. 20-76-20-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POLICE PENSION TRUST[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Police and firemen's retirement systems, RSMo 86.580 et seq. 

Sec. 20-91. - Plan adopted; set out. 
    There is hereby provided the following plan for the retirement of the salaried members of the organized police department of the city, and for the payment to such employees during their retirement and, upon their death to their widow or widower and minor children, of the pension as herein more specifically set forth, in pursuance of the Constitution of the state and the laws enacted thereunder: 
Section 1. Administration 
1.1. Administration of the plan. The employer shall appoint one or more plan administrators, hereinafter collectively called the "administrator," to administer the plan. The administrator, who may be the employer, an employee of the employer or the trustee hereunder (but not an employee of any corporate trustee), shall serve at the pleasure of the board of aldermen. The administrator may resign by delivering his resignation to the board of aldermen, to be effective not less than 30 days after such delivery. In the event of the removal or resignation of the administrator, the board of aldermen shall appoint a successor administrator who shall have the same powers and duties as those conferred upon his predecessor. 
1.2. Powers and duties. The administrator shall prepare and maintain a summary plan description and shall furnish a copy thereof to each participant within 90 days after he becomes a participant and to each beneficiary of a participant within 90 days after he first receives benefits. 
    The administrator shall file such reports and other information as may be required of him by law. 
    The administrator shall administer the plan in accordance with its terms and shall have all powers necessary to carry out the provisions of the plan. He shall interpret the plan and shall determine all questions arising in the administration, interpretation and application of the plan. In any case where the administrator shall deny benefits to a participant or beneficiary, he shall set forth the specific reason or reasons therefor, in writing, and deliver the same to such participant or beneficiary, and shall afford such participant or beneficiary a hearing, if such participant or beneficiary makes written request for such hearing within 30 days after delivery of the written notice of denial, as aforesaid. 
    The administrator may adopt such regulations as he deems desirable for the conduct of his affairs. He may appoint such accountants, counsel, specialists, investment managers and other persons that he deems necessary or desirable in connection with the administration of his plan. He shall be entitled to rely conclusively upon, and shall be fully protected in any action taken by him in good faith in relying upon any opinions or reports which shall be furnished to him by any such investment managers. 
    The administrator shall have no duty to inquire into the amount of the employer's annual contribution or method used in determining said contribution. 
1.3. Records and reports. The administrator shall keep a record of all his acts, and shall keep all such books of account, records and other data as may be necessary for proper administration of the plan. He shall notify the trustee and the employer of any action taken by him and, when required, shall notify any other interested person or persons. 
1.4. Payment of expenses. Unless otherwise determined by the employer, the administrator shall serve without compensation for his services as such. The expenses of the administrator for bookkeeping and recordkeeping shall be paid by the trust fund; and all other expenses of the administrator incident to his functioning, including but not limited to fees of accountants, counsel, investment managers and other specialists, bond and insurance premiums, and other costs of administering the plan shall be paid by the employer. 
    The employer may, at its sole cost, purchase insurance to cover the potential liability of the administrator to the plan. 
1.5. Notice to participant. The administrator shall furnish to each employee becoming a participant in the plan a written, nontechnical notification of the availability of the election provided in section 5.5 regarding the method of payment of benefits. Such notice shall explain in nontechnical language the methods of payment which the participant may elect, and it shall describe the effect of the participant's failure to make an election. It shall also describe the financial effect of electing the joint and survivor annuity option versus the option of an annuity solely for the life of the participant. 
Section 2. [Eligibility to Participate] 
2.1. Conditions of eligibility. All "employees" who were eligible to participate in the plan on or prior to June 1, 1986, shall continue to participate in the plan as amended; provided, however, that no employee who was a participant on or prior to June 1, 1986, shall forfeit any benefit as a result of this amendment to the plan; and, provided further, that any "employee" who has attained 21 years of age and has completed no less than 583 1/3 hours of service during the period from June 1, 1986, through and including December 31, 1986, shall be eligible to participate in the plan as of January 1, 1987. Any other employee shall be eligible to participate in the plan on January 1 or July 1 after the employee has attained 21 years of age and has completed no less than 1,000 hours of service during a consecutive 12-month period based upon his or her employment date or an anniversary thereof. In the plan year in which an employee joins participation in the plan, he shall be considered a participant for the entire plan year regardless of the date his participation actually commences. 
    Any participant who has terminated his employment and is later rehired after the passing of a consecutive 12-month period based upon that participant's employment date or an anniversary thereof during which he does not complete more than 500 hours of service, other than by reason of an authorized leave of absence pursuant to section 2.4, shall not be eligible to rejoin participation until the first day of the next plan year beginning after the date on which such person recommences employment. However, after such person has rejoined participation hereunder, he shall be deemed to have recommenced participation for all purposes hereunder as of the date of his reemployment. 
    A former participant who received a distribution may reinstate his account if (a) he again performs an hour of service as a participant before incurring five consecutive breaks in service and (b) he repays to the trustee the full amount of the distribution(s) (excluding any amount of such distribution attributable to his voluntary contributions) no later than the date he incurs the fifth consecutive break in service. 
2.2. [Hours of service.] Each employee will be credited with an hour of service for: 
(1)  Each hour for which an employee is directly or indirectly paid or entitled to payment by the employer for the performance of duties. These hours shall be credited to the employee for the computation period or periods in which the duties are performed; and 
(2)  Each hour (up to a maximum of 50 hours) for which an employee is directly or indirectly paid or entitled to payment by the employer (irrespective of whether the employment relationship has terminated) due to vacation, holiday, illness, incapacity (including disability), layoff, jury duty, military duty or leave of absence other than for the performance of duties; these hours shall be credited to the employee for the computation period or periods in which the nonperformance of duties occurred; and 
(3)  Each hour for which back pay, irrespective of mitigation of damage, has been either awarded or agreed to by the employer. These hours shall be credited to the employee for computation period or periods to which the award or agreement pertains rather than computation period in which the award, agreement, or payment was made. 
    The special rule for determining hours of service for reasons other than the performance of duties as provided in DOL Reg 2530.200b-2(b), is incorporated herein as if fully set forth herein. Any ambiguities in the above definition shall be resolved in favor of the position giving the employees credit for time and hours of service. 
2.3. Application for participation. Coincident with the date a new employee commences employment with the employer, he shall be notified of the existence of the plan and he shall be provided with an application to participate. Such application may be submitted at that date or any date thereafter. However, failure to complete such application shall not prevent any employee from becoming a participant in the plan. Such application shall provide the employee with the opportunity to designate his beneficiary and the method for payment of his benefits under the plan. 
    The information set forth in the application shall be binding on the employee and his beneficiary. However, the employee may revise the information and election contained in his application at any time prior to payment of his benefits hereunder. 
2.4. Authorized leave of absence. An authorized leave of absence is an absence approved by the employer pursuant to the uniform application of the personnel policy of the employer. 
2.5. Effect of authorized leave of absence. During an authorized leave of absence: 
(a)  A participant will not incur a break in service if the failure to accrue 500 hours of service during the plan year is due solely to such authorized leave of absence; 
(b)  A participant's account shall share in the allocation of net earnings, net losses, taxes and expenses of the trust during such period; 
(c)  For purposes of determining eligibility to share in employer contributions under section 4.2, a participant's employment shall be deemed to have been continuous during such period. 
2.6. Determination of eligibility. The administrator shall determine the eligibility of each employee for participation in the plan. 
2.7. Uniformity of application. Specifically with regard to the application of the provisions of this section 2, employees in similar circumstances shall be treated alike by the employer. 
2.8. Inactive status. In the event that any participant shall fail, in any year of his employment after the effective date, to complete a "year of service" as defined in section 2.2, but does complete more than 500 hours of service during such year, his employer contribution account shall be placed on inactive status. In such case, such year shall not be considered as a year of service for the purposes of determining the participant's vested interest in accordance with section 5.4, and the participant shall not share in the employer's contribution or in forfeiture allocations for any such year, but he shall continue to receive income allocations in accordance with section 4.4. In the event such participant accumulates 1,000 hours of employment in a subsequent year, his employer contribution account shall revert to active status with full rights and privileges under this plan restored. 
Section 3. Contributions 
3.1. Contributions by employer. 
(a)  Subject as hereinafter provided, for the plan year ending in 1982 and each plan year thereafter, the employer shall contribute to the trust fund an amount that is equal to 0 percent [effective June 30, 2012] of each participant's "compensation" (as hereinafter defined) for such plan year. Employer contributions under this subparagraph (a) shall be made only for those employees who are employed on the last day of the respective plan year and who complete a year of service during such year. However, new participants in the year they join participation shall have their entire compensation for the year used in determining the contribution made for them. 
(b)  Subject as hereinafter provided, and in addition to the employer contributions made pursuant to subparagraph (a) of this section 3.1, the employer shall make such additional contributions to the trust fund annually as are necessary in order to fund the "past service credits" which were guaranteed when the plan was established in 1969. 
    Employer contributions for past service credits under this subparagraph (b) shall be made only for those employees who are eligible for past service credits as set out above and who are employed on the last day of the respective plan year for which such contributions are made. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the total contributions made by the employer for any plan year, pursuant to this section 3.1, shall not exceed the maximum amount deductible as employee compensation from the employer's income for such year, plus previous years, under the Internal Revenue Code of the United States, or any statute of similar import. 
3.2. Time of payment of employer contributions. The employer shall pay to the trustee its contribution for each year within the time prescribed by law. 
3.3. Amount of employer contribution. The trustee shall not be obligated to inquire into the amount or method of computation of the employer's contributions, but shall accept without question any and all amounts turned over to the trustee by the employer. Such contributions shall represent irrevocable contributions of the employer to the trust fund created hereunder, except in the case of contributions made as a result [of] a "mistake" permitting refund of such contribution to the employer under regulations of the Internal Revenue Code. 
Section 4. Allocation 
4.1. Participants' accounts. The trustee shall establish and maintain an employer contribution account in the name of each participant to which he shall credit all sums allocated to each such participant pursuant to the provisions of section 4.2 hereof. 
4.2. Allocation of annual contributions. 
(a)  The trustee, as of the close of business on the last day of each plan year for which the employer shall make a contribution, shall allocate the contribution made by the employer pursuant to section 3.1 hereof with respect to each participant's compensation or past service credit to each respective eligible participant's employer contribution account. Regardless of an employee's exact date of entry into the plan during any given plan year, each newly eligible participant shall have his allocable share of the employer's contribution for such year under section 3.1(a) allocated to his account based upon his total compensation for such year. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the annual additions made to the employer contribution accounts of any participant under all qualified pension plans maintained by the employer shall not exceed the lesser of (a) $25,000.00 plus such adjustment for cost of living increases as are made pursuant to Internal Revenue Code, section 415(d); or (b) 25 percent of the participant's compensation. In the event that any participant's total employer contribution accounts would receive total annual additions in excess of limitations described in the preceding sentence and such excess annual additions result from annual additions made under this plan, such annual additions shall be reallocated among the employer contribution accounts of the other participants in the plan according to their relative levels of compensation for such year. 
4.3. Valuation of the trust fund. The trustee, as of the last day of each plan year, shall determine the net worth of the assets of the trust fund and, within 90 days thereafter, report such value to the administrator in writing. A copy of such report shall be furnished by the administrator to each participant within 210 days after the aforesaid valuation date. In determining such net worth, the trustee shall evaluate the assets of the trust fund at their fair market value as of such valuation date and shall deduct all expenses for which the trustee has not yet obtained reimbursement from the employer or from the trust fund. Such valuation shall include any contribution made or to be made by the employer for the respective plan year. 
4.4. Valuation of accounts. The trustee shall determine the value of the accounts of the participants as of the last day of each plan year and allocate thereto any income or loss according to the respective account balances as of the immediately preceding valuation date. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, such valuation shall include any contribution made by the employer for the plan year then under consideration for such accounts, regardless whether that contribution is made before or after the last day of such plan year. 
Section 5. [Distribution] 
5.1. Distribution upon retirement. Subject to postponement upon the mutual consent of the participant and the employer, every participant shall retire for the purposes hereof on the first day of the month after attaining his normal retirement date. In addition, with the employer's consent, early retirement may be permitted for a participant who has attained his early retirement date and requests such early retirement in writing. 
    The normal retirement date for each participant is when he attains the age of 65. The early retirement date for each participant is when he attains the age of 55. 
    If a participant terminates his employment on or after his normal retirement date, his interest in the portion of the trust fund then credited to his account shall be 100 percent vested and nonforfeitable. Following such a participant's retirement, the plan administrator, in accordance with the provisions of section 5.5 hereof, shall direct the trustee to distribute such participant's account in the manner designated by the participant. No distribution shall be made to a participant, regardless of age, until he has in fact retired. 
    The employer may, with the mutual consent of the participant, from time to time postpone the normal retirement date for a participant to a specified date beyond the participant's 65th birthday. The participant whose retirement is thus postponed shall share in the contributions made and forfeitures reallocated during said extended period and shall remain fully vested during such period. 
    If a participant is permitted to take early retirement hereunder by the employer, only that portion of the participant's account which is vested and nonforfeitable under the schedule set forth in section 5.4 hereof will be distributed to the participant. The remainder will be forfeited upon the occurrence of a break in service. Distribution will be made in the manner designated by the participant under section 5.5 hereof and shall commence during the time limits prescribed for payment of normal retirement benefits. 
5.2. Distribution upon death. Upon the death of a participant before retirement or upon death before other termination of his employment, the monetary value of such portion of the trust fund then credited to his account shall become fully 100 percent vested and nonforfeitable. The administrator, in accordance with the provisions of section 5.5 hereof, shall direct the trustee to make distribution from the trust fund of a portion thereof of said monetary value to the person designated therefor by the participant, or, if there is no designation, to such participant's surviving spouse. If there be no surviving spouse, then such distribution shall be made to such participant's estate. 
    Upon the death of a former participant, the administrator, in accordance with the provisions of section 5.5 hereof, shall direct the trustee to distribute the then value of the vested, nonforfeitable portion of the former participant's account remaining undistributed to the person designated therefor by such former participant, or, if there is no designation, to such former participant's surviving spouse. If there be no surviving spouse, then such distribution shall be made to such participant's estate. 
    The administrator may require such proper proof of death and such evidence of the right of any person to receive payment of the vested account of a deceased participant or former participant as he may deem proper and desirable. His determination of death and of the right of any person to receive payment shall be conclusive. 
    Each employee, upon becoming a participant, may designate the person to receive his vested portion of the trust fund in the event of his death and, in addition, another person to receive such portion if the first person should not survive the employee. Such designations shall be made in a form satisfactory to the administrator. Any participant may at any time revoke or change his designation by filing written notice of such revocation or change with the administrator. 
5.3. Distribution in event of disability. Upon the determination of the total and permanent disability of a participant, the amount credited to his account shall become fully 100 percent vested and nonforfeitable. The administrator, in accordance with the provisions of section 5.5 hereof, shall direct the trustee to distribute to such participant the then value of such account. Upon such distribution, such account shall be cancelled. 
    The total and permanent disability of any participant shall be determined and certified to by a physician selected by the employer. 
5.4. Payment on termination of employment for other reasons. Upon the termination of employment of a participant for any reason other than death, retirement due to age, or disability, the administrator in accordance with the provisions of section 5.5 hereof, shall direct the trustee to distribute to such participant, following the elapse of a break in service as defined in section 2.2, the vested portion in his account in accordance with the schedule below. 
    The portion of said participant's account which shall become vested is based on the completed years of service of the participant after attaining the age of 21 years, as set out below, including all such completed years of service worked by the employee for the employer, regardless whether any break in service has ever occurred, to the maximum of 100 percent; provided, however, that an employee who terminates his employment for whatever reason shall be deemed to have a completed year of service for the plan year in which he terminates if he has accumulated 1,000 hours of service during the plan year. 
Completed Years of Service 
  After Age 21 with 
   the Employer Percentage of 
Account Vested Less than 3 .....   0 3 or more, but less than 4 .....  30 4 or more, but less than 5 .....  40 5 or more, but less than 6 .....  50 6 or more, but less than 7 .....  60 7 or more, but less than 8 .....  70 8 or more, but less than 9 .....  80 9 or more, but less than 10 .....  90 10 or more ..... 100  
    Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, 100 percent of the vested (nonforfeitable) portion of the trust fund of any participant whose employment has been terminated as aforesaid, may be held at the discretion of the trustee, subject to adjustment as hereinabove provided in sections 4.3 and 4.4, until such participant shall be entitled to distribution thereof in accordance with the provisions of sections 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 hereof. The nonvested portion of the account of a participant who has terminated his employment shall be held until a break in service shall have occurred and shall then be forfeited and shall be applied as provided in section 5.9 hereof. 
    Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, any participant who completes 583 1/3 hours of service during the short plan year from June 1, 1986, through and including December 31, 1986, shall receive a year of service for such short plan year. 
5.5. Method and medium of payment. The distribution provided hereunder shall be made within 60 days after the close of the plan year in which the event entitling a participant or his beneficiary to distribution shall have occurred and shall be made in such one or more of the following methods as the employee may elect, in writing, in a form satisfactory to the administrator, to wit: 
(a)  The purchase of a nontransferable lifetime annuity contract for the participant in such an amount as may be purchased with all of the funds then credited to the participant's account as provided for herein; [or] 
(b)  The purchase of a nontransferable joint and survivor annuity contract for the participant and his or her spouse in such an amount as may be purchased with all of the funds then credited to the participant's account as provided for herein, which joint and survivor annuity contract provides for the payment of a reduced amount of retirement allowance to the participant during his lifetime and for the continuance of the same in equal or reduced amounts as he may elect, but not less than 50 percent of the amount paid to the participant during his lifetime, to the participant's spouse for the lifetime of the spouse after the participant's death; or 
(c)  One lump sum payment, subject to approval of the administrator; or 
(d)  Substantially equal payments in monthly, quarterly, semiannual or annual installments, over a period not exceeding ten years (until the account is exhausted), after first having segregated the aggregate amount thereof in a special account or fund; provided, however, the unpaid balance of any such special account or fund which is deferred and is to be paid in installments shall be subject to adjustment as hereinabove provided in sections 4.3 and 4.4; and provided further that the period selected does not exceed the life expectancy of the participant. 
    The participant shall be entitled at any time prior to the commencement of or his receipt of benefits hereunder to make an election or revoke an election and make a new election, except as otherwise limited herein. A break in service during any period of employment shall not invalidate an election or revocation of an election made, as authorized herein, nor prevent an election from being made or revoked. 
    Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, however, any married participant who has not elected in writing one of the other options hereinbefore set out prior to the date for payment of his benefits shall be provided and shall be deemed to have elected a joint and survivor annuity as set out in section 5.5(b) hereof providing for a survivor annuity equal to 50 percent of the amount paid to the participant during his lifetime. 
    If the participant is unmarried on the date giving rise to distribution, and he does not have a written designation of the method for payment of his benefits on file with the plan administrator at the time when distribution is to commence, distribution shall be made in one of the methods provided above as elected by the administrator; provided, however, a joint and survivor annuity may not be elected by the administrator. 
5.6. Valuation and distribution. The valuation to be given the portion of the trust fund to be distributed to participants, or the persons designated by them or to their estates, shall be based upon value of the trust fund last determined by the trustee. 
5.7. Administrative powers relating to payment. Payments to participants and beneficiaries shall be made in cash, securities or other property, as the administrator, with the concurrence of the trustee, may determine. Payments to a participant or beneficiary who is under legal disability or who, by reason of illness or mental or physical disability, is, in the opinion of the administrator, unable properly to administer such payments, may be made by the trustee in such of the following ways as the administrator shall direct: 
(a)  Directly to such participant or beneficiary; or 
(b)  To the legal representative of such participant or beneficiary; or 
(c)  To some relative by blood or marriage, or friend, for the benefit of such participant or beneficiary. 
5.8. Statement of benefits on distribution. The trustee, upon making distribution to a participant or his beneficiary, shall furnish such participant or beneficiary a statement setting forth the amount and nature of the distribution and the amount, if any, of the deferred vested benefits held in the plan for such participant. 
5.9. Forfeitures. Portions of participants' accounts which are forfeited as provided in section 5.4 of this plan shall be accumulated during the year in which they occur and at the end thereof the total of such accumulations shall be applied to reduce the employer's contributions for the current year or for the succeeding year or years in the trustee's discretion. 
Section 6. Trustees 
6.1. Establishment and acceptance of trust. The trustee shall receive contributions to the trust fund in cash or other property approved by the administrator for acceptance by the trustee. Contributions so received, together with the income therefrom (herein called the "trust fund"), shall be held, managed and administered in trust pursuant to the terms of this agreement. The trustee hereby accepts the trust fund created hereunder and agrees to perform the duties under this agreement on his part to be performed. 
6.2. Investment of the trust fund. Responsibility for the management and control of the trust fund shall be vested in the discretion of the trustee and in such one or more investment managers as may be appointed by the trustee with the consent of the employer. Any investment manager hereunder appointed by the trustee shall be empowered to control and manage the investment and reinvestment of the portion of the trust fund charged to his care. The trustee shall have the express authority to contract with an insurance company for investment of the plan's funds in a group annuity contract. 
    Although separate records of account shall be kept in the name of each participant and each beneficiary entitled to annual payments, this shall in no way restrict the trustee or the investment manager in the investment of the assets of the trust fund which, for investment purposes, may be administered as a single fund. 
    The assets held in the trust fund shall be invested to assure, to the extent possible, that substantial funds will be accumulated to provide the retirement benefits hereunder. Investments may include but shall not be limited to mutual funds, stocks, common or preferred, any suitable collective investment fund, corporate bonds, including but not limited to certified bonds, certificates of deposit and like assets. The selection, retention and disposition of any specific investment from among the classes of authorized investments designed above, such as certificates of deposit or mutual funds for example, shall be made by the trustee in his discretion. The trustee shall not be liable in the event that up to and including 100 percent of the trust assets are prudently invested in any one class of investments, such as certificates of deposit. The trustee shall discharge the investment of the assets in accordance with the funding policy and guidelines established by the employer or the plan and communicated to the trustee. 
    In making investments of the assets of the trust fund, the trustee shall discharge his duties solely in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries and for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to participants and their beneficiaries and defraying reasonable expenses of administering the plan, with the care, skill, prudence and diligence under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent man acting in a like capacity and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an enterprise of a like character and with like aims, by diversifying the investments of the trust fund in the types of assets enumerated above. 
    The investment manager shall, to the extent of the funds under its control, be responsible for providing proper diversification with respect to the trust fund. The trustee shall not be liable for losses or diminution of the portion of the trust fund under the control of the investment manager, which diminution is incurred by the management of the investment manager, unless the trustee knowingly participates in, or knowingly undertakes to conceal, an act or omission of such investment manager and the trustee has reason to know that such act constitutes a breach of fiduciary responsibility by the investment manager. Upon any direction of the investment manager, the trustee shall make, execute, acknowledge and deliver any and all documents or instruments of transfer and conveyance that may be necessary to carry out the investment manager's foregoing powers and responsibilities. 
    In the event any of the trust funds are used to purchase and pay premiums on ordinary insurance contracts, and such funds have been accumulated for at least two years, then in such event (1) the aggregate life insurance premiums for each participant shall be less than one-half of the aggregate of the contributions allocated to the credit of the participant at any particular time, and (2) the trustee shall be required to convert the entire value of the life insurance contract at or before retirement into cash, or to provide periodic income, so that no portion of such value may be used to continue life insurance protection beyond retirement, or to distribute the contract to the participant. 
6.2A. Participant direction of investments. Each participant shall have the right and power to direct in writing particular investments for such participant's account. If the trustee determines that such investments are suitable for the investment of trust funds, as described in section 6.2 hereof, the trustee may acquire and hold such specific assets directed by such participant in such participant's account. If the participant and trustee agree as to the holding of specific assets in such participant's account, the trustee shall be relieved of any liability for failure to diversify the assets held in such participant's account and for failure to dispose of such assets without further direction from the participant. 
    In the event specific assets are held for the accounts of individual participants, as provided above, such respective accounts shall receive the income from such assets together with a pro rata share of the general income of the trust, based upon the share in the unallocated assets of the trust fund of the respective participant. Further, in such event, the trustee shall, at all times, keep separate books of account showing those trust assets which are allocated to individual participants' accounts, which records shall be open for inspection by all participants and other interested parties. 
6.3. Powers of trustee. The trustee shall have the following powers and authority in the administration of the trust fund, to be exercised in accordance with and subject to the provisions of section 6.4 hereof. 
(a)  To purchase, or subscribe for, any securities or other property and to retain the same in trust. 
(b)  To sell, exchange, convey, transfer or otherwise dispose of any securities or other property held by him, by private contract or at public auction. No person dealing with the trustee shall be bound to see to the application of the purchase money or to inquire into the validity, expediency or propriety of any such sale or other disposition. 
(c)  To vote upon any stocks, bonds or other securities; to give general or special proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of substitution; to exercise any conversion privileges, subscription rights or other options, and to make any payments incident thereto; to oppose, or to consent to, or otherwise participate in, corporate reorganizations or other changes affecting corporate securities, and to delegate discretionary powers, and to pay any assessments or charges in connection therewith; and generally to exercise any of the powers of an owner with respect to stocks, bonds, securities or other property held as part of the trust fund. 
(d)  To cause any securities or other property held as part of the trust fund to be registered in his own name or in the name of one or more of its nominees, and to hold any investments in bearer form; but the books and records of the trustee shall at all times show that all such investments are part of the trust fund. 
(e)  To borrow or raise money for the purpose of the trust in such amount, and upon such terms and conditions, as the trustee shall deem advisable; but in no event shall the trustee pledge or impose any lien on all, or any part, of the trust fund to secure said loan. 
(f)  To keep such portion of the trust fund in cash or cash balances as the trustee may, from time to time, deem to be in the best interests of the trust created hereby, without liability for interest thereon. 
(g)  To accept and retain for such time as he may deem advisable any securities or other property received or acquired by him as trustee hereunder. 
(h)  To make, execute, acknowledge and deliver any and all documents of transfer and conveyance and any and all other instruments that may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the powers herein granted. 
(i)  To settle, comprise [sic] or submit to arbitration any claims, debts or damages due or owing to or from the trust fund, to commence or defend suits or legal or administrative proceedings and to represent the trust fund in all suits and legal and administrative proceedings. 
(j)  To employ suitable agents, and counsel (who may be counsel for the employer), and to pay their reasonable expenses and compensation. 
(k)  To do all such acts, take all such proceedings, and exercise all such rights and privileges, although not specifically mentioned herein, as the trustee may deem necessary to administer the trust fund, and to carry out the purposes of this trust. 
6.4. Directing the trustee. The powers granted the trustee under sections 6.2 and 6.3 shall be exercised by the trustee in his sole discretion. 
6.5. Payments from the fund. The trustee shall from time to time on the written direction of the administrator, make payments out of the trust fund to such persons, in such manner, in such amounts and for such purposes as may be specified in such written directions; and upon such payment being made, the amount thereof shall no longer constitute a part of the trust fund. Each such written direction shall be accompanied by a certificate of the administrator that the payment is in accordance with the plan. The trustee shall not be responsible in any way for the application of such payments or for the adequacy of the trust fund to meet and discharge any and all liabilities under the plan. 
6.6. Payment of compensation, expenses and taxes. The trustee shall be paid in accordance with such schedule of fees as shall have been adopted and published by said trustee and in effect at the time such services are rendered; provided that no individual trustee and no trustee who is also an employee of the employer shall be entitled to any compensation from the plan or trust for his services as trustee whatsoever. 
    The trustee shall be reimbursed for any reasonable expenses, including but not limited to fees of accountants, counsel, investment managers and other specialists, premiums for bonds and other costs incurred in the administration of the trust fund. The expenses of the trustee for bookkeeping and recordkeeping shall be paid by the trust fund. All other expenses of the trustee and compensation of the trustee shall be paid by the employer, but until paid shall constitute a charge upon the trust fund. All taxes of any and all kinds whatsoever that may be levied or assessed under existing or future laws upon, or in respect of, the trust fund or the income thereof shall be paid from the trust fund. 
    The employer may, at its sole cost, purchase insurance to cover the potential liability of the trustee to the plan. 
6.7. Accounting. The trustee shall keep accurate and detailed accounts of all investments, receipts, disbursements and other transactions hereunder. All accounts, books and records relating to such transaction shall be open to inspection and audit at all reasonable times by any person designated by the administrator. 
    Within 60 days following the close of each plan year of the trust or the receipt of the employer's contribution for such plan year, whichever is later, and within 60 days after the removal or resignation of the trustee, as provided in section 6.10 hereof, the trustee shall file with the administrator a written account setting forth all information required by any report or statement to be filed under the Internal Revenue Code of the United States, or any statute of similar import for such plan year or during the period from the close of the last plan year to the date of such removal or resignation. The trustee shall also file with the administrator a written account setting forth all cash receipts and disbursements on a quarterly, semiannual or annual basis, as the trustee may determine, said account to be filed within 30 days following the close of the period covered by said account. Upon the expiration of 60 days from the date of filing such annual or other account, the trustee shall be forever released and discharged from all liability and accountability to the plan administrator with respect to the propriety of its acts and transactions shown in such account, except with respect to any such acts or transactions as to which the administrator shall file with the trustee written objections within such 60-day period. 
6.8. Immunity of trustee. 
(a)  The trustee shall not be liable for the making, retention or sale of any investment or reinvestment made by him, as herein provided, nor for any loss to or diminution of the trust fund, unless due to the trustee's negligence, willful misconduct, lack of good faith or breach of his fiduciary duties and responsibilities hereunder or imposed by the Internal Revenue Code of the United States of any statute of similar import. 
(b)  The trustee shall be fully protected in relying upon a certification of the administrator with respect to any instruction of direction of the administrator and also in relying upon the certification of an officer or agent of the employer as to the appointment of the administrator and in continuing to rely upon such certification until a subsequent certification if filed with the trustee. The trustee shall be fully protected in acting upon any instrument, certificate or paper believed by him to be genuine and to be signed or presented by the proper person or persons; and the trustee shall be under no duty to make any investigation or inquiry as to any statement contained in any such writing but may accept the same as evidence of the truth and accuracy of the statements therein contained. 
(c)  The employer agrees to indemnify the trust fund and the trustee against any liability imposed as a result of a claim asserted by any person or persons under the community property or other laws of any state where the trustee has acted in good faith in reliance on a written direction of the administrator. 
(d)  The trustee shall have no duty to inquire into the amount of the employer's annual contribution or the method used in determining the amount of the employer's contribution, but shall be accountable only for funds actually received by him. 
6.9. Advice of employer, administrator or counsel. If at any time the trustee is in doubt concerning the course which he should follow in connection with any matter relating to the plan, he may request the employer or administrator to advise him with respect thereto, and shall be protected in relying upon the advice or direction which may be given by the employer or administrator in response to such request. The trustee may consult with legal counsel, who may be counsel for the employer, with respect to the meaning or construction of this plan and trust and the obligations and duties of the trustee hereunder, and with respect to any action taken or omitted in good faith pursuant to the advice of legal counsel. 
6.10. Removal, resignation and appointment of successor trustees. The trustee may be removed by the employer at any time upon 60 days' notice in writing to the trustee and the administrator. The trustee may resign at any time upon 60 days' notice in writing to the employer and the administrator. Upon such removal or resignation of the trustee, the employer shall appoint a successor trustee or trustees who shall have the same powers and duties as those conferred upon his, its or their predecessor. 
6.11. Incapacity of employer. If at any time the employer shall be incapable of giving directions, instructions or authorizations to the trustee, as herein provided for, the trustee may act and shall be completely protected and without liability in so acting without such directions, instructions or authorizations, as he, in his sole discretion, deems appropriate and advisable in the circumstances for the carrying out of the provisions of this plan and trust. 
Section 7. Amendment and Termination 
7.1. Amendment. The employer may at any time, and from time to time, amend, in whole or in part, any or all of the provisions of this agreement. Any such amendment shall become effective upon delivery of a written instrument, executed by order of the board of aldermen, to the trustee and the endorsement of the trustee of his receipt or of his written consent thereto, if such consent is required; provided, however, no such amendment which affects the rights, duties or responsibility of the trustee may be made without the trustee's written consent. No amendment shall cause any reduction in the amount heretofore credited to any participant or cause or permit any portion of the trust fund to revert to or become the property of the employer. Any amendment which changes the vesting schedule hereinabove set forth in section 5.4 shall not become effective with reference to any participant having five or more years of service unless such participant is permitted to elect, in a writing filed with the administrator, to have his nonforfeitable percentage computed under the plan without regard to such amendment within 60 days after the latest of the following events: (1) The adoption of such amendment; (2) the effective date of such amendment; or (3) the date when notice of such change is given to the participant. 
    Under no circumstances may any part of the trust fund (other than such part as is required to pay taxes and administration expenses) be used for or diverted to purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of the participants or their beneficiaries or estates, whether by operation or natural termination of the trust, by power of revocation or amendment, by the happening of a contingency, by collateral arrangement, or by any other means. 
7.2. Termination of plan. The employer may at any time discontinue its contributions hereunder or terminate this agreement and the trust hereby created, or written notice thereof to the trustee, the administrator and the participants. 
    Upon termination or partial termination of the plan all of the funds then credited to the participants' accounts shall become fully vested, and shall not thereafter be subject to forfeiture. Upon termination of the trust, the administrator shall direct the trustee to distribute all assets remaining in the trust fund, after payment of any expenses properly chargeable against it, to the participants in accordance with the value of the accounts credited to such participants as of the date of such distribution, in cash or in kind and in such manner as the administrator shall determine. 
7.3. Withdrawal by employer. The employer may elect to withdraw from participation in the plan hereby established without terminating the trust hereunder. 
Section 8. Miscellaneous 
8.1. Participant's rights. Neither the establishment of the plan hereby created, nor any modification thereof, nor the creation of any fund or account, nor the payment of any benefits, shall be construed as giving to any participant or other person any legal or equitable right against the employer, or any officer or employee thereof, or the trustee, or the administrator, except as provided herein or by law. Under no circumstances shall the terms of employment of any participant be modified or in any way be affected hereby. All participants in like circumstances must be treated equally under uniform rules, which are uniformly applied and without discrimination or favor of, or against any participant. 
8.2. Spendthrift clause. The right of any participant or beneficiary to any benefit or to any payment hereunder or to any separate account shall not be subject to alienation or assignment, nor shall the same be subject to seizure by creditors of such participant or beneficiary under any writ or proceeding at law or in equity. If such participant shall attempt to assign, transfer or dispose of such right, or should such right be subjected to attachment, execution, garnishment, sequestration or other legal, equitable or other process, it shall ipso facto pass to such one or more as may be appointed by the administrator from among the beneficiaries, if any, theretofore designated by such participant and the spouse and blood relatives of the participant. However, the administrator in his sole discretion may reappoint the participant to receive any payment thereafter becoming due either in whole or in part. Any appointment made by the administrator hereunder may be revoked by him at any time, and a further appointment made by him. 
8.3. Delegation of authority by employer. Whenever the employer under the terms of this agreement is permitted or required to do or perform any act or matter or thing, it shall be done and performed by an officer thereunto duly authorized by its board of aldermen. 
8.4. Consolidation or merger. Nothing in this agreement shall prevent the consolidation or merge of the employer with or into any other municipal corporation, and the successor corporation formed and resulting from such consolidation or merger shall have the right to become a party to this agreement by adopting the same by resolution and by executing a proper supplemental agreement with the trustee. If within 90 days from the effective date of such consolidation, merger or sale of assets such new corporation does not become a party to this agreement, as above provided, this plan shall automatically be deemed terminated as of the date of such consolidation, merger or sale. 
    In the case of any merger or consolidation with, or transfer of assets or liabilities to, any other plan, each participant under this plan shall (if the plan then terminates) receive a benefit immediately after the merger, consolidation or transfer which is equal to or greater than the benefit he would have been entitled to receive immediately before the merger, consolidation or transfer (if the plan had then terminated). 
8.5. Dissolution or liquidation of employer. In the event that the employer is legally dissolved or liquidated by any procedure other than a consolidation, merger or sale, this plan shall terminate as of the effective date of such dissolution or liquidation. 
8.6. Covenant to perform further acts. All parties to, or claiming any interest under, this agreement, agree to perform any and all acts and to execute any and all documents and papers which are necessary or desirable for carrying out this plan and trust. 
8.7. Construction of agreement. This agreement shall be construed according to the laws of the State of Missouri, and all provisions thereof shall be administered according to the laws of said state. 
8.8. Gender and number. Wherever any words are used herein in the masculine gender they shall be construed as though they were also used in the feminine gender in all cases where they would so apply, and wherever any words are used herein in the singular form they shall be construed as though they were also used in the plural form in all cases where they would so apply. 
8.9. Limitation of liability; legal actions; and payment of expense. It is expressly understood and agreed by each employee who becomes a participant hereunder that except for violation of any applicable provision of law, willful neglect, breach of fiduciary duties or fraud, neither the employer, the administrator nor the trustee shall be in any way subject to any suit or litigation, or to any legal liability, for any cause or reason or thing whatsoever, in connection with this plan or its operation; and each such employee hereby releases the employer, the administrator and the trustee and their respective officers, agents and servants from any and all liability or obligation to the extent permissible by law. 
    In any action or proceeding involving the trust fund, or any property constituting part or all thereof, or the administration thereof, the employer, the administrator and the trustee shall be the only necessary parties; and no employees or former employees of the employer or their beneficiaries or any other person having or claiming to have an interest in the trust fund or under the plan shall be entitled to any notice of process. 
    Any final judgment which is not appealed or appealable that may be entered in any such action or proceeding shall be binding and conclusive on the parties hereto, the administrator, and all persons having or claiming to have an interest in the trust fund or under the plan. 
8.10. Partial invalidity not to affect remaining provisions. In case any provisions of this agreement shall be held illegal or invalid for any reason, said illegality or invalidity shall not affect the remaining parts; but this agreement shall be construed and enforced as if the illegal or invalid provisions had never been inserted. 
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the employer has caused this first amendment to the City of Ballwin policemen pension trust to be executed by its duly appointed officers and its corporate seal to be hereunto affixed the day and year first above written. 
(Code 1973, § 19-185; Ord. No. 12-22, § 1, 4-23-12) 
Editor's note- The original plan set out in the above section was submitted to and approved by voters at a municipal election held April 1, 1969. The plan has also been approved by the Internal Revenue Service as a qualified plan under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. 
Sec. 20-92. - Amendment or modification of plan. 
    The plan set out in this article may be amended, modified or terminated by the city at any time, and any such amendment or modification shall be by ordinance approved by a majority of the elected members of the board of aldermen; provided, however, that no such amendment, modification or termination shall require any approval by the voters of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 19-187) 
Secs. 20-93-20-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 20-111. - Installation. 
(a)  Permit required. Any resident or person who desires to install or continue use of an emergency alarm system shall apply for and obtain a permit from the city on a form to be provided by the city clerk. Each application shall be signed by the applicant and shall include, among other things, the following: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the alarm user. 
(2)  The address of the property where the alarm is installed, if different from subsection (1) above. 
(3)  The name of the alarm business which has or will install the alarm system. 
(4)  The name of the alarm business which the alarm user will contract for repair service. 
(5)  The name and address of the agency which the alarm system will be connected for monitoring. 
(6)  The name, address and telephone number of at least one other person with access to the premises protected by the alarm system. 
(b)  Not assignable. No permit is assignable or transferable and any change in control, ownership or right to possession of property with an installed alarm shall require the issuance of a new permit for alarm use. 
(c)  Alarm system standards and inspections. All alarm systems installed in commercial or public buildings after June 22, 1992, shall utilize equipment and methods of installation substantially equivalent to or exceeding the following minimum applicable underwriter laboratories (UL or ANSI) standards: 
(1)  UL 609 (ANSI SE2.1-1972) "Local Burglar Alarm Units and Systems;" UL 636 (ANSI SE2.7-1973) "Hold Up Alarm Units and Systems;" UL 681 (ANSI SE2.3-1972) "Installation and Classification of Mercantile and Bank Burglar Alarm Systems." 
(2)  All systems installed in residences after June 22, 1992, shall utilize equipment which shall meet or exceed the minimum applicable UL standard 1023 (ANSI SE2.1-1972) "Household Burglar Alarm System Units," and such equipment shall be installed in a safe, reliable and professional manner. 
(d)  Additional requirements. In addition, the requirements set forth by the above referenced UL or ANSI standards, the following additional requirements shall be met: 
(1)  All systems installed after this date must have a standby power supply for both the control panel and power lines. The standby power supply shall be installed so such that failure of the main source of power will not cause an alarm indication. All standby power supplies shall be capable of operating the system for a minimum of four hours. All alarm systems shall be installed in a way that will include a visible and/or audible indication of the proper operation of the alarm conduit. 
(2)  Voltage on systems terminating at the police department shall be a minimum of six volts dc, and a maximum of 20 volts dc. The voltage reading shall be that obtained at the police station. Current requirements for alarm systems terminating at the police department shall be a minimum of five milliamperes and a maximum of 15 milliamperes of current. 
(3)  All sensory mechanisms used in conjunction with such alarms must be adjusted to the degree reasonably possible to suppress nonvalid indications of fire or intrusion, so that alarms will not be actuated by natural phenomenon such as tangent pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind noise or external pressure change such a rattling or vibration of windows, sonic booms or vehicular noise adjacent to the installation. 
(Ord. No. 2253, art. 1, 6-22-92) 
Sec. 20-112. - False alarms. 
(a)  The alarm user is responsible for seeing that the alarm system installed on his premises is not misused. During each calendar year, two false alarms shall be allowed per installation without penalty. Any additional false alarms encountered for an installation during each calendar year shall result in the imposition of a service charge. The service charge, shall be as follows: 
Number of false alarms      Fee 
3\$25.00 
4\50.00 
5\100.00 
over 5, per false alarm\100.00 
    The service charge amount shall be imposed against the alarm user. Refusal to pay any fee shall result in the issuance of a summons from the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2253, art. 1, 6-22-92; Ord. No. 03-02, § 3, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 08-23, § 1, 7-14-08) 
Sec. 20-113. - Answering service license required. 
    Any business operated by a person that provides a service for consideration and receives signals from an alarm system located within the city and who thereafter relays the message to the police department of the city must obtain and maintain an alarm system answering service license from the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2253, art. 1, 6-22-92) 
Sec. 20-114. - Application for answering service license. 
    Prior to providing answering services for alarm systems located within the city, and on or before July 1 of each calendar year thereafter, any person offering such service shall make application to the city clerk for a license to provide such service to subscribers located within the city. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address of all subscribers within the city, and the address of the location where the alarm system is installed, if different. 
(3)  The name and residential address of the owner of the property where the alarm is installed. 
(4)  The name, address and telephone number of the entity who receives emergency messages from an activated alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 2253, art. 1, 6-22-92) 
Sec. 20-115. - Nonliability. 
    The city, its officials and employees shall not be liable for any defects in the operation of signal line systems, for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt or notice of an alarm from such source, nor for the failure and neglect of any person with a license issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2253, art. 1, 6-22-92) 
Sec. 20-116. - Installation contractor license required. 
    Any business operated by a person that installs for consideration and receives payment for the installation of an alarm system located within the city must obtain and maintain a contractor license from the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2379, Art. I, 5-9-94) 
Secs. 20-117-20-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EMERGENCY CALL-INS 

Sec. 20-136. - When charge applicable. 
    Police, public works and other employees who are called in response to conditions involving the health and safety of the citizens of Ballwin caused by people or corporations not associated with the City of Ballwin shall be charged by the city in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-13, § 1, 2-26-01) 
Sec. 20-137. - Normal working hour response. 
    During normal working hours for the employees responding to an emergency situation, the city shall charge the standard hourly rate of those employees involved in responding to the request. 
(Ord. No. 01-13, § 1, 2-26-01) 
Sec. 20-138. - After hour response. 
    Response to emergency call-ins after normal working hours for the people responding to the particular situation shall require repayment to the city of a minimum fee of $200.00, and an hourly charge of $50.00 per person for time expended in responding to the situation in excess of one hour, rounded up to the nearest whole hour. 
(Ord. No. 01-13, § 1, 2-26-01) 
Sec. 20-139. - Additional equipment charge. 
    In the event special equipment is required in response to the situation, for example, without limiting use to the following, a backhoe or street sweeper, the city shall be entitled to a fee of $100.00 per hour per special piece of equipment, rounded up to the nearest whole hour, in addition to any charge imposed for personnel in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-13, § 1, 2-26-01) 
Chapter 21 - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1943, the plumbing ordinance of the city, should be consulted in conjunction with this chapter. Such ordinance is on file at the city hall. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; administration, ch. 2; buildings and structures, ch. 7; flood hazard areas, ch. 10; variance procedures under flood hazard ordinance, § 10-71 et seq.; flood hazard reduction, § 10-61 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 12; kitchen sinks, § 13-67; planning and development, ch. 19; solid waste, ch. 23; streets and sidewalks, ch. 24; subdivisions, ch. 25; storm sewers, § 25-71 et seq.; swimming pools, ch. 26; trailers and recreational vehicles, ch. 28; site improvements in planned multiple dwelling districts, app. A, art. VII, § 12. 
State Law reference- Cooperation by political subdivisions under contract, RSMo 70.210 et seq.; public utilities in municipalities, RSMo 71.520 et seq.; water and sewer facilities in fourth class cities, RSMo 79.380, 79.390; public works, special assessments, condemnation, RSMo 88.010 et seq.; municipally owned utilities, RSMo 91.010 et seq.; municipal sewerage systems and waterworks, RSMo 250.010 et seq.; on-site sewage disposal systems, RSMo 701.025 et seq. 

Sec. 21-1. - Legislative purpose. 
    The board of aldermen finds, determines and declares that it is necessary and conducive for the protection of public health, safety and welfare of the people of the city to regulate and control the disposal of human and industrial waste within the city to the end that public health, safety and welfare of the people of the city will be protected and enhanced and to prevent the indiscriminate and uncontrolled disposal of human and industrial waste in violation of recognized public health standards. 
(Code 1973, § 20-1) 
Sec. 21-2. - Authority to promulgate rules for carrying out intent of chapter. 
(a)  The health commissioner and the Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District (MSD) shall promulgate rules and regulations to carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter to protect the public health. 
(b)  Any such rule or regulation shall meet the minimum standards of the state department of health; provided, nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the county health commissioner or MSD from requiring compliance with higher requirements than those contained herein where such higher requirements are essential to maintain a sanitary condition. 
(Code 1973, § 20-4) 
Sec. 21-3. - Wastes disposed of other than as provided by chapter deemed a nuisance. 
    Any sewage, sludge, industrial waste, human excrement, liquid putrescible material or liquid toxic material removed, transported or disposed of in any other manner than as may be provided for by the provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations adopted hereunder shall be deemed to be offensive material dangerous or prejudicial to the public health and is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1973, § 20-5) 
Sec. 21-4. - Surveys of system to be made. 
    The health commissioner shall cause to be made such surveys, investigations and studies of sewage, sewerage systems and streams receiving sewage as may be necessary to determine that all sewerage systems are installed, operated and maintained in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any rule or regulation adopted hereunder. 
(Code 1973, § 20-6) 
Sec. 21-5. - Connection to sewer required. 
(a)  Every person owning or occupying any building or portion thereof, in which plumbing fixtures are installed, and every person owning or occupying any parcel of real estate or portion thereof, having drainage piping thereon, shall connect such drainage pipe or building to a sewer, if available. 
(b)  A sewer shall be deemed available if it is within 150 feet of any part of the property to be connected to the sewer. When a sewer is not available within the meaning of this section, an individual sewage disposal system approved by the health commissioner shall be installed to service such buildings, premises or real estate. Any such installation shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and all rules and regulations adopted hereunder. 
(Code 1973, § 20-7) 
Sec. 21-6. - Private sewerage systems. 
(a)  Every person, public utility, public agency or institution desiring to install or enter into a contract for the installation of a public, semiprivate or private sewerage system or industrial sewer, or to make additions or alterations in any sewage or industrial waste treatment plant, shall make application to and shall receive written approval from the health commissioner before proceeding with the proposed work. The health commissioner shall conduct such inspections as may be necessary to insure compliance with the approved plans. 
(b)  Every application referred to in subsection (a) shall contain three sets of complete plans and specifications fully describing such sewerage system or additions, alterations or extensions contemplated in the application. One set shall be filed with the health commissioner. The approval by the health commissioner may contain such terms and conditions as may be reasonable and necessary to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 20-8) 
Sec. 21-7. - Prohibited acts. 
    The following acts, or the causing thereof, are hereby prohibited: 
(1)  No sewage, human excrement or industrial waste may be discharged, deposited or permitted to flow on, in or under the surface of the ground or into any surface water or groundwater flowing through, in or bordering the city, unless such disposal or condition of sewage, human excrement or industrial waste meets the standards and requirements of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted hereunder. 
(2)  No person shall remove, transport or dispose any sewage sludge, industrial waste or human excrement by any portable or mobile container without an unrevoked permit for that purpose from the health commissioner. 
(3)  No sewage, human excrement, industrial waste or other material shall be discharged into any sewer, stormwater sewer or drain unless it conforms to the standards and requirements of this chapter and any rule or regulation adopted hereunder. 
(4)  No person shall injure or cause to be injured any portion of any sewer system. 
(5)  No person shall open or enter, or cause to be opened or entered, any manhole in any sewer to dispose of garbage or other deleterious substance or storm or surface waters, or for any other like purpose not provided for by permits issued under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 20-9) 
Sec. 21-8. - Sanitary sewer lateral repair program guidelines. 
(a)  What work is eligible for payment. 
(1)  Eligible work. Payment for the repair of failed sanitary sewer laterals for residential property having six or less dwelling units is eligible. This is defined as: 
a.  Excavation and replacement of the failed section of lateral. This shall include the replacement of the failed pipe with new material of a similar nature or the use of a liner or other similar technology that allows the restoration of function to the failed sewer lateral without its physical removal. Replacement may also include the construction of a yard clean out to permit future service to the lateral "Failed" shall be defined as a disconnection or break that allows leakage of effluent from the lateral or blockage that causes effluent to back up into a plumbing fixture or other portion of a qualifying residential property; 
b.  Backfill and restoration of the backfill consisting of grading into a mound to allow for settlement, and seeding and straw; 
c.  Removal and hauling away of construction and pavement materials that were in the way of excavation; 
d.  Patching (this includes saw cutting and patching only and not whole slab replacement) of private driveways or sidewalks that had to be cut and removed in order to repair the sewer lateral; 
e.  Repair or replacement of any public sidewalks or street pavement damaged or removed as a result of the sewer lateral failure or replacement (All repair and replacement shall be done as directed by the department of public works under the standards for excavation permits); 
f.  Payment for trees or shrub removal in the public right-of-way that must be done to make the necessary repairs to the sanitary sewer lateral will be figured on a case-by-case basis. The city reserves the option of hiring a separate contractor or doing the work with city forces. 
(2)  Exclusions. 
a.  The cost of cabling to clear a blockage or to document sewer lateral failure is not reimbursable under this program. In order to apply for service under this program, a property owner must document the existence of a failed lateral as defined in subsection (a)(1)a. and that an owner has attempted to clear the blockage by cabling; 
b.  There will be no payment for replacement or loss of trees or shrubs; 
c.  Any future settlement of the back filled sewer lateral trench will be the responsibility of the property owner to repair; 
d.  No damage to adjoining private property or utilities will be paid for from this fund. This will be the responsibility of the property owner and the contractor; 
e.  The mere existence of a crack or presence of roots or vines shall not constitute a failure. The applicant must demonstrate a history of clearing blockages caused by roots at a frequency greater than once annually for this to be considered a reason to fund a sewer lateral repair. Root removal at the rate on once per year or less is considered normal maintenance and not a basis for funding under this program. 
(b)  Definition of sanitary sewer lateral. This is the sewer line that extends from the building foundation wall or exterior wall to the sewer main owned and maintained by MSD in a right-of-way or easement. This does not include a sewer line located under any part of a building. A lateral sewer line may be located in a front, side or rear yard. 
(c)  Eligibility. No commercial or industrial properties are eligible for this program. In addition, no multifamily properties that contain more than six dwelling units per property are eligible for this program. 
(d)  Proof of sanitary sewer lateral failure. The city will require documentation that the property owner's sewer lateral has failed. The documentation must in all cases include proof of property ownership, and one of the following: 
(1)  Documentation from a reliable contractor that cabling of the sewer lateral has conclusively proven that the lateral has failed; 
(2)  Documentation that repeated cabling has only temporarily opened the lateral and that either the pipe is permanently obstructed or has major damage prohibiting normal function; 
(3)  Documentation that a reliable contractor has cabled the lateral and found no blockage, but the backups continue; 
(4)  Documentation from a reliable contractor or from the Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District in the form of a video showing that a sewer lateral is leaking and causing a health hazard or has damaged or potentially could damage a public street or sidewalk. In this case the city will contract for and pay for a TV inspection of the lateral. 
Note- To insure the integrity of the program, the city reserves the right to spot check contractors by hiring a third party to cable or do TV inspections of allegedly failed sewer laterals. 
(e)  Contractor selection, entering into a contract and payment. 
(1)  Contractor selection: All residential property owners eligible for payment under the sanitary sewer lateral repair program shall contract with a sole source vendor, to be selected by the city, after the city obtains bids and selects the lowest and best responsible bidder. The city shall rebid the program every two years. 
(2)  Entering into a contract. Prior to beginning any work, the selected contractor shall be responsible for applying for and obtaining a plumbing permit from the City of Ballwin. In addition, the contractor shall be responsible for submittal of a signed sewer lateral repair program contract agreement. No work may proceed until both the signed contract and the plumbing permit has been submitted and approved by the City of Ballwin. 
(3)  Contractor payment. In order for the contractor to be paid, they must file both an application for a plumbing permit and an itemized bill for reimbursement under the Ballwin Sewer Lateral Insurance Program. Reimbursement will not be made unless and until the city has inspected the repair for compliance with the plumbing code and verified the length of the trench and other items for reimbursement purposes. 
The contractor will also be responsible for obtaining an excavation permit if there is excavation involving any street pavement, public sidewalk or other improvements in a public right-of-way. The removal of any street trees shall be reviewed and authorized by the director of parks and recreation. 
Once the permits have been issued, the contractor may proceed with the sanitary sewer lateral repair making sure to call for all required inspections. When all work is completed and inspected, the contractor must submit an itemized bill to the city that conforms to the agreed upon cost per foot and other unit prices in the unit price list. Any changes to the established price per foot must receive prior written approval from the city. Once the itemized bill and lien waivers have been received from the contractor and any subcontractors and major suppliers, payment will be made promptly. 
(f)  City not responsible for damages. The City of Ballwin and the lateral fund will not be responsible for any damage to owner's or neighbor's property caused by sewer backups, lateral failures or the actions of the selected contractor. 
(g)  What must be inspected. 
(1)  The plumbing inspector must observe the repaired sewer lateral before the trench can be backfilled. 
(2)  The sewer lateral joints must be properly made in accordance with the plumbing code. 
(3)  There must be proper fall on the sewer lateral of at least 1/8 -inch per foot. 
(4)  All new piping must be bedded on and covered with granular fill under the supervision of the plumbing inspector, prior to the backfill of the trench. The inspector must be present for the beginning of the backfill process. No materials such as large rocks, pavement pieces, old pipe and tree stumps will be permitted in the backfill. 
(h)  All parties have a responsibility to proceed expeditiously. All parties involved in this process have a responsibility to move as quickly as possible to repair a failed sanitary sewer lateral. A residential dwelling is temporarily uninhabitable when the toilets, lavatories, bathtubs, showers and kitchen sink are rendered unusable by the failed lateral. It is the City of Ballwin's intention to expedite this process whenever possible. Applications will be reviewed quickly, permits will be issued promptly and inspections will be given priority. It is expected that all contractors involved will give the property owner the same consideration. Contractors will be evaluated periodically for responsiveness and the prompt completion of repair work under this program. 
(i)  Unit price category descriptions. 
    Mobilization. This includes delivery to the site of all manpower, equipment and materials necessary to complete the sewer lateral repair. This includes obtaining permits, getting utility locates, excavation, repair of the sections of lateral needing repair in compliance with the plumbing code, disposal of all removed material, granular bedding and one foot of granular cover over the repaired lateral, backfilling the trench, mounding the trench as smoothly as possible and seeding and strawing all disturbed areas. Mobilization shall also include cabling and flushing of the sanitary sewer lateral if necessary, and providing and operation of video equipment capable of insertion into the sanitary sewer lateral for diagnostic purposes at the direction of the Ballwin plumbing inspector. 
    Sidewalk removal and replacement. This includes either removal at joints or saw cutting and removal of the section(s) of public or private sidewalk that must be removed to make the sewer lateral repair. This also includes disposal of all removed material. All back fill under sidewalk shall be granular fill and sidewalks shall be replaced with four-inch concrete except through driveways which shall be six-inch concrete. Contractors must obtain an excavation permit from the Ballwin Department of Public Works for any work within the public right-of-way. 
    Concrete slab removal and replacement. This includes either removal at joints or saw cutting and removal of the section(s) of the concrete street or driveway slab(s) that must be removed to make the sewer lateral repair. This also includes disposal of all removed material. All back fill under the slab shall be granular fill and concrete slabs shall be replaced with six-inch concrete. The city engineer will make the determination as to the extent of removal. Contractors must obtain an excavation permit from the Ballwin Department of Public Works for any work within the public right-of-way. 
    Curb and gutter replacement. This includes either removal at joints or saw cutting and removal of the section(s) of the concrete curb and gutter that must be removed to make the sewer lateral repair. This also includes disposal of all removed materials. All back fill under the curb and gutter shall be granular fill and curb and gutter shall be replaced to match the adjoining sections. The city engineer will make the determination as to the extent of the removal. Contractors must obtain an excavation permit from the Ballwin Department of Public Works for any work within the public right-of-way. 
    Concrete and asphalt overlay removal and replacement. This includes either removal at joints or saw cutting and removal of the section(s) of the concrete slab with its asphalt overlay that must be removed to make the sewer lateral repair. This also includes disposal of all removed materials. All back fill under the concrete slab and overlay shall be granular fill, concrete slabs shall be six-inch and overlays shall be a minimum of one-inch. The city engineer will make the determination as to the extent of removal. Contractors must obtain excavation permits from the Ballwin Department of Public Works for any work within the public right-of-way. 
    Asphalt driveway removal and replacement. This includes saw cutting and removal of the area of the asphalt driveway that must be removed to make the sewer lateral repair. This also includes the disposal of all removed materials. All back fill under the asphalt driveway repairs shall be granular fill, and asphalt paving shall be a minimum of four-inch. The city engineer will make the determination as to the extent of removal. Contractor must obtain excavation permits from the Ballwin Department of Public Works for any work within the public right-of-way. 
    Asphalt street removal and replacement. This includes either removal at joints or saw cutting and removal of the section of asphalt street pavement that must be removed to make the sewer lateral repair. This also includes disposal of all removed materials. All back fill under the asphalt pavement shall be granular fill, asphalt overlays shall match the existing or consist of six inches of base asphalt and two inches of finish asphalt. The city engineer will make the determination as to the extent of removal. Contractors must obtain excavation permits from the Ballwin Department of Public Works for any work within the public right-of-way. 
(j)  The maximum amount available for repayment under this program for any sewer lateral repair shall be $3,000.00. 
(k)  All applicants for participation in the sanitary sewer lateral repair program shall pay a user fee of $150.00, to be submitted with the application. If eligibility is denied, the user fee shall be returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1, 3-22-99; Ord. No. 00-54, §§ 1, 2, 10-23-00; Ord. No. 05-15, § 1, 3-14-05; Ord. No. 10-38, § 1, 11-22-10; Ord. No. 15-07, § 1, 1-26-15; Ord. No. 17-09, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-17) 
Chapter 22 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; buildings and structures, ch. 7; planning and development, ch. 19. 
State Law reference- Billboards, RSMo 226.500 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Words and phrases consistent with zoning ordinance. 
    The words and phrases set out in section 1-2 that are applicable to this chapter and those that are applicable to the zoning ordinance of the city are intended to be defined consistently with one another. 
(Code 1973, § 21-1) 
Sec. 22-2. - Effect of zoning regulations. 
(a)  Sign permits. No permit shall be issued for a sign, nor shall any sign be erected, installed, maintained or displayed in any zoning district of the city, except as illustrated in this section. 
(b)  Signs in residential districts. Subject to the limitations set forth in this chapter, the following signs shall be permitted in the R-1A, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-4, R-5, PSD, MXD, PA, CSD and NRD districts: 
(1)  Political signs. 
(2)  Real estate and construction signs. 
(3)  Temporary signs. 
(4)  Subdivision signs. 
(5)  Institutional or governmental signs. 
(6)  Wall signs not to exceed 20 square feet. 
(7)  Directional/informational signs. 
(8)  Directional and informational signs. 
(9)  Informational post signs 
(10)  Ground signs in conjunction with non-residential uses allowed in the district in accordance with section 22-52. 
(11)  Ground signs in conjunction with residential uses allowed in the district not to exceed three feet in height, three square feet in area or six square feet in area for multi sided signs. 
(c)  Signs in commercial districts. Subject to the limitations set forth in this chapter, the following signs shall be permitted in the C-1, C-2, C-3, S-1, MXD, MRD and NCD districts: 
(1)  All signs permitted in residential districts. 
(2)  Automobile dealership or automobile mall sign. 
(3)  Canopy and/or awning signs. 
(4)  Directory sign. 
(5)  Ground sign. 
(6)  Hanging sign. 
(7)  Reader board sign. 
(8)  Roof sign. 
(9)  Temporary sign. 
(10)  Wall sign. 
(d)  Substitution. This section shall apply to the location, erection and maintenance of signs in all zoning districts within the City of Ballwin, Missouri. The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by chapter 22 of this Code may substitute noncommercial copy or message in lieu of any other commercial or noncommercial sign copy of message subject to permitting and operational standards set forth herein. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech or message over noncommercial speech or message. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary. 
(Code 1973, § 21-2; Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 5-24-10; Ord. No. 11-02, § 2, 1-10-11) 
Cross reference- Zoning, app. A. 
Sec. 22-3. - Registration of signs required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or have erected a sign of any type defined in this chapter, or to collect or contract for the payment of any rental or charge on account of any such sign placed, to be placed, maintained or to be maintained within the city unless such sign is authorized by permit by the director. 
(b)  Registration shall be made on forms furnished by the director and each sign so registered shall receive a number which shall be recorded in a book kept by the director for that purpose. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the director to make, at least annually, a thorough inspection of all signs in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 21-3) 
Sec. 22-4. - Removal of unlawful signs, notice to be given. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property on which a sign has been erected, the lessee, the business manager or owner and/or the permittee for such sign to cause any unlawful sign to be removed. 
(b)  In cases involving all signs in violation of chapter 22, Signs, of the Ballwin Code of Ordinances, the property owner, the lessee, the business manager or owner and/or the permittee for a sign shall be given two days notice to correct the sign code violation. Notice shall be given by leaving a written report of the violation with an individual of lawful age at the location of the sign code violation or by certified mail. Second and subsequent sign code violations within the calendar year shall not require a notice of violation and may be punishable as provide by section 22-4(c). 
(c)  Any sign code violation allowed to continue after the time frame established in a notice of violation has passed, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-6(a) of the Ballwin Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1973, § 21-4; Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 5-24-10) 
Sec. 22-5. - Signs conflicting with traffic control devices prohibited. 
    Any sign which by color, location, appearance, character or design resembles, conflicts or interferes with emergency vehicles or traffic control signs or devices is prohibited. 
(Code 1973, § 21-5; Ord. No. 11-02, § 3, 1-10-11) 
Cross reference- Display of unauthorized signs, § 15-348. 
Sec. 22-6. - Dynamic display signs. 
(1)  Dynamic display signs may be made a part of or used as ground, wall or directory signs in the C-1 zoning district within 150 feet of the Manchester Rd. or Clayton Rd. rights-of-way. Such signs shall be at least 200 feet from any single-family residential zoning district on the same side of the roadway and 100 feet from any single family zoning district on the opposite side of the roadway. 
(2)  Dynamic display signs may be made a part of or used as ground or wall signs (but not signs located at subdivision entrances) in single-family residential zoning districts in conjunction with and on the premises of elementary and secondary public schools and private schools offering curricula similar to that offered by such public schools, churches, philanthropic and fraternal order not-for-profit institutions and governmental buildings and facilities provided the signs are at least 250 feet from a residential dwelling unit. 
(3)  Dynamic display signs may have no more than 35 percent of the actual copy and graphic area of the sign as a dynamic display area. The remainder of the sign area must not have the capacity to have dynamic displays even if not used. 
(4)  Only one dynamic display area is allowed on a sign face. 
(5)  A dynamic display may not change or move more often than once every 20 seconds, except one for which changes are necessary to correct local hour, minute, date or temperature information. Time, date or temperature information is considered one dynamic display and may not be included as a component of any other dynamic display. A display of time, date or temperature must remain for at least 20 seconds before changing to a different display, but the time, date or temperature information itself may change no more often than once every three seconds. 
(6)  The images and messages displayed on a dynamic display sign must be static and the transition from one static display to another must be instantaneous without any special or transitional effects. 
(7)  Every line of copy and graphics in a dynamic display must be at least seven inches in height along a road with a speed limit of less than 34 miles per hour and nine inches along a road with a speed limit of 35 to 45 miles per hour. If there is insufficient room for copy and graphics of this size in the area allowed for such signs per subsection (3) of this section, then no dynamic display is allowed. 
(8)  Dynamic display signs must be designed and equipped to freeze the device in one position if a malfunction occurs. The displays must also be equipped with a means to immediately discontinue the display if it malfunctions and the sign owner must immediately stop the dynamic display when notified by the city that it is not complying with the standards of this chapter. 
(9)  Dynamic display signs existing on January 10, 2011 must comply with the operational standards listed above. An existing dynamic display sign that does not meet the spacing requirements in subsections (1) and (2) of this section may continue as a legally nonconforming use. Any nonconforming sign that cannot meet the minimum copy and graphic height requirements of subsection (7) of this section must use the largest copy and graphic height possible for one line of copy to fit the available space. 
(10)  Brightness standards for dynamic display signs. 
(a)  All dynamic display signs must meet the following brightness standards: 
1.  No sign may be brighter than is necessary for clear and adequate visibility. 
2.  No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance as to impair the vision of a motor vehicle driver with average eyesight or to otherwise interfere with the driver's operation of a motor vehicle. 
3.  No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance that it interferes with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, device or signal. 
(b)  The person owning or controlling the sign must adjust the sign to meet the brightness standards in accordance with the city's instructions. The adjustments must be made within five working days after notice of noncompliance from the city as provided in section 22-4. The person owning or controlling the sign may appeal the city's determination through the following appeal procedure: 
1.  After making the adjustment required by the city, the person owning or controlling the sign may appeal the city's determination by delivering a written appeal to the city clerk within ten days after the city's noncompliance notice if the required adjustment is not made as provided herein, the appeal shall be dismissed. The written appeal must include the name of a person unrelated to the person and business making the appeal, who will serve on the appeal panel. 
2.  Within five business days after receiving the appeal, the city must name a person who is not an official or employee of the city to serve on the appeal panel. Within five business days after the city names its representative, the city's representative must contact the owner's representative and the two of them must appoint a third member to the panel who has no relationship to either party. 
3.  The appeal panel may develop its own rules of procedure, but it must hold a hearing within five days after the third member is appointed. The city and the sign owner must be given the opportunity to present testimony and the panel may hold the hearing or a portion of it at the sign location. The panel must issue its decision on what level of brightness is needed to meet the brightness standards with five business days after the hearing commences. The decision will be binding on both parties. 
(c)  All signs installed after January 10, 2011 that will have illumination by a means other than natural light must be equipped with a mechanism that automatically adjusts the brightness in response to ambient light conditions. These signs must also be equipped with a means to immediately turn off the display or lighting if it malfunctions and the sign owner or operator must immediately turn off the sign or lighting when notified by the city that it is not complying with the standards in this section. 
(11)  A dynamic display sign owned and operated by the City of Ballwin or other governmental agency for the purpose of warning motorists, providing notification of a dangerous condition, announcing non-commercial, City-sponsored and community events or otherwise operated in furtherance of the public safety and police power authority of the City of Ballwin shall be exempt from the standards contained in Chapter 22 with respect to dynamic display signs. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, § 4, 1-10-11; Ord. No. 11-54, § 1, 11-28-11; Ord. No. 13-36, § 1, 9-9-13) 
Secs. 22-7-22-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS AND FEES 

Sec. 22-21. - Required. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no sign of the types defined in section 1-2 shall be erected, nor the location of any existing sign changed, until a permit therefor shall have been issued by the director. 
(b)  No existing sign shall be enlarged, rebuilt, structurally altered or relocated except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and until a permit therefor has been issued by the director. 
(Code 1973, § 21-18) 
Sec. 22-22. - Application for permit. 
    No permit shall be granted until after an application has been filed with the director showing the plans and specifications, including dimensions, materials and details of construction of the proposed sign structure, and a letter of approval from the owner of the shopping center or building if the applicant is a tenant thereof, nor until all the provisions of this chapter relating to such sign structure have been complied with. 
(Code 1973, § 21-19) 
Sec. 22-23. - Authority for director to vary form or content of applications. 
    The director may prescribe suitable regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, concerning the form or content of all applications for permits herein required. 
(Code 1973, § 21-20) 
Sec. 22-24. - Fees. 
(a)  Each application for a permit required by this article shall be accompanied by a permit fee as set out below: 
(1)  The fee for a permit for each sign, as defined herein, shall be computed at $2.00 per square foot of the area of the sign proposed to be erected; provided, however, that the minimum amount of the fee for a permit shall be $40.00. 
(2)  The permit fee for multifaced or multisided signs shall be based on the total sign area of all faces or sides. 
(b)  The permit fees herein provided for shall cover the inspection of the location of the proposed signs and inspections during and after construction and erection; and all moneys so collected by the director shall be turned over to the city treasurer for deposit in the general revenue fund of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 21-21; Ord. No. 03-11, § 2, 2-10-03; Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 5-24-10) 
Sec. 22-25. - Issuance of permit not to relieve owner from duty of maintaining sign safety. 
    The issuance of a permit required by this article shall not relieve the owner or lessee of the premises from the duty of maintaining any of the structures regulated by this article. 
(Code 1973, § 21-22) 
Secs. 22-26-22-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 22-41. - Signs in violation of chapter prohibited; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install, have installed, maintain or display, on or in connection with any premises within the city, any sign, poster, letter, picture or advertising device in violation of any provisions of this chapter, or any type of sign not specifically allowed and detailed in this article. 
(b)  The use of any sign or advertising device lawfully existing and maintained as of June 25, 1984, and made unlawful by the provisions of this chapter, may be continued and maintained; provided, however, that if such sign or advertising device is damaged or destroyed to the extent of 50 percent of its replacement value or is altered or moved, or is no longer nonconforming due to a change in use of its associated property such that the new use requires different signs, then such sign or advertising device shall be made to comply with all of the requirements of this chapter, or removed. 
(c)  A sign shall cease being legally nonconforming upon the closing of the business with which it is associated. No subsequent use or owner will have any claim to the nonconforming sign and may only erect signs which comply with this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 21-33) 
Sec. 22-42. - Display of signs restricted; removal of signs no longer applicable to property required. 
(a)  A sign may only be erected on the premises or building where the business is conducted except: 
(1)  Signs advertising or announcing the development of a property for residential purposes erected in accordance with section 22-58; or 
(2)  Signs erected temporarily for a specific period, not to exceed 120 days, as authorized in writing by the city administrator for: 
a.  Public purposes; or 
b.  When special conditions cause a hardship that interferes with compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  Any sign which is no longer applicable to the property or building upon which such sign is located shall be considered an unlawful sign and shall be removed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 21-34; Ord. No. 2138, § 1, 11-12-90) 
Sec. 22-43. - Unsafe signs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit to remain upon any premises owned, leased, occupied or used by him with notice thereof, any unsafe or insecure sign liable to injure any person or property, or to maintain or permit to remain on any such premises any sign which because of its deteriorated condition or appearance would have a negative effect upon other property in the city. 
(b)  Any sign found to be unsafe under the provisions of this section shall be deemed an unlawful sign and shall be ordered removed under the provisions of section 22-4. 
(Code 1973, § 21-35) 
Sec. 22-44. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following types of signs are prohibited: 
(1)  Flashing signs. 
(2)  Fluttering signs, except flags as may be permitted in sections 1-2 and 22-60 of the Ballwin Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  Marquee signs. 
(4)  Moving signs (operated mechanically, electrically, electronically, or by wind or other forces of nature) except as allowed in section 22-60. 
(5)  Paper, cloth, cardboard or other similar nonpermanent material signs except as provided in sections 22-47 and 22-60. 
(6)  Post signs except as provided in sections 22-51, and 22-62. 
(7)  Sandwich-type board or A-frame signs except as allowed in section 22-60. 
(8)  Projecting signs. 
(9)  Advertising media. 
(10)  Moveable signs except as allowed in section 22-60. 
(11)  Illuminated or lighted signs in zoning districts of the city designated R-1A, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-5 and S-1 districts except: 
a.  Subdivision signs conforming to the requirements of section 22-59 provided the illumination or lighting of the sign will not disturb adjacent property or affect traffic on adjacent rights-of-way; and 
b.  In zoning districts designated S-1 service districts, provided that no illuminated or lighted sign shall be allowed within 100 feet of any district designated R-1A, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or PSD. 
(Code 1973, § 21-36; Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 5-24-10; Ord. No. 11-02, § 5, 1-10-11) 
Sec. 22-45. - Signs not to obstruct fire escapes. 
    No sign of any description shall be installed, erected, constructed or maintained in such a manner as to obstruct any fire escape. 
(Code 1973, § 21-37) 
Sec. 22-46. - Mechanical contrivances prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install, maintain or display on or in connection with any premises owned, occupied or used by him any sign, which incorporates mechanical movements or contrivances of any kind, excepting clocks and dynamic display signs. Any such sign so erected shall be an unlawful sign within the meaning of this chapter and shall be subject to removal. 
(Code 1973, § 21-38; Ord. No. 11-02, § 6, 1-10-11) 
Sec. 22-47. - Awning and canopy signs. 
    All awning and canopy signs shall be subject to the general restrictions of wall signs and shall: 
(1)  Maintain the following minimum height above the ground or pavement: 
a.  Ten feet where vehicular traffic may be present. 
b.  Seven feet where pedestrian traffic may be present. 
c.  Five feet in all other places. 
(2)  Be painted or similarly affixed and may be constructed of the same material as the awning or canopy where such signs are applied to cloth or similar material. 
(Code 1973, § 21-39; Ord. No. 2212, § 1, 10-14-91) 
Sec. 22-48. - Church bulletin boards. 
    Church bulletin boards shall be subject to the general restrictions of ground signs or wall signs, whichever is applicable, and shall not exceed 20 square feet in sign area. 
(Code 1973, § 21-40) 
Sec. 22-49. - Construction signs. 
    All construction signs shall be subject to the general restrictions of ground signs, if applicable, and shall: 
(1)  Be limited to one such sign per subdivision, or development. 
(2)  Not exceed 32 square feet in area. 
(3)  Be removed within ten days of the final inspection of the last structure of the subdivision or development. 
(Code 1973, § 21-41) 
Cross reference- Buildings and structures, ch. 7. 
Sec. 22-50. - Directional and information signs. 
    All directional and information signs shall: 
(1)  Not exceed three feet in height and six square feet in area. 
(2)  Contain only directional and advertising text or identification logos. 
(3)  Be limited to four signs per parcel or development. 
(4)  Not be counted toward allowable signage, but the advertising or identification logo area shall be counted toward allowable signage. 
(Code 1973, § 21-42) 
Sec. 22-51. - Directory signs. 
    All directory signs and properties displaying directory signs are subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Only office buildings and shopping centers are allowed to display a directory sign. 
(2)  Where a single parcel of land contains multiple office buildings, shopping centers, or combinations thereof, each may have a directory sign provided there is a minimum of 500 linear feet of roadway frontage between each sign. 
(3)  Shopping centers and office buildings containing less than 50,000 and more than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area may have a directory sign containing a maximum of 200 square feet. A maximum of 50 percent (100 square feet) of such sign may contain the name of the shopping center or office building. 
(4)  Shopping centers and office buildings having 50,000 square feet or more of gross floor area may have a directory sign containing a maximum of 400 square feet. The distribution of space on any such sign will use the same formula outlined for centers and buildings of less than 50,000 square feet. 
(5)  A directory sign not meeting the provisions for wall signs may be erected on one or more posts, provided such sign: 
a.  Has a maximum height of 25 feet above the mean ground level below the sign. 
b.  Has a minimum height of ten feet above the mean ground level below the sign. 
c.  Does not extend beyond any property line. 
d.  Is not within ten feet of any side property line. 
e.  Is constructed in a front yard as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
f.  Is built of noncombustible materials. 
g.  Is illuminated only internally. 
(6)  No shopping center or office building shall have any ground or post sign other than a directory sign. 
(7)  Shopping centers and office buildings containing less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area may have directory signs as provided in subsection (3) of this section, but they must comply with the ground sign height restrictions of section 22-52. All other dimensional requirements of subsection 22-51(5) shall apply, except the height restrictions of subsections 22-51(5)a and b are replaced by the restrictions of section 22-52. 
(8)  Post signs shall not be placed less than 500 feet apart. 
(Code 1973, § 21-43) 
Cross reference- Zoning, app. A. 
Sec. 22-52. - Ground signs. 
    Ground signs are subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  They shall be located no closer than six feet to adjacent right-of-way lines or structures. 
(2)  They shall not obstruct vision at any intersection or vehicular access point. 
(3)  They may not exceed six feet in height above the mean ground level under the sign. 
(4)  The height of any planter, pedestal or support structure shall be included in the calculation of sign height. 
(5)  No associated support structure shall exceed a height of four feet. 
(6)  No ground sign shall exceed 100 square feet in area except as provided in this chapter. 
(7)  Not more than one ground sign shall be erected on any one lot or tract of land, except that one sign for each 300 feet of frontage may be erected, provided that such signs are located 300 feet apart on such lot or tract of land. No ground sign when erected on a lot fronting on intersecting streets shall be erected within 25 feet of the intersection of the streets. 
(8)  They shall not be erected on any parcel or premises which have an existing ground, post or directory sign except as provided herein. 
(Code 1973, § 21-44) 
Sec. 22-53. - Hanging signs. 
    All hanging signs shall: 
(1)  Only be permitted under permanent structures such as canopies and covered walkways. 
(2)  Be firmly attached to their mounting and may not move in the wind. 
(3)  Provide a minimum of ten feet of clearance to ground level. 
(4)  Not exceed four square feet in area. 
(Code 1973, § 21-45) 
Sec. 22-54. - Informational post signs. 
    Post signs indicating the direction to any noncommercial institution or place may be erected and maintained on the parkway or side of a public street, alley or place under the following conditions: 
(1)  The sign serves a public purpose and a public necessity for such directional sign exists. 
(2)  The noncommercial institution or place is within the city. 
(3)  Such sign shall not exceed 18 inches by 24 inches in size and shall be installed under the supervision of the director in a manner and at a height so as not to interfere with the ordinary and lawful use of the street. 
(Code 1973, § 21-46) 
Sec. 22-55. - Institutional and governmental signs. 
(a)  Institutional and governmental signs shall: 
(1)  Be either ground or wall signs. 
(2)  Not be over 32 square feet in area or exceed ten feet in height above the mean grade at its base in any residential zone district. 
(3)  Be located only on the property at a governmental agency or not-for-profit institutional property. 
(4)  Not be nearer than ten feet to any property line. 
(5)  Be subject to the general restrictions of ground or wall signs except as provided herein. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed so as to prohibit a governmental agency or institution from having signs otherwise allowed in any commercial district. 
(Code 1973, § 21-47) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 22-56. - Roof signs. 
    Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, roof signs are allowed only when the unique architectural design of the structure does not provide a location for a wall sign. When allowed, roof signs shall: 
(1)  Be limited in size to a sign area not greater than ten percent of the area of the front wall of the building or portion of the building occupied, or 100 square feet, whichever is less. 
(2)  Be allowed only to advertise the business conducted in the building upon which the sign is mounted. 
(3)  Not extend beyond the exterior walls of the building upon which the sign is mounted. 
(4)  Be constructed entirely of noncombustible materials. 
(Code 1973, § 21-48) 
Sec. 22-57. - Seasonal signs and display. 
    Property owners and tenants shall be permitted to put up and display decorations and displays celebrating or denoting religious holidays or events, the seasons of the year, state and national holidays and similar occasions, subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  No such display shall be in place for a period exceeding 75 days. 
(2)  No pendants, streamers, prohibited flags or similar wind-operated device is allowed. 
(3)  No such display may convey a commercial advertising message or bear the name of a business or a product. 
(4)  Should any such display fail to meet the criteria outlined herein, it shall deemed to be in violation of section 22-3. 
(Code 1973, § 21-49) 
Sec. 22-58. - Signs for sale or lease of real estate and commercial properties. 
(a)  Signs which advertise the sale or lease of real estate of less than one acre and which are located upon the property or premises to which such signs refer shall not exceed six square feet in area, shall not be erected within ten feet of any line of the property on which it is erected and shall not exceed two in number for any lot or tract of ground advertised; but shall be otherwise exempt from the remaining provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Signs which advertise the sale, lease or coming development of real estate of one acre or more shall be located upon the property or premises to which such signs refer, shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, and shall be limited to one in number for any tract or parcel. 
(c)  One sign announcing the development of property for residential purposes at another location within the city may be permitted and maintained, provided however, that no such sign shall exceed 32 square feet total display area nor be displayed or maintained longer than is allowed by this chapter, and provided that no more than one such sign is erected, displayed or maintained at any one time for any individual development. 
(d)  Any signs allowed under this section shall not be included in any total signage allocation for such parcel or development and shall be removed within ten days of the sale or lease of the property being advertised. 
(Code 1973, § 21-50) 
Sec. 22-59. - Subdivision signs. 
    Subdivision signs shall: 
(1)  Not be located within any road or utility right-of-way. 
(2)  Conform to the general provisions of ground signs except as provided in this section. 
(3)  Be located only at the entrance to a subdivision. 
(4)  Have a maximum sign area of 100 square feet at any subdivision entrance, which sign area may be divided into two signs and located on opposite sides of the subdivision entrance road. 
(5)  Signs shall be located on subdivision common ground or on an area with a sign easement dedicated and managed by the subdivision trustees. 
(6)  No sign shall be located to obscure visibility or the line of sight for motor vehicles at intersecting streets, alley, driveways or at curb cuts. 
(Code 1973, § 21-51; Ord. No. 2212, § 2, 10-14-91) 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, ch. 25. 
Sec. 22-60. - Temporary signs. 
    Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, signs meeting the definition of temporary sign may be permitted and maintained subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Temporary signs may be erected for up to 60 continuous display days per calendar year. This may be broken into separate permit periods as short as three consecutive display days. A permit is required for each separate period a temporary sign is displayed. 
(2)  Temporary signs shall be either ground signs or wall signs and shall be governed by the general regulations for those types of signs except as contained herein. 
(3)  A temporary sign shall: 
a.  Not exceed 32 square feet in sign area counting all sides of multi-sided signs. 
b.  Not exceed ten feet in height above the mean ground level for ground-mounted signs or above the lowest mounting point for non-round-mounted signs. 
c.  Be limited to one sign per address occupied by the permittee at one time. 
d.  Not be issued a permit for display for a period of less than three consecutive days. 
e.  Be issued a permit for display a maximum total time period of 60 days per year per address occupied by the permittee. This may be one or more separate permits. 
f.  Not be displayed in excess of two signs in quantity at one time at any multi-occupant building or premises. 
g.  Be displayed only at the location indicated on the permit. 
h.  Not be placed within the public right-of-way or on public property. 
i.  Be firmly and securely attached to the ground or a building. 
j.  Not be displayed on or attached to any accessory structure, fence, equipment, trailer, vehicle, or plant life. 
k.  Be removed promptly upon the expiration of the permit period. 
l.  Be a conventional flat sign, a suspended or affixed flexible banner, an A-frame sign, a fan-inflated dancing balloon or a ground-mounted flexible device intended to move with the assistance of the wind and shall be made of fire resistant materials and securely attached to a building or the ground. 
m.  Not include pennants, pinwheels, motorized or flashing lights or devices, personnel or any device held, displayed or manipulated by personnel nor any items or media otherwise prohibited or limited by ordinance. 
n.  Be maintained in a condition as originally manufactured and erected without tears, holes, fading or other deterioration. 
o.  Include oversized inflatable devices in excess of 32 square feet in area and/or ten feet in height subject to the general regulations for temporary signs except such oversized inflatables may only be given permits for a maximum of 30 days per year (each day for an oversized inflatable shall be charged as two days toward the 60-day annual allotment of display time for a temporary sign). Oversized inflatables shall be securely attached to the ground or a building. No such device shall be located to obscure visibility or the line of sight for motor vehicles in public rights-of-way or on private property. 
(4)  Temporary sign fees and compliance deposits: 
a.  The fee for temporary signs shall be $2.00 per square foot with a minimum sign permit fee of $25.00. The fee for oversized inflatable devices shall be $6.00 per day with a minimum fee of $18.00. No refunds of the permit fee or adjustment to the display days attributed to a temporary sign shall be made after a permit has been issued and the sign erected. 
b.  A temporary sign compliance deposit of $100.00 shall be paid with every temporary sign permit. Such compliance deposit shall be refunded in full to the permittee upon the temporary sign remaining in compliance with all Ballwin regulations throughout the entire time of its display and it being removed in accordance with the permit time frame. Failure to maintain the temporary sign in compliance with Ballwin regulations and remove it in accordance with the permit shall result in a forfeiture of the full compliance deposit amount. 
(Code 1973, § 21-52; Ord. No. 2212, §§ 3-6, 10-14-91; Ord. No. 03-11, § 3, 2-10-03; Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 5-24-10) 
Sec. 22-61. - Wall signs. 
    Wall signs are subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Except as provided in this section, no wall sign or signs shall be allowed to exceed 100 square feet for any single building, store or occupied unit. 
(2)  Any commercial building or occupied unit shall be permitted a wall sign having an area equal to ten percent of the area of the front wall of the building or portion of the building occupied. 
(3)  A sign not to exceed 300 square feet may be placed on a building the front wall of which is not less than 300 feet to the right-of-way line of a public street or to the limits of any other street or roadway. 
(4)  Any building occupied by a single tenant and having a front wall area of over 2,000 square feet adjoining a public street may have a wall sign with a sign area not in excess of ten percent of the area of the front wall of such building; provided, however, that the area of a wall sign shall not exceed 300 square feet. 
(5)  A building on a corner lot may have signs on each street side of such building, and the area of each wall adjoining a public street shall be computed separately to determine the size of the sign which may be erected on each wall. 
(6)  All wall signs shall be made of noncombustible materials. Moldings and cappings may be made of wood. 
(7)  All wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to a building. 
(8)  No wall sign shall project beyond or above the face of the surface to which it is attached. 
(9)  No wall sign shall be erected so as to cover the doors or windows of any building, or otherwise prevent free ingress and egress to or from any window, door or fire escape of any building. 
(10)  No wall sign shall extend more than 12 inches from the surface to which it is attached. 
(11)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, these restrictions shall not apply to a sign erected on a water tank by a water service utility, regulated by the Missouri Public Service Commission when, such a sign is displayed for identification purposes. 
(Code 1973, § 21-53; Ord. No. 13-34, § 1, 8-19-13) 
Sec. 22-62. - Automobile dealership or mall signs. 
    Automobile dealer and automobile mall signs are subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  No sign may exceed 500 square feet of total sign area per product line. 
(2)  Total sign area may not exceed 1,500 square feet. 
(3)  Only one post or ground sign per product line is allowed at each automobile mall. 
(4)  No post or ground signs may exceed 300 square feet. 
(5)  Ground signs shall comply with section 22-52 except for the requirements of subsection 22-52(6), (7) or (8). 
(6)  Wall signs shall comply with section 22-61, except that wall signs of 200 square feet are allowed on walls of less than 2,000 square feet. 
(7)  All freestanding signs must have a minimum of 75 feet between signs and must not be located within any street right-of-way lines. 
(8)  No sign shall be located to obscure visibility or the line of sight for motor vehicles at intersecting streets, alleys, driveways or at curb cuts. 
(9)  Post signs shall have a maximum height of 25 feet above the established street grade; and the post or support columns must be a minimum of six feet: 
a.  Away from any adjacent street right-of-way line. 
b.  Away from any structures. 
(Code 1973, § 21-54) 
Sec. 22-63. - Maximum total sign area. 
    The maximum total sign area that may be exhibited or maintained by, for or on behalf of any one person or business establishment occupying any tract of land or premises shall be 200 square feet except as set out in sections 22-51, 22-61 and 22-63. 
(Code 1973, § 21-55) 
Sec. 22-64. - Billboard signs. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Billboard signs shall conform to the general provisions of ground signs except as provided herein. 
(2)  Billboard signs shall conform to the provisions of State of Missouri Statutes regulating billboards. 
(3)  Billboards and billboard sign structures shall be free-standing and may not be attached to or supported by any other building or structure, nor may such sign or structure project over or above any other structure of any kind intended for permanent or temporary human occupancy. 
(4)  Billboard signs and billboard sign support structures shall only be allowed in the C-1 zoning district. 
(5)  The area of billboard signs shall be counted toward the maximum allowable sign area as established in section 22-63. 
(b)  Lighting. All billboard signs shall be lighted according to the following: 
(1)  Only be illuminated externally. 
(2)  Be illuminated in such a manner that the lamps, lenses and other light generating, directing and/or focusing devices cannot be observed directly from any point on the ground or from any point within a structure on adjoining or surrounding properties or rights-of-way. 
(3)  Not be illuminated in a manner that generates in excess of ten foot-candles of illumination or adds additional illumination to the existing ambient light levels such that the foot-candles exceed ten when measured upon adjoining rights-of-way or properties at the closest proximity to the sign. Billboard erectors shall provide a sealed report from a Missouri licensed engineer familiar with such matters as to the amount of increase in foot-candles that will be generated at such locations. Such report shall be provided prior to the issuance of any permit for a billboard or billboard support structure. 
(4)  Have no revolving, rotating, flashing, oscillating, intermittent or moving lights other than public service information such as date, time, and temperature. This shall not include electronic changing message boards. 
(5)  Shall only utilize illumination that shines in a generally upward direction away from the ground and surrounding rights-of-way, structures and properties but in accordance with the other provisions of this section. 
(c)  Size. All billboard signs shall meet the following size requirements: 
(1)  The maximum total area for a billboard sign, including all faces, is 200 square feet. This shall include borders, trim, frames, etc., but shall not include supporting structure elements. 
(2)  The maximum height of a billboard sign or billboard sign structure shall not exceed 20 feet. 
(3)  The maximum area limitations shall apply to the combined area of all display faces of a billboard sign. A billboard sign structure may have no more than two displays per facing. Multiple faces shall only be erected in back-to-back or V-type configurations. A multi-faced billboard sign structure shall be considered one sign. 
(d)  Height. All billboard sign structures shall meet the following height requirements: 
(1)  Have a maximum height of 20 feet above the average ground level as measured under the sign. Under no circumstances shall the highest point of the sign or supporting structure be more than 20 feet above the average ground level below the sign. 
(2)  Have a minimum of 14 feet of clearance between the bottom of any overhanging or projecting portion of the sign or support structure and the ground, pavement or other surface beneath where vehicular traffic may occur. 
(3)  Have a minimum of ten feet of clearance between the bottom of any overhanging or projecting portion of the sign or support structure and the ground, pavement, or other surface beneath where pedestrian traffic may occur. 
(e)  Spacing. All billboard signs and billboard sign support structures shall be subject to the following spacing requirements. All distances relative to spacing shall be measured from the closest parts of the signs or supporting structures. 
(1)  Shall be spaced a minimum of 1,320 feet from all other billboard signs. 
(2)  Shall be spaced a minimum of 500 feet from any post or free-standing directory sign. 
(3)  Shall be spaced a minimum of 250 feet from any existing ground sign. 
(4)  Shall be spaced a minimum of 100 feet from any other free standing existing outdoor advertisement. 
(5)  Shall be spaced a minimum of ten feet distant for every one foot of height of the sign and/or supporting structure from the boundaries of all residential zoning districts. 
(6)  Shall be spaced a minimum of ten (10) feet from any public or private right-of-way. 
(7)  Shall be spaced in such a manner that the fall zone will not overlap or intrude into a public or private right-of-way, any structure intended for occupancy by people or chattels, or any parcel other than that upon which the sign is erected. 
(8)  Shall be spaced no more than 660 feet from Manchester Road. 
(Ord. No. 99-26, § 2, 5-24-99) 
Sec. 22-65. - Signs excluded from regulation. 
    Except for the provisions of section 22-21 et seq. hereinabove, the following signs are excluded from regulation under this chapter: 
Integral decorative or architectural features of building or works of art, so long as such features or works do not contain letters, numbers, trademarks, moving parts or lights. 
The fees required under section 22-24 herein shall be waived for public and private elementary, middle and high schools. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, § 1, 1-24-05) 
Secs. 22-66-22-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OUTDOOR ADVERTISERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 22-81-22-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 22-101. - Advertising sign business license required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of billposting or outdoor advertising by erecting or maintaining any of the signs defined in this chapter within the corporate limits of the city without first having obtained a license from the city to conduct such business. 
(Code 1973, § 21-62) 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, ch. 14. 
Sec. 22-102. - Application. 
    Applications for a license required by this article shall be made on forms furnished for such purpose. 
(Code 1973, § 21-63) 
Sec. 22-103. - Licenses not transferable. 
    No license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be transferable. 
(Code 1973, § 21-64) 
Sec. 22-104. - Expiration. 
    All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall expire on June 30 following the date of issuance. 
(Code 1973, § 21-65) 
Sec. 22-105. - Renewal. 
    All licenses required by section 22-101 shall be renewed according to the provisions of the licensing ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 21-66) 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, ch. 14. 
Sec. 22-106. - Revocation. 
    The city may revoke any license issued pursuant to this article upon satisfactory evidence that the licensee has violated any provision of this chapter. A license so revoked shall not be reinstated within 30 days of its revocation and then only on satisfactory evidence that the cause for revocation has been removed. 
(Code 1973, § 21-67) 
Chapter 23 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; administration, ch. 2; health and sanitation, ch. 12; refuse, garbage and rubbish storage in housing, § 13-78; abandoned vehicles, § 15-411 et seq.; littering, § 17-60; sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 21; weeds and vegetation, ch. 29. 
State Law reference- Refuse disposal in cities, RSMo 71.680 et seq.; solid waste disposal, RSMo 260.200 et seq.; municipal solid waste management plans, RSMo 260.220; hazardous waste management, RSMo 260.350 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Accumulation prohibited. 
(a)  The accumulation of garbage or refuse of any type for a period in excess of five days is hereby declared a public nuisance and a clear danger to public health. No owner, lessee or occupant, nor any agent, servant, representative or employee thereof, of any lot, ground or premises, or any part thereof, shall allow or maintain any such accumulation of garbage or refuse upon any lot, ground or premises in the city or upon streets or upon the right-of-way adjoining such premises or upon any adjoining sidewalk. 
(b)  This section shall not prohibit the accumulation or storage of refuse produced as an incident to the lawful use of the same premises where stored; provided such stored refuse is pending removal or disposal and does not remain on the premises for a period in excess of seven consecutive days, and provided further that the refuse is placed or stored in a container or is otherwise screened from the view of persons upon adjacent property or rights-of-way, except on a day scheduled for collection when it may be placed adjacent to the public right-of-way. 
(Code 1973, § 10-2) 
Sec. 23-2. - Scattering. 
    No person within the city shall cast, place, throw, deposit or sweep any refuse or garbage upon any street or public place or upon private property. 
(Code 1973, § 10-3) 
Sec. 23-3. - Compost. 
    No provision of this chapter shall be interpreted to prevent the accumulation of compost for residential use, provided that it is contained in an appropriate container, does not create an odor detectable on neighboring properties, and does not harbor or induce the accumulation of vermin. 
Sec. 23-4. - Storage of infectious, hazardous and special wastes. 
(a)  No person possessing or generating infectious, hazardous or special waste shall permit such infectious, hazardous or special waste to be placed in storage containers ordinarily used for waste that is not infectious, hazardous or special waste, as the case may be. 
(b)  No person possessing or generating infectious, hazardous or special waste shall place such waste in storage containers which are not clearly marked "Infectious Waste," "Hazardous Waste," or "Special Waste," as the case may be. 
(Code 1973, § 10-6) 
Secs. 23-5-23-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTORS 

Sec. 23-21. - Licenses required. 
    No person shall collect or remove from any premises within the city, or convey over any of the streets or alleys of the city, any garbage or refuse unless such person shall have a license to do so as may be required under the provisions of this chapter or any other regulation or ordinance of the city, for each vehicle utilized for such purpose. 
(Code 1973, § 10-18) 
Sec. 23-22. - Collection to be by city or authorized trash hauler only; exception. 
(a)  All garbage or refuse accumulated in the city on premises occupied by a dwelling shall be collected, removed, conveyed and disposed of only by the city or a trash hauler or a trash hauler's employee and it shall be unlawful for any person other than an employee of the city, a trash hauler or a trash hauler's employee to use any street or public way within the city for the collection, removal or conveyance of any garbage or refuse from dwellings within the city. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the actual producers of refuse, or the owners of premises upon which refuse has accumulated, from personally collecting, conveying and disposing of such refuse; nor shall anything in this section prohibit collectors of refuse from places outside of the city from hauling such refuse over city streets, provided such collectors comply with the provisions of this chapter and with any other governing law or ordinance. 
(Code 1973, § 10-19) 
Sec. 23-23. - Authority to enter into agreement for collection of refuse. 
(a)  The mayor shall have the authority to enter into an agreement on behalf of the city with any person approved by the board of aldermen for the collection, removal and disposal of garbage and refuse from premises occupied by dwellings; provided, however, that such trash haulers shall not exceed two in number at any one time. 
(b)  All agreements executed under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to contain the requirements and conditions as herein set out, regardless of whether the same are set forth in such agreement or regardless of any terms or provisions of such agreement to the contrary notwithstanding. 
(Code 1973, § 10-20) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to contract for collection and removal of refuse, RSMo 71.680. 
Sec. 23-24. - Prerequisites to agreements. 
    Before there shall be executed on behalf of the city any agreement with any person for the collection, conveyance and disposal of any refuse accumulated within the city on premises occupied by dwellings, the person so contracting with the city shall at his own expense furnish: 
(1)  A certificate of workers' compensation insurance. 
(2)  A certificate of general liability insurance providing for coverage in the amount of $1,000,000.00 for personal injury and property damage and naming the city, its elected officials and employees as additional insured. The policy shall provide that it cannot be cancelled or terminated except upon at least 30 days' written notice to the city. 
(3)  A bond in favor of the city and all persons who shall furnish labor or materials in connection with such contract, in such amount and with such surety as the board of aldermen may approve, conditioned upon the faithful performance of all obligations of such person under the contract, for the payment of all bills for labor or material furnished in connection with such contract, for compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances, and for the indemnification of the city from any and all loss, costs or expense which the city may incur by reason of injury to persons or property as a result of any negligence or alleged negligence of such person in doing work under the contract. 
(Code 1973, § 10-21; Ord. No. 2164, § 1, 5-13-91) 
State Law reference- The Workers' Compensation Law, RSMo 287.010 et seq. 
Sec. 23-25. - Revocation of agreement. 
    The board of aldermen may revoke the city's agreement with any trash hauler upon a finding by the board of aldermen that a trash hauler has not complied with any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 10-22) 
Sec. 23-26. - Payment of trash haulers. 
    The board of aldermen, in its sole discretion, may provide for the payment to a trash hauler out of the general revenue fund of the city or out of the proceeds of any fee which may be established and assessed, by ordinance or resolution of the board, against the occupants or owners of dwellings within the city for the collection, removal and disposal of garbage or refuse. A trash hauler is hereby authorized to collect on behalf of the city any such fees which may be assessed. The fees which are collected by a trash hauler shall be retained by him as and for full payment for his services in collecting, removing and disposing of garbage and refuse; and such fees which are so collected shall be in full settlement of the city's obligation to a trash hauler. However, the city shall not be responsible for any fees which a trash hauler may be unable to collect. 
(Code 1973, § 10-23) 
Sec. 23-27. - Trash hauler not required to collect from persons delinquent in payments. 
    When any owner or occupant of a dwelling shall be 30 days delinquent in the payment of fees established and assessed for the collection of garbage and refuse, a trash hauler shall not be obligated to collect, remove or dispose of any garbage or refuse from the premises of any persons so delinquent. 
(Code 1973, § 10-24) 
Sec. 23-28. - Subcontracting prohibited without prior approval. 
    No trash hauler shall, without first receiving the approval of the board of aldermen in writing, sublet or subcontract any portion of the work to be done in collecting, removing or disposing of garbage or refuse. 
(Code 1973, § 10-25) 
Sec. 23-29. - Vehicle requirements. 
    No license shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter for any vehicle utilized by any person for the collection, removal, disposal or hauling of garbage or refuse within the city unless: 
(1)  The vehicle to be so utilized is equipped with a metal body of leakproof construction and a metal cover constructed in such a way that both the body and cover of the unit shall be leakproof. 
(2)  Such vehicle is equipped with a fire extinguisher of a type approved by the National Fire Protection Association for highway transport use. 
(3)  The owner or operator of such vehicle has deposited with the city clerk evidence that he has secured, paid for and has in effect a policy of motor vehicle liability insurance in the minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 for personal injury and property damage and naming the city, its elected officials and employees as additional insured. The policy shall provide that it cannot be cancelled or terminated except upon at least 30 days' written notice to the city. 
(4)  Such vehicle has been inspected by a member of the police department and found to be in good condition with all safety appliances operative. 
(Code 1973, § 10-26; Ord. No. 2165, § 1, 5-13-91) 
Secs. 23-30-23-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRECOLLECTION, COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 23-46. - Authority to refuse to collect garbage or refuse. 
    The collection and removal services may be refused for failure to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 10-38) 
Sec. 23-47. - Accumulation of refuse prohibited. 
(a)  No owner, lessee or occupant, nor agent, servant, representative or employee of any such owner, lessee or occupant of any lot, ground or premises, or any part thereof, shall keep or allow to be kept upon any such lot, ground or premises any refuse unless it is in containers meeting the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The fact that refuse has accumulated or is kept on premises or property in violation of the provisions of this section shall be prima facie evidence that the occupant and owner of the premises or property are responsible for the violation occurring. 
(Code 1973, § 10-39) 
Sec. 23-48. - Containers to be provided. 
    Containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of the premises. 
(Code 1973, § 10-40) 
Sec. 23-49. - Container requirements generally. 
    Containers shall be watertight and have tightfitting lids used in place at all times. 
(Code 1973, § 10-41) 
Sec. 23-50. - Containers to be kept in sanitary manner. 
    All containers shall be maintained and kept in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. 
(Code 1973, § 10-42) 
Sec. 23-51. - Capacity and maximum weight of containers. 
    Containers placed for collection by the city or a trash hauler shall not have a capacity of more than 31 gallons nor exceed 75 pounds in weight, when filled, unless authorized and allowed by the city or the trash hauler. 
(Code 1973, § 10-43) 
Sec. 23-52. - Replacement of nonconforming or damaged containers. 
    Any container that does not conform to the provisions of this article, or may have ragged or sharp edges or any other defect liable to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof, shall be promptly replaced upon notice. 
(Code 1973, § 10-44) 
Sec. 23-53. - Number of containers restricted. 
    Containers shall be limited in number according to the provisions of the contract in effect with a trash hauler. 
(Code 1973, § 10-45) 
Sec. 23-54. - Refuse containers in front yards prohibited. 
    No person shall place or keep or permit the placing or keeping of a refuse container in the front yard (as that term is now or may in the future be defined in section 1-2 for the city's zoning ordinance) of premises or property owned, occupied or controlled by him, except when such containers are screened from view within a sight proof enclosure erected in compliance with the applicable provisions of this Code or are placed for collection not more than 12 hours prior to the day of collection nor more than 12 hours after the time of collection. 
(Code 1973, § 10-46) 
Sec. 23-55. - Precollection practices. 
(a)  Liquids. All garbage and refuse shall be drained of any liquid before being deposited for collection. 
(b)  Boxes and cartons. All boxes and cartons shall be collapsed before being placed for collection. 
(Code 1973, § 10-47) 
Sec. 23-56. - Frequency of collection. 
    Trash haulers shall collect and remove garbage and refuse accumulated upon premises occupied by dwellings at least one time each week. 
(Code 1973, § 10-49) 
Sec. 23-57. - Hours of collection. 
    No trash or refuse hauler shall collect, remove or convey garbage or refuse in the city between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, nor at any time on Sundays. Vehicle operators and the collection companies for which they work, either as employees or as contractors, shall be jointly and severably responsible for a violation of this section and may be penalized in accordance with the provisions of section 1-6 of the Ballwin Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1973, § 10-50; Ord. No. 2505, § 1, 3-11-96) 
Sec. 23-58. - Points of collection. 
    Refuse containers shall be placed at ground level on the property, accessible to and not more than five feet from the side of the street or alley from which collection is made; provided that containers may be placed for collection at other than ground level at a distance of more than five feet when an additional fee for the payment of the extra service is agreed upon by the trash hauler and the occupant or owner. 
(Code 1973, § 10-51) 
Sec. 23-59. - Manner of operating collecting vehicles generally. 
    All vehicles used for the collection, removal, disposal or conveyance of garbage and refuse shall be operated so as to prevent garbage and refuse from being blown, dropped or spilled. 
(Code 1973, § 10-52) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 15. 
Sec. 23-60. - Refuse to be disposed of outside city. 
    Persons collecting refuse within the city shall dispose of the same outside the city limits. 
(Code 1973, § 10-53) 
Sec. 23-61. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Citation of a violation of the provisions of this chapter 23 shall be made according to the following procedure: 
(1)  Be in writing. 
(2)  Contain a statement of the reason for the citation. 
(3)  Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act required under the citation, not to exceed ten days. 
(4)  Contain an outline of remedial action which if taken will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Be served on the owner, an agent thereof or the occupant, as the case may require. 
(b)  Service of a citation under this section shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner, an agent thereof or the occupant if a copy thereof is: 
(1)  Served on such person personally; 
(2)  Sent by certified mail to the last know address of such person; or 
(3)  Posted in a conspicuous place in or about the property affected by the citation. 
(c)  If an owner fails to comply with the requirements of the citation, the city may seek remedy using one or more of the following: 
(1)  Issue a municipal court summons and the owner shall be subject to fine in accordance with section 1-6 of this Code. 
(2)  If the owner of the property fails to remedy the citation within the time period specified, the city may rectify the violation, and the cost of compliance shall be certified to the finance officer who shall cause the certified cost to be included in a special tax bill. If the certified cost is not paid within 30 days, the tax bill shall be considered delinquent, and the laws governing delinquent and back taxes shall govern the collection of the delinquent bill. The tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be deemed a personal debt against the owner and shall also be a lien on the property until paid. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, § 2, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 23-62. - Roll-off trash containers in residential districts. 
    Portable temporary roll-off trash containers or dumpsters are permitted in residential zoning districts under the provisions of this section. Not more than one such container shall be allowed per residential lot. Containers shall not have a capacity greater then 20 cubic yards. In no instance shall the container be placed in the public right of way or easements. The use of such containers shall not exceed 30 days, unless due cause for an extension of time can be demonstrated. For good cause shown, one 30-day extension may be granted. One roll-off trash container may be allowed in conjunction with building or demolition permit during the valid time of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 05-09, § 2, 2-28-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-09, § 2, adopted Feb. 28, 2005, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as § 23-61. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as § 23-62, at the discretion of the editor. 
Chapter 24 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; administration, ch. 2; department of public works, § 2-271; buildings and structures, ch. 7; construction projects that may damage or litter streets, § 7-104; cleaning of streets during building construction, § 7-110; purpose of flood hazard ordinance, § 10-26; variance procedures under flood hazard ordinance, § 10-71 et seq.; grading, mining, filling and clearing, ch. 11; vending of merchandise not to obstruct streets, § 14-1; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 15; driving across freshly painted street markings, § 15-128; damaging streets, § 15-129; parades and processions, § 15-206 et seq.; leaving abandoned or derelict vehicle on street, § 15-414; planning and development, ch. 19; sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 21; subdivisions, ch. 25; streets in subdivisions, § 25-91 et seq.; site improvements in planned multiple dwelling districts, app. A, art. VII, § 12; streets in mixed use development districts, app. A, art. XIIA, § 8. 
State Law reference- Public improvements, RSMo 71.290 et seq.; construction and repair of public roads, RSMo 71.340; wheelchair ramps, RSMo 71.365, 71.367; municipal regulation of streets, sidewalks, etc., RSMo 79.410; public works, special assessments and condemnation, RSMo 88.010 et seq.; fourth class cities, RSMo 88.667 et seq.; indebtedness for street improvements, RSMo 95.125; notice of excavations in streets, RSMo 319.010 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Requirements for acceptance of street. 
(a)  No road, street or thoroughfare within the city shall be accepted by the board of aldermen as a public street unless the street is constructed according to the plans and specifications of the city. 
(b)  The plans and specifications mentioned in subsection (a) shall include plans and specifications for type of construction and surfacing and also for width. 
(Code 1973, § 22-1; Ord. No. 2474, § 2, 10-9-95) 
Sec. 24-2. - Authority to close streets temporarily. 
(a)  The city engineer or chief of police is authorized to close any highway, road or street in the city and withdraw the same from the public use temporarily and during such period as public work thereon or other public emergency or expediency shall make such action necessary. 
(b)  No person shall use or attempt to use any highway, road or street so withdrawn from public use or drive or attempt to drive any vehicle thereon during the period the highway, road or street is withdrawn from public use. 
(c)  The city engineer shall place a sign at each end of the portion of such highway, road or street withdrawn from public use. Such sign shall meet the standards of the current edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Streets and Highways, published by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration. 
(Code 1973, § 22-2) 
Sec. 24-3. - Obstructions in streets and street rights-of-way. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall obstruct in any manner whatsoever the free passage or use of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public way, or erect, construct, place or maintain any speed bumps, horses, ridges, depressions, fences, gates, pipes, chains, bars, basketball hoops, hockey nets, skate ramps or any other type of structure or obstruction in, on, or across the paved portion of any public street or roadway within the city. 
(b)  No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, place or maintain anything within the unpaved portion of any right-of-way owned by the city except as follows: 
(1)  Grass and/or landscaping materials, including trees and bushes, provided that such landscaping materials do not hinder sight distance, become a public nuisance or otherwise obstruct or interfere with the free and safe movement of traffic. 
(2)  Mailboxes as authorized or required by postal authorities. 
(3)  Traffic control devices and signs installed and maintained by the city or other governmental entity. 
(4)  Public utility lines and equipment including, but not limited to, street lights, cable television installations and utility poles, provided that appropriate permits are obtained from the city. 
(5)  Private driveways and sidewalks, provided that appropriate permits are obtained from the city. This authorization shall not be construed to allow for installation of parking pads adjacent to or parallel with the roadway. 
(6)  Directional or informational signs as may be approved by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(7)  Lawn sprinkler systems, invisible fences or similar subsurface installations may be installed or maintained on the public right-of-way exclusively at the risk of the person, firm or corporation installing or maintaining the same. In the event that such systems are installed or maintained in the public right-of-way, the city shall have no responsibility or liability whatsoever for removal of or damage to such systems as a result of the use, maintenance or repair of any street, sidewalk, or right-of-way by the city or its agents, employees or representatives, nor shall the city be responsible or liable for any damage done to any such item caused by or resulting from the use of the public right-of-way by members of the public. 
(Code 1973, § 22-3; Ord. No. 2684, § 1, 6-8-98) 
State Law reference- Encroachments and obstructions, RSMo 79.410. 
Sec. 24-4. - Street and sidewalk construction generally. 
(a)  Generally. All streets and sidewalks constructed within the city shall conform to the standards of St. Louis County except (i) Meramec River gravel shall be used in lieu of crushed limestone where concrete is required for construction; and (ii) in situations where a cul-de-sac is constructed, the diameter of the landscaped island shall be 20 feet. 
(b)  Streets. Streets shall be constructed in accordance with section 25-91. 
(c)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be four inches thick, (six inches thick at residential driveway and seven inches thick at all others), four feet wide and shall have expansion joints at intervals of no greater than 20 feet and crack control joints at four-foot intervals. 
(d)  Curbs; ramps in sidewalks at crosswalks. All new curbs which are constructed within the city, and all existing curbs which are a part of any reconstruction, shall comply with this subsection. In order to enable persons using wheelchairs to travel freely and without assistance, at each crosswalk a ramp shall be built into the curb so that the sidewalk and street blend at a common level. Such ramp shall be not less than 36 inches wide and shall not have a slope greater than one inch rise per 12 inches length (8.3 percent). In all ramps there shall be gradual rounding at the bottom of the slope. Deviations from the standards set forth in this subsection shall only be permitted where conformance to such standards is impractical or physically impossible and where methods, material and dimension used in lieu thereof do not create a hazard. Such deviations must first be submitted to the city engineer for approval or rejection based on sound engineering principles. 
(e)  Vault under sidewalks. No vaults shall be constructed under sidewalks within the city unless a building permit is obtained to construct vaults under sidewalks subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  The area which may be occupied under a sidewalk by a property owner in front of a building shall not be allowed in the space between the front lot line and a line five feet back of and parallel to such line or the space between the curbline of the street and a line five feet back of and parallel to such line, whichever allows the most setback from the street. 
(2)  In no instance shall an excavation be made in any street, alley or driveway for the construction of a vault. 
(3)  In no instance shall a vault be constructed that does not provide for the removal or drainage of water, snow or ice from such vault. 
(4)  The vault shall be constructed of reinforced concrete and have a proper foundation, the design of which must be approved by the city engineer. 
(5)  The vault shall be covered with a grate or door capable of supporting 3,000 pounds. 
(f)  Maintenance and repair of sidewalk, private driveway, alley, driveway culverts, etc. The owner of property abutting any sidewalk along any avenue, street, road or highway within the city is responsible for that sidewalk's maintenance: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  The owner of any property having a private driveway, alley, avenue, road, street or highway connecting to any public right-of-way used for alleys, avenues, roads, streets or highways within the city shall maintain and repair any defective portion, including the drainage culvert beneath the private driveway, alley, etc., that is located within the public right-of-way in conformance to the standards as required by the city on file in the office of the city engineer. All such private driveways, alleys, avenues, roads, streets or highways shall blend at a common level with any adjoining sidewalks and any alleys, avenues, roads, streets or highways located on a public right-of-way. 
(3)  New driveways constructed or repaved by the City of Ballwin within the public right-of-way shall be limited to the cost of either traditional poured concrete or hot mix asphalt confirming to the standard driveway details and specifications of St. Louis County Department of Highways and Traffic. The concrete shall be air-entrained poured in place six inches thick with Meramec River gravel used in lieu of crushed limestone. No colored, exposed aggregate, stamped, textured concrete or other special surface treatments shall be permitted. Asphalt shall be three-inch thick St. Louis County hot mix Type "C" surface course mix on six-inch Type 1 Aggregate Base Course. 
(4)  That portion of driveways within the public right-of-way between the street and sidewalk shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property owner. Where no sidewalk exists, that portion of the driveway within the right-of-way shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property owner. 
(5)  Sidewalks within the public right-of-way, except those extending private walkways to the street, shall be the responsibility of the City of Ballwin. Portions of the sidewalk through driveways and alleys shall be constructed in accordance with sections 24-4(a) and 24-4(c) and with joints separating this portion of the sidewalk from the driveway shall be installed providing the same width as the adjoining sidewalks. 
(g)  Location of private driveway, alley, avenue, road, etc. No private driveway, alley, avenue, road, street or highway shall enter any public right-of-way within 75 feet of any public right-of-way lines of the intersecting streets in the districts zoned PA public activity district, C-1 commercial, C-2 regional shopping, C-3 planned limited commercial, S-1 service, and MXD mixed use development unless the lot is less than 100 feet; then it shall not be located closer than two-thirds of the length of the lot from the public right-of-way lines of the intersecting streets. 
(h)  Condemnation; repair, removal and replacement. The board of aldermen may by ordinance condemn defective driveways that have not been repaired or removed and provide for the construction of new driveways in place of driveways so condemned or removed. The city maintains sidewalks within public right-of-way or easement except those which serve private property. 
(i)  County-owned properties. All real estate owned by the county and situated within the city shall be subject to the provisions of all ordinances of the city related to the erection and maintenance of sidewalks, guttering, curbing, and fences along streets and alleys, and the paving of streets to the same extent as that of private citizens of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 22-4; Ord. No. 2584, § 1, 3-24-97; Ord. No. 03-26, § 1, 5-12-03; Ord. No. 08-40, § 1, 12-8-08; Ord. No. 11-12, § 1, 3-14-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 71.365, 71.367; condemnation of sidewalks by fourth class cities, RSMo 88.713; county property subject to ordinances of fourth class cities, RSMo 88.743. 
Sec. 24-5. - Sidewalk master plan. 
    The map designated sidewalk master plan on file with the city engineer is adopted as the master plan for installation of sidewalks by the city; and sidewalks will be installed in accordance with such plan upon receipt and approval by the board of aldermen of petitions signed by 75 percent of property owners adjacent to the street or 75 percent of the property owners of a subdivision served by such street. 
(Ord. No. 2150, § 1(22-6), 2-11-91) 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, ch. 25. 
Sec. 24-6. - Illustrations. 
    The following are illustrations of the construction of different types of streets: 

EXHIBIT 1 



(Ord. No. 2375, §§ I, II, 4-11-94; Ord. No. 2584, § 2, 3-24-97) 
Sec. 24-7. - Requirements for acceptance of private roadways. 
(a)  Under no circumstances will the city accept any private parking lot for public maintenance. The determination as to whether a facility is a parking lot under the provisions of this section is solely that of the board of aldermen. 
(b)  Roadways with groups of parking spaces directly adjacent to the roadway pavement and within the proposed right-of-way, or adjacent to the right-of-way, but accessed by a curb cut within the right-of-way which approximates the overall length of the parking space group, may be considered for public maintenance if the total length of curb line (pavement edge) occupied by such parking or curb cut is less than 25 percent of the total length of the curb line (pavement edge) being considered for acceptance and public maintenance. 
(c)  Any private roadway accepted for public maintenance must be accepted for its entire length within the city limits of Ballwin. 
(d)  A petition from owners of property representing 75 percent of the front footage of land along both sides of a private roadway must be presented and verified before the board of aldermen may consider the acceptance of a private roadway for public maintenance. 
(e)  One hundred percent of the property owners upon whose property a publicly maintained roadway will be established must agree to the roadway dedication by signing a plat or other similar document. No compensation shall be paid by Ballwin to any party for land or expenses associated with such dedication. The cost of preparing and recording a dedication plat or similar instrument shall be the sole responsibility of the petitioner. 
(f)  The city will not pursue condemnation or other legal action against any property owner(s) who refuse to dedicate property or sign a petition. 
(g)  All roadways accepted for public maintenance must be within a recorded right-of-way dedicated to Ballwin. A right-of-way accepted for public maintenance shall generally be no less than 50 feet wide. 
(h)  If a dedication plat must be prepared for recording, it is the responsibility of the petitioner(s) to provide and record the document. 
(i)  The board of aldermen shall not approve or execute any dedication plat which creates lots or setbacks which are nonconforming under the provisions of Ballwin's Zoning Ordinance. The board may consider approving a dedication plat involving existing nonconformancies if the dedication plat does not increase such nonconformancies. 
(j)  No roadway will be accepted for public maintenance which cannot be accessed directly from another publicly maintained roadway within the Ballwin corporate limits. 
(k)  Roadways must meet the following physical construction criteria: 
(1)  The roadway must be paved with either concrete, asphalt or equivalent paving material acceptable to the board of aldermen. 
(2)  Pavement shall meet Ballwin standards for new roadway of the same kind. 
(l)  All pavement shall be in good condition and free of significant cracks, sinking, scaling, rutting or other deterioration. 
(m)  No right-of-way will be accepted for public maintenance which contains structures other than pavement, stormwater inlets, manholes, pipes and other customary roadway related improvements unless such structures are specifically identified in the dedication plat as being the perpetual maintenance responsibility of an adjoining property owner, trustee association or other entity acceptable to the board. 
(n)  Streets accepted for public maintenance must have appropriately designed, maintained and functioning curbs and gutters, roadside ditches, driveway culverts etc. which direct runoff into natural drainage ways without causing flooding, erosion, siltation or other problems to adjoining public and private property. 
(o)  Integral storm sewer systems must be in good condition. All pipes, culverts, inlets, manholes, etc. must be clear of blockages and functioning as designed. 
(p)  All storm sewer systems must be certified by a civil engineer, acceptable to the city, that they meet the minimum design and function criteria of MSD. The cost of such certification is the responsibility of the petitioner. 
(q)  Additional easements, outside of the dedicated right-of-way, may be required if it is determined that such easements are needed to properly maintain storm sewers, inlets, manholes, culverts, box culverts, roadways, shoulders, ditches and other such facilities within the dedicated right-of-way. 
(r)  All utility easements within the right-of-way proposed for public maintenance must be identified on the dedication plat. 
(s)  The city shall not expend public funds to bring any roadway, easement or right-of-way into compliance with these minimum guidelines in order to make it eligible for maintenance as a public facility. 
(t)  The board of aldermen, by ordinance, may amend, make additions to, delete or otherwise revise subsections (a) through (s) or this section by majority vote without respect to the passage of any period of time between such amendments, additions, deletions or other revisions if it determines that to do so is in the best long term and/or overall interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2474, § 2, 10-9-95) 
Sec. 24-8. - Manchester road sidewalk payment. 
    Property owners of property abutting Manchester Road having sidewalks constructed where none previously existed under the Federal Transportation Enhancement Program shall be responsible for 30 percent of the actual cost associated with sidewalk construction along their property abutting Manchester Road. Payment of such cost shall be due upon the transfer of any special use exception associated with the property. The city administrator is hereby authorized to develop a special use exception transfer fee which incorporates the cost of sidewalk construction associated with such property, which shall be due at the time of application for special use exception transfer. 
(Ord. No. 05-39, § 1, 9-12-05) 
Sec. 24-9. - Driveways and driveway aprons. 
(1)  The driveway apron is the portion of the driveway between the sidewalk and curb. Since this section of driveway only serves the adjoining property, the property owner shall be responsible for maintenance. This includes possible damage caused by salt. 
(2)  The City of Ballwin will replace the portion of driveway which serves as part of the existing sidewalk, considering that portion as sidewalk, serving pedestrians. 
(3)  For driveways where the gutter is integral with the driveway apron, the City of Ballwin will replace the apron only if the gutter requires replacement; however, a joint will be inserted, separating the gutter and the apron. This joint will allow for future gutter replacement without replacing the apron. 
(4)  If the apron and gutter are integral, but only the apron needs replacement, then the property owner is responsible for replacing both the gutter and apron. Again, a separation joint shall be installed. 
(5)  Driveway aprons shall be replaced with either concrete or asphalt. The driveway apron shall be concrete along streets with vertical curbs. 
(Ord. No. 11-49, § 1, 10-10-11) 
Sec. 24-10. - Roadway acceptance. 
(1)  Under no circumstances will the City of Ballwin accept any parking lot for public maintenance. For the purposes of this document, a parking lot is defined as a paved, graveled or otherwise designated area intended for the parking and/or storage of motor vehicles and trailers. Parking lots are not located within public rights-of-way, generally have no discernable physical separation between the area intended for parking spaces and the adjoining area intended for vehicular access to the parking spaces except painted lines or raised islands, and are intended for the parking and storage of vehicles and trailers. Such facilities do not function as a conduit (roadway) for vehicular traffic which is not intending to utilize the parking spaces within the facility or in adjoining parking facilities. The determination as to whether a facility is a parking lot under the provisions of this policy and definitions in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Ballwin, is solely that of the board of aldermen. 
(2)  Roadways with groups of parking spaces directly adjacent to the roadway pavement and within the proposed right-of-way, or adjacent to the right-of-way, but accessed by a curb cut within the right-of-way which approximates the overall length of the parking space group, shall not be considered for public maintenance. 
(3)  Any roadway accepted for public maintenance must be accepted for its entire length within the city limits of Ballwin. 
(4)  A petition from owners of property representing 75 percent of the front footage of land along both sides of a private roadway must be presented and verified before the board will consider the acceptance of a private roadway for public maintenance. 
(5)  One hundred percent of the property owners upon whose property a publicly maintained roadway will be established must agree to the roadway dedication by signing a plat or other similar document. No compensation shall be paid by Ballwin to any party for land or expenses associated with such dedication. The cost of preparing and recording a dedication plat or similar instrument shall be the sole responsibility of the petitioner. 
(6)  The City of Ballwin will not pursue condemnation or other legal action against any property owner(s) who refuse to dedicate property or sign a petition. 
(7)  All roadways accepted for public maintenance must be within a recorded right-of-way dedicated to Ballwin. A right-of-way accepted for public maintenance shall generally be no less than 50 feet wide. 
(8)  If a dedication plat must be prepared for recording, it is the responsibility of the petitioner(s) to provide and record the document. 
(9)  The board of aldermen generally will not approve or execute any dedication plat which creates lots or setbacks which are nonconforming under the provisions of Ballwin's Zoning Ordinance. The board may consider approving a dedication plat involving existing nonconformances if the dedication plat does not increase such nonconformances. 
(10)  No roadway will be accepted for public maintenance which cannot be accessed directly from another publicly maintained roadway within the Ballwin corporate limits. 
(11)  Roadways must meet the following physical construction criteria: 
(a)  The roadway must be paved with either concrete, asphalt, or equivalent paving material acceptable to the board of aldermen. 
(b)  Pavement shall meet Ballwin standards for new roadways of the same kind. 
(12)  All pavements shall be in good condition and free of significant cracks, sinking, scaling, rutting, or other deterioration. 
(13)  No structures, other than pavement and sidewalks, will be maintained by the city, unless such structures are specifically identified in the dedication plat as being the perpetual maintenance responsibility of the city. 
(14)  Streets accepted for public maintenance must have appropriately designed, maintained and functioning curbs and gutters, roadside ditches, driveway culverts, etc., which direct runoff into natural drainage ways without causing flooding, erosion, siltation or other problems to adjoining public and private property. 
(15)  Integral storm sewer systems must be in good condition. All pipes, culverts, inlets, manholes, etc. must be clear of blockages and functioning as designed. The Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District must agree to accept all of the storm sewer system. 
(16)  Additional easements, outside of the dedicated right-of-way, may be required if it is determined that such easements are needed to properly maintain storm sewers, inlets, manholes, culverts, box culverts, roadways, shoulders, and other such facilities within the dedicated right-of-way. 
(17)  All utility easements within the right-of-way proposed for public maintenance must be identified on the dedication plat. 
(18)  Ballwin will not expend city funds to bring any roadway, easement, or right-of-way into compliance with these minimum guidelines in order to make it eligible for maintenance as a public facility. 
(19)  The Ballwin Board of Aldermen reserves the right to waive any of the guidelines enumerated in this policy if it is determined that to do so is in the best long term and/or overall interests of the City of Ballwin. 
(Ord. No. 11-49, § 2, 10-10-11) 
Sec. 24-11. - Sidewalks. 
    The board of aldermen reserves the right to authorize installation of sidewalks within the public right-of-way whenever deemed to be in the best interest of the community. The board shall consider unique factors such as proximity to schools, parks, and public facilities, increased pedestrian activity and/or overriding safety concerns. Where appropriate, consideration should be given to connection with the existing sidewalk system. Approval requires a simple majority affirmative vote of the board of aldermen. 
(1)  Any new site development, whether residential or commercial, shall install sidewalks on both sides of the street. If the board of aldermen agrees that a new sidewalk is not appropriate due to future street improvements or tree preservation, they will require payment from the developer to the City of Ballwin an amount equal to the present cost to Ballwin for sidewalk construction. 
(2)  Ballwin will install sidewalks along one side of a public roadway under the city's jurisdiction, if a petition signed by at least 75 percent of the abutting property owners is received. Sidewalk construction will be budgeted on a first-come first-served basis as soon as is financially possible, but no sooner than the fiscal year following the receipt of the petition. Large petitions may be broken into multiple parts and funded over several years. Petitions received late in the fiscal year may be received too late to be included in the subsequent year's budget. 
(3)  Any petition signed by at least 75 percent of the property owners and accepted by the board of aldermen will be in effect for a period of two years from the date of acceptance. No petition in opposition to the accepted petition will be considered during this two-year period. 
(4)  Property owners along any a street that do not want a sidewalk must submit a petition signed by at least 75 percent of the property owners adjacent to the street indicating that they do not want a sidewalk. This petition would then be submitted to the board of aldermen for acceptance, provided a petition for sidewalks has not been received within the past two years. Once the petition is accepted, it remains effective as described in subsection (2) above. 
(Ord. No. 11-49, § 3, 10-10-11) 
Sec. 24-12. - Kehrs Mill Road sidewalk payment. 
    Property owners of property abutting Kehrs Mill Road having sidewalks constructed where none previously existed under the Federal Surface Transportation Program shall be responsible for 20 percent of the actual cost associated with sidewalk construction along their property abutting Kehrs Mill Road. Payment of such cost shall be due upon the approval of any redevelopment or subdivision associated with the property. The city administrator is hereby authorized to develop a fee which incorporates the cost of sidewalk construction associated with such property, which shall be due at the time of approval of such redevelopment or subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 11-50, § 1, 10-24-11) 
Secs. 24-13-24-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate excavations, RSMo 79.410. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-21. - Barricades required. 
    Every person who shall cause to be made any excavation in or adjoining any public street, alley, public place, highway, walkway, right-of-way or easement or who shall occupy any portion of any public street, alley, public place, highway, walkway, right-of-way or easement with building material or with any other obstruction shall provide, erect and maintain at all times along the line of work all such barricades, signs, lights and warning signals as may be necessary in the judgment of the city engineer to protect the public from the hazards arising from the operation. The city engineer may require additional protection of excavation. 
(Code 1973, § 22-21) 
Sec. 24-22. - Routing of traffic. 
    The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions as nearly normal as practicable shall be maintained at all times so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting property and to the general public, provided that the city engineer may permit the closing of streets to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by him if in his opinion such closure is necessary. The permittee shall route and control traffic, including its own vehicles, as directed by the city police department. The following steps shall be taken before any street may be closed or restricted to traffic. 
(1)  The permittee must receive the approval of the city engineer and the police department therefor; 
(2)  The permittee must notify the chief of the fire district of any street so closed; 
(3)  Upon completion of construction work, the permittee shall notify the city engineer, the city police department and the fire district before traffic is moved back to its normal flow so that any necessary adjustments may be made; 
(4)  Where flagmen are deemed necessary by the city engineer, they shall be furnished by the permittee at its own expense. Through traffic shall be maintained without the aid of detours, if possible. In instances in which this would not be feasible, the city engineer will designate detours. The city shall maintain roadway services at existing streets designated as detours without expense to the permittee, but in case there are no existing streets, the permittee shall construct all detours at its expense and in conformity with the construction specifications set by the city engineer. The permittee shall be responsible for any unnecessary damage caused to any streets, sidewalks and storm sewers caused by the operation of its equipment. 
(Code 1973, § 22-23; Ord. No. 2682, § 1, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 24-23. - Manner of making excavations. 
(a)  In the making of excavations in any street, highway or public place, the excavated materials from the trenches shall be placed where they will cause the least possible inconvenience to the public. 
(b)  The width of excavation shall be no greater than is necessary for doing the work, and sheathing and bracing shall be used as necessary to keep the sides of the trench vertical and to prevent caving. 
(c)  Adequate provision for proper drainage of the areas surrounding the work shall be maintained at all times. 
(Code 1973, § 22-24) 
Sec. 24-24. - Manner of backfilling pavement. 
(a)  Excavations made in or under a street, walk or driveway pavement are to be backfilled with granular material thoroughly tamped into place and the pavement surface restored to its original condition. In such locations excavated materials are to be removed from the site of the work as the excavation is made and no such material allowed to accumulate on the site. 
(b)  Substitution may be made for granular backfill only with specific approval in writing of the city engineer in each instance. 
(c)  Approved granular backfill material shall be composed of a mixture of crushed stone or gravel and sand, free from clay lumps and trash and conforming to the following sieve analysis: 
(1) Passing 1? screen ..... 100% (2) Passing 3/4? screen ..... 35 to 65% (3) Passing #50 screen ..... Not more 
than 20% (4) Total clay and silt ..... Not more 
than 10%  
Other materials may be used only when they have the approval of the city engineer. 
(d)  Granular backfill is to be placed in horizontal layers not greater than six inches thick before compaction and shall be thoroughly compacted by mechanically operated tamping. During placement and compaction care must be taken to avoid undue segregation of coarse and fine particles. 
(e)  Each applicant for a permit shall notify the city engineer of the time and place of the backfilling of an excavation and will only make the backfill in the presence of and under the supervision of an inspector of the city. 
(f)  Every person making an excavation in or adjoining any public street, alley, public place, highway, walkway, right-of-way or easement shall restore the surface to its former condition to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
(Code 1973, § 22-25) 
Sec. 24-25. - Manner of backfilling parkways. 
    Excavations in parkways, outside of the paved area of streets or walks, may be backfilled with earth and all grassed areas returned to their original condition. Earth backfill is to be placed and compacted in the same manner as described for granular fills or thoroughly jetted to obtain maximum settlement and shall be maintained by the person making the excavation until the area has been stabilized in the original condition. As soon as the excavation has been backfilled all excess excavated materials shall be removed from the area and disposed of. 
(Code 1973, § 22-26) 
Sec. 24-26. - City to restore streets upon excavator's failure to do so; costs. 
    Should any person making an excavation fail to restore any street, alley, public place, highway, walkway, right-of-way or easement, to standards established by the city, the city may make such restoration as deemed necessary and charge the person making the excavation one and one-half times the direct labor and materials costs of making the restoration. 
(Code 1973, § 22-27; Ord. No. 2210, § 1, 9-23-91) 
Secs. 24-27-24-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 24-46. - Required. 
    No person shall make or cause to be made any excavation in any public place, street, highway, walkway, alley, right-of-way or easement without first obtaining a permit from the city engineer. Such permit will only be granted when in the opinion of such officer the excavation requested is necessary and upon the conditions set forth in this article and such other conditions, as in the opinion of the city engineer are necessary, which shall be set forth in writing by the city engineer when the permit is issued. Each separate and distinct excavation shall require a separate permit. 
(Code 1973, § 22-15) 
Sec. 24-47. - Applicability of article to utility companies. 
    Any person owning or operating in the city facilities that are subject to the provisions of sections 24-75 et seq., shall comply therewith in lieu of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 22-16; Ord. No. 16-21, § 2, 7-25-16) 
Sec. 24-48. - Application. 
    An application for an excavation permit shall be made in writing to the city engineer and shall contain a written description of the work contemplated. 
(Code 1973, § 22-17) 
Sec. 24-49. - Application fee. 
    Each application for an excavation permit required by this article shall be accompanied by a fee of $100.00 to cover the cost of the permit and the inspection of the proposed excavation by the city. Inspections required for excavations are set out by way of example and not by limitation in sections 24-21 through 24-25. In the event the holder of the permit or their agent contacts the city prior to completion of the work so as to enable the city to conduct the necessary inspections, one-half of the permit fee shall be returned to the holder of the permit. Compliance with this provision shall be evidenced by the issuance of an excavation permit refund by the city. In the event the city is not notified prior to work completion, the permit holder shall be required to reopen the excavation at their cost to enable verification by the city of the work done, and no rebate of the permit fee shall be made. 
(Code 1973, § 22-18; Ord. No. 02-60, § 1, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 04-53, § 1, 12-13-04; Ord. No. 07-12, § 1, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 24-50. - Cash bond or performance and payment bond required. 
(a)  Generally. Before any permit required by this article may be issued for work which disturbs pavement, sidewalks, curbs and/or cutters an applicant shall deposit a cash bond with the city of at least an amount equal to the cost to the city for such work as determined by the city engineer, which deposit shall remain with the city for a period or 12 months after the surface of the street, alley, public place, highway, walkway, right-of-way or easement has been restored to its former condition to the satisfaction of and verified in writing by the city engineer. In lieu of such cash deposit, any applicant may file with the city administrator a performance and payment bond, with sureties satisfactory to the city administrator, in a similar amount and for a similar time period, and holding harmless the city against all claims by others because of injuries or damages sustained as a result of any excavation made by the applicant. Any excavation not restored to the conditions required herein or in the permit being issued will be grounds for the city engineer, upon 30 days written notice addressed to the applicant at the address indicated in the application, to forfeit the bond if the excavation is not restored to the conditions contained herein and in the permit with such 30-day period. 
(b)  Replacement/new residential driveways and sprinkler systems. Subsection (a) above not withstanding, where a property owner and his agent applies for a permit required by this article in which the excavation does not disturb the street pavement, sidewalk, curb and/or cutter, then the cash escrow amount required shall be waived. 
(Code 1973, § 22-19; Ord. No. 02-60, § 2, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 03-23, § 2, 4-28-03; Ord. No. 03-33, § 2, 6-23-03) 
Sec. 24-51. - Insurance. 
    Each applicant for a permit required by this article shall, in addition to the bond requirements, furnish proof of liability insurance in the minimum amount of $300,000.00 per occurrence against all claims for damages arising from the prosecution of the work for which a permit is sought. 
(Code 1973, § 22-20) 
Sec. 24-52. - Applicant to indemnify city from suits or claims. 
    Each applicant for a permit required by this article, on condition of receiving the permit, shall indemnify and save harmless the city, its officers and employees from any suits, actions or claims of any character brought because of any injuries or damages received or sustained by any persons or property on account of the work or on account of or in consequence of any neglect in safeguarding the work. 
(Code 1973, § 22-22) 
Sec. 24-53. - Refunds not to be given nor additional permits to be issued until outstanding balances paid. 
    No cash deposit will be refunded nor any other excavation permit issued to any person, unless payment of all outstanding balances due the city for resurfacing and backfilling done by the city for such person have been paid. 
(Code 1973, § 22-28) 
Sec. 24-54. - Removal and protection of utilities. 
    The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the city engineer and the utility company or the person owning the utility. If it becomes necessary to remove an existing utility, this shall be done by its owner. No utility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work be borne by the permittee. The cost of moving privately owned utilities shall be similarly borne by the permittee unless it makes other arrangements with the person owning the utility. The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or otherwise, all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by excavation work and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them, under, over, along or across said work. In case any of said pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus shall be damaged, they shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee and his or its bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage done any water pipes, sewer, gas pipe, electric conduit or other utility and its bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage. 
(Ord. No. 2682, § 2, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 24-55. - Protection of adjoining property. 
    The permittee shall at all times and at his or its expense preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where in the protection of such property it is necessary to enter upon private property for the purposes of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall obtain a license from the owner for such purpose. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through any lawn area, the sod shall be replaced after the excavation has been backfilled. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as nearly as possible to that which existed before such work began. The permittee shall not remove even temporarily any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas or easements across private property without first having notified and obtained the consent of the property owner, or in the case of public property, the appropriate city department or city official having control of such property. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to any excavation work under the supervision of city authorities by employees of the city or by any contractor of the city performing work for and in behalf of the city necessitating openings or excavations in streets. 
(Ord. No. 2682, § 2, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 24-56. - Liability of the city. 
    The ordinance from which sections 24-54 through 24-56 derive shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or any official or employee any liability or responsibility for damage to any person injured by the performance of any work for which a permit is issued hereunder, nor shall the city or any official or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit or the approval of any excavation work. 
(Ord. No. 2682, § 2, 5-11-98) 
Sec. 24-57. - Landscape sprinkler and irrigation systems. 
(a)  No person shall construct or install a landscape sprinkler or other irrigation system in the public right-of-way without having obtained an excavation permit. 
(b)  An excavation permit for a landscape sprinkler or irrigation system being completely or partially within a public right-of-way shall only be issued if the request, therefore, is accompanied by plans, drawing or specifications for said landscape sprinkler or irrigation system which comply with the following: 
(1)  No sprinkler head, similar discharge fixture, or piping may be located within 24 inches of any roadway, driveway, sidewalk, other pavement, utility junction box, transformer, street light or other permanent structure. 
(2)  All landscape sprinkler and irrigation system pipe installations within a roadway right-of-way, except vertical connections to sprinkler heads or other discharge fixtures, must be buried a minimum of 18 inches below grade. 
(c)  The owner of property which is served by a landscape sprinkler or irrigation system installed within a roadway right-of-way is responsible for the relocation and/or removal of such system if it is obstructing public works or utility companies working within the public right-of-way. 
(d)  The owner of property which is served by a landscape sprinkler or irrigation system installed within a right-of-way is responsible for any damage caused by the installation, use of or the result of the presence of that system. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 2, 1-27-03) 
Secs. 24-58-24-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-21, § 1, adopted July 25, 2016, repealed Art. III, §§ 24-71-24-74, which pertained to fiber optic installations and derived from Ord. No. 2481, § 1, adopted Nov. 13, 1995. 

Secs. 24-71-24-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RIGHTS-OF-WAY USAGE CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Note- See editor's note for Ch. 7.5, Art. IV. 

Sec. 24-75. - Title, definitions and word usage. 
(a)  Title. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Rights-of-way usage code". 
(b)  Definitions and word usage-General. For the purposes of this Code, the following terms, phrases, words and abbreviations shall have the meanings given herein, unless otherwise expressly stated. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense and vice versa, words in the plural number include the singular number and vice versa and the masculine gender includes the feminine gender and vice versa. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. For convenience, the first letter of terms, phrases, words and abbreviations defined in this Code have been capitalized, but an inadvertent failure to capitalize such letter shall not affect meaning. 
(c)  Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have these prescribed meanings: 
    Antenna. Facilities consisting of any device, array or antenna of any kind, including, but not limited to, a whip antenna, panel antenna or satellite antenna, that transmits or receives electromagnetic signals to deliver microwave, cellular, broadcast or other non-wire voice, data or video communications service through the airwaves above the rights-of-way and which attach to either pre-existing or subsequently approved facilities. 
    Antenna fee. A compensation fee approved by the board of aldermen established in section 7.5-39 as amended from time to time for the rent of a portion of the rights-of-way by a person having facilities within the rights-of-way. The antenna fee shall be calculated on the number of antennas located within the ROW and shall not include any linear foot fee, but a ROW user may be subject to both an antenna fee and a linear foot fee. 
    Applicant. The person applying for and receiving a ROW permit for ROW work. 
    Application. That form which an applicant must use to obtain a ROW permit to conduct ROW work. 
    City. The City of Ballwin, Missouri, and its agencies, departments, agents and employees acting within their respective areas of authority. 
    City administrator. The city administrator of the City of Ballwin, Missouri. 
    Board of aldermen or council. The governing body of the city. 
    City facilities. Any facilities, street light poles, lighting fixtures or other structures or equipment located within the rights-of-way and owned by the city. 
    Director. The city's public works director or such other person designated by the city administrator to administer and enforce this Code. 
    Emergency rights-of-way (or ROW) work. Includes, but is not limited to, ROW work made necessary by exigent circumstances to repair, control, stabilize, rectify or correct the following: 
(1)  An unexpected or unplanned outage, cut, rupture, leak or any other failure of facilities that prevents or significantly jeopardizes the ability of a ROW user to provide service to customers; 
(2)  An unexpected or unplanned outage, cut, rupture, leak or any other failure of facilities that results or could result in danger to the public or a material delay or hindrance to the provision of service to the public if the outage, cut, rupture, leak or other such failure is not immediately repaired, controlled, stabilized, rectified or corrected; or 
(3)  Any occurrence involving facilities that a reasonable person would conclude under the circumstances that immediate action was necessary and warranted. 
    Facilities. A network or system or any part thereof used for providing or delivering a service and consisting of one or more lines, pipes, irrigation systems, wires, cables, fibers, conduit facilities, poles, vaults, pedestals, boxes, appliances, antennas, transmitters, towers, gates, meters, appurtenances or other equipment. 
    Governmental entity. Any county, township, city, town, village, school district, library district, road district, drainage or levee district, sewer district, water district, fire district or other municipal corporation, quasi-municipal corporation or political subdivision of the State of Missouri or any other state, any agency or instrumentality of the State of Missouri or any other state or the United States and any cooperative district allowed by law acting in a governmental rather than a proprietary capacity. 
    Linear foot fee. A compensation fee approved by the Board of Aldermen and established in section 7.5-39 as amended from time to time for the rent of a portion of the rights-of-way by a person having facilities within the rights-of-way. The linear foot fee shall be calculated on the length, in linear feet, of the rights-of-way in or on which facilities are located and shall not include any antenna fee, but a ROW user may be subject to both a linear foot fee and an antenna fee. 
    Person. An individual, partnership, limited liability corporation or partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, organization, corporation or other entity or any lawful successor thereto or transferee thereof. 
    Person(s) having facilities within the rights-of-way. Any person having ownership or control of facilities located within the rights-of-way. 
    Rights-of-way or ROW. Unless otherwise restricted herein, the surface, the air space above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, parkway, waterway, public easement or sidewalk in which the city now or hereafter holds any property interest which, consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purpose of installing and maintaining facilities. Rights-of-way shall not include: 
(1)  The city's proprietary property, such as city-owned or -operated buildings, parks, street lights or other similar property; 
(2)  Airwaves used for cellular, non-wire telecommunications or broadcast services; 
(3)  Easements obtained by ROW users; 
(4)  Railroad rights-of-way or ground used or acquired for railroads; or 
(5)  Facilities owned and used by the city for the transmission of one or more services. 
    No reference herein to rights-of-way shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the city that its interest or other right to control the use of such property is sufficient to permit its use for the purpose of providing service. 
    Rights-of-way (or ROW) permit. A permit granted by the city to a ROW user for ROW work. 
    Rights-of-way (or ROW) user. A person having facilities within the ROW. A ROW user shall not include ordinary vehicular or pedestrian use. 
    Rights-of-way (or ROW) work. Action by a ROW user to (i) install, change, replace, relocate, remove, maintain or repair facilities within the rights-of-way, or (ii) to conduct work of any kind within or adjacent to the rights-of-way that results in an excavation, obstruction, disruption, damage or physical invasion or impact of any kind to the rights-of-way or the use thereof. The routine inspection of facilities shall not be considered ROW work unless the inspection requires the conduct of any of the activities or actions noted herein. 
    Service. Providing or delivering an economic good or an article of commerce, including, but not limited to, gas, telephone, cable television, internet, open video systems, video services, alarm systems, steam, electricity, water, telegraph, data transmission, petroleum pipelines, sanitary or stormwater sewerage or any similar or related service, to one or more persons located within or outside of the city by use of facilities located within the rights-of-way. 
    Wireless transmission provider. A person having facilities within the rights-of-way, which such facilities consist primarily of antennas, transmitters, towers or other appliances or equipment used to deliver a cellular, broadcast, data transmission or other non-wire communications service through the airwaves above the rights-of-way and which attach to either pre-existing or subsequently approved facilities. 
    Within. In, along, under, over or across rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 16-21, § 3, 7-25-16) 
Sec. 24-76. - Registration of person(s) having facilities within the right-of-way. 
(a)  Registration required. 
(1)  Any person desiring to become a person having facilities within the ROW and any person having facilities within the ROW must register with the city. 
(2)  Any person having or applying for a cable franchise from the city a video service provider authorization from the Missouri Public Service Commission must register hereunder. To the extent that any term of such person's cable franchise or video service authority conflicts with the rights-of-way usage code, the terms of the cable franchise or video service authority shall prevail. To the extent that the cable services code conflicts with the rights-of-way usage code, the more stringent shall prevail. 
(3)  Any person that provides or intends to provide video programming by means of an open video system pursuant to certification approved by the Federal Communications Commission must register hereunder but shall also remain subject to the applicable provisions of the cable services code. To the extent that the cable services code conflicts with the rights-of-way usage code, the more stringent shall prevail. 
(4)  As of the effective date of this Code, any person having facilities within the ROW pursuant to a duly-issued, lawful and applicable license or franchise shall register hereunder. Such person maintains all rights, privileges and obligations established by its license or franchise. To the extent that any terms of such person's license or franchise conflicts with the rights-of-way usage code, the terms of the license or franchise shall prevail. 
(b)  Effectiveness of registration. Registration hereunder by an eligible person shall remain effective for so long as that person remains eligible, unless terminated by the person or the city hereunder. Any registration of an ineligible person shall be void from the date of ineligibility. 
(c)  Registration characteristics. 
(1)  A valid registration hereunder authorizes the issuance of ROW permits to the registered person in accordance with this Code. It does not expressly or implicitly authorize ROW work without an ROW permit or work on private property without owner consent through eminent domain or otherwise (except for use of compatible easements pursuant to federal law) or to use publicly or privately owned facilities without a separate agreement with the owners. 
(2)  A valid registration hereunder shall not eliminate the need to obtain any franchise, license or permit for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city as may be generally required by the ordinances and laws of the city other than this Code or for attaching devices to poles or other structures, whether owned by the city or other person. 
(3)  A valid registration grants no exclusive or vested rights to occupancy within the rights-of-way other than those granted by this Code or the administration thereof. 
(4)  The right to obtain ROW permits shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the rights-of-way and the city reserves the right to designate where facilities are to be placed within the rights-of-way as provided herein to the extent allowed by law. 
(d)  Registered person subject to other laws. 
(1)  A person required to register shall at all times be subject to and shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and shall at all times be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power of the city including, but not limited to, all powers regarding planning, zoning, supervision of construction, assurance of equal employment opportunities, control of rights-of-way and consumer protection. 
(2)  Registration hereunder shall not deprive any person of any rights or obligations imposed by any previously existing franchise, license or contract, nor shall it impose any obligations on any such person in addition to those included in any previously existing franchise, license or contract, except to the extent allowed by law. 
(3)  Nothing in this Code shall be construed to prohibit the grant or renewal of any franchise by the city as may be allowed or required by state or federal law. 
(4)  Nothing in this Code shall be construed or deemed to supersede any applicable state or federal law or any applicable regulation issued by a state or federal agency including, but not limited to, the Missouri Public Service Commission and the Federal Communications Commission. In the event of any conflict between such laws or regulations and this Code, the applicable state or federal law or regulation shall apply. 
(e)  Failure to register. Any person who has not registered within 90 days of the effective date of this Code shall nonetheless be subject to all requirements of this Code including, but not limited to, its provisions regarding ROW permits, construction and technical standards and fees, except as otherwise provided herein. In its discretion and to the extent allowed by law, the city at any time may: 
(1)  Require such person to register within 30 days of receipt of a written notice to such person from the city that registration is required; 
(2)  Require such person to remove its facilities from the rights-of-way and restore the affected area to a condition satisfactory to the city within a specific time period; 
(3)  Direct municipal personnel to remove the facilities from the rights-of-way and restore the affected area to a condition satisfactory to the city and charge the person the costs thereof, including by placing a lien on the person's property as provided in connection with abating nuisances; or 
(4)  Take any other action it is entitled to take under applicable law. 
    Additionally, such person may also be subject to the imposition of penalties as provided herein. 
(f)  Registration exemption. Governmental entities having facilities within the ROW need not register hereunder, but such entities shall be subject to sections 24-78 and 24-79 of this Code and such other sections or provisions as may be appropriate to their presence in the ROW. 
(ord. No. 16-21, § 3, 7-25-16) 
Sec. 24-77. - Registration procedures. 
(a)  Requirements and processing. 
(1)  Registration shall be accomplished in the form of a letter to the city filed with the director. 
(2)  To be valid, the registration letter must be signed by an authorized representative of the registering person, contain all required information and be accompanied by a filing fee established in the city's pertinent schedule of fees. 
(3)  At any time the director determines a registration letter does not comply with this Code, the director may return it to a point of contact identified therein with a written explanation of the reason(s) for such return. Filing fees shall not be refunded. Failure to return a registration letter shall not validate an incomplete or otherwise invalid or void registration letter. 
(b)  Contents of registration letter. A registration letter shall contain or be accompanied by the information required herein. All such information received by the city shall be public, unless confidentiality is requested and permitted by the Missouri Open Meetings Law and other applicable state and federal law. The information required shall include: 
(1)  Name, address and legal status of the registering person; 
(2)  Name, title, address, telephone number, e-mail address and fax number of individual(s) authorized to serve as the point of contact between the City and the registering person so as to make contact possible at any time (i.e., 24 hours per day, seven days per week); 
(3)  Description of the general uses made or to be made of the facilities located within the rights-of-way by the registering person, e.g., provision of service(s), transfer or lease of facilities (or portion thereof, including bandwidth) to another person, use of the facilities to transverse the city, construction of facilities to be used at a later date, etc.; 
(4)  Description of all services provided or to be provided by the registering person to any person located in the city through facilities located within the rights-of-way and an explanation of the registering person's legal qualifications to provide such services, including copies of supporting documentation such as relevant certificates or orders from the Federal Communications Commission, Missouri Secretary of State and/or Missouri Public Service Commission or pertinent rules or statutes; 
(5)  Name and address of any and all other persons providing service(s) to any person located in the city through the registering person's facilities located within the rights-of-way and a general description of such service(s); and 
(6)  Current certificates of insurance in accordance with this Code. 
(c)  Notice of change. Within 30 days of any changes in the information set forth in or accompanying its registration letter, a registered person shall notify the city of any such change. Such notices shall be submitted and processed in the same manner as an initial registration, except the filing fee shall not be required. 
(d)  Registration index. The director shall maintain an index of all registered persons and their point(s) of contact. 
(e)  Termination of registration. 
(1)  The city shall have the right to terminate a registration for a substantial and ongoing failure to comply with this Code or other applicable law or for defrauding or attempting to defraud the city. To invoke the provisions of this section, the director shall give the person written notice of such intent. If within 30 calendar days following such written notice from the city, the person has not completed corrective action or corrective action is not being actively and expeditiously pursued to the satisfaction of the director, the director may commence a proceeding to consider terminating the person's registration, giving written notice of the reasons therefor. 
(2)  Prior to terminating a registration, the director shall hold a hearing, after giving at least ten calendar days' notice to the person, at which time the person shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Following the hearing, the director may determine whether to terminate the registration based on the information presented at the hearing and other information of record. If the director determines to terminate a registration, the decision shall be in writing setting forth the reasons therefor. The director may make such decision conditional on a person's failure to resolve outstanding problems or take appropriate steps to resolve such problems within a specific period of time. A copy of such decision shall be provided to the person. 
(3)  Once a registration has been terminated by the director, the person may not register again except upon express written approval by the city administrator, which approval shall be withheld absent clear and convincing evidence that the person has remedied all previous violations and is in full compliance with all laws and will not in the future violate this Code or defraud the city. 
(4)  Registration of a public utility that has been legally granted access to the right-of-way shall not be terminated. 
(Ord. No. 16-21, § 3, 7-25-16) 
Sec. 24-78. - Rights-of-way (ROW) permits. 
(a)  ROW permit requirements. 
(1)  Any person desiring to perform ROW work must first apply for and obtain a ROW permit, in addition to any other building permit, license, easement, franchise or authorization required by law. In the event of a need for emergency ROW work, the person conducting the work shall as soon as practicable notify the city of the location of the work and shall apply for the required ROW permit as soon as practicable following the commencement of the work, not to exceed the third business day thereafter. The director may design and issue general permits for emergency ROW work for several different locations or throughout the city. 
(2)  No person having facilities within the ROW who has failed to register with the city shall be granted a ROW permit, except as otherwise provided or allowed by ordinance, franchise, license or written contract with the city. 
(3)  All applications for ROW permits shall be submitted to the director. The director may design and make available standard forms for such applications, requiring such information as allowed by law and as the director determines in his or her discretion to be necessary and consistent with the provisions of this Code and to accomplish the purposes of this Code. Each application shall at minimum contain the following information for the proposed ROW work, unless otherwise waived by the director: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of a representative whom the city may notify or contact at any time (i.e., 24 hours per day, seven days per week) concerning the work; 
b.  If different from the applicant, the name of the person on whose behalf the proposed work is to be performed; 
c.  A description of the proposed work including a conceptual master plan and, when applicable, an engineering site plan or other technical drawing showing the nature, dimensions and location of the applicant's proposed work or facilities, their proximity to other facilities that may be affected by the proposed work and the number of street crossings and their locations and dimensions; 
d.  Projected commencement and termination dates and anticipated duration of the work or, if such dates are unknown, a representation that the applicant shall provide the director with reasonable advance notice of such dates once they are determined; 
e.  If the applicant is, or is acting on behalf of, a person having facilities within the ROW or a person desiring to become a person having facilities within the ROW, verification that the applicant or such person has registered with the city and that the information included in that registration is accurate as of the date of the application; and 
f.  Copies of any required certificates of insurance or performance and maintenance bonds. 
(4)  The information required by the application may be submitted in the form maintained by the applicant, provided it is responsive to these requirements and the applicant shall be allowed a reasonable amount of time to complete the application based on the amount of data or information requested or required. 
(5)  Each such application shall be accompanied by the following payments: 
a.  An application fee, as approved by the board of aldermen and established in the city's pertinent schedule of fees, to cover the cost of processing the application; 
b.  Any other amounts otherwise due to the city from the applicant including, but not limited to, prior delinquent permit fees and costs, delinquent rental fees and any loss, damage or expense suffered by the city because of the applicant's prior excavations of the rights-of-way or for any emergency actions taken by the city, but the director may modify this requirement to the extent the director determines any such fees to be in good-faith dispute. 
(b)  ROW permit application review and determination. 
(1)  The director shall promptly review each completed application for a ROW permit and shall grant or deny all such applications as provided herein within 31 days of receipt of a completed application. If the director fails to act on an application for a ROW permit within 31 days, the application shall be deemed approved. Unless the application is denied pursuant to subsection (b)(7) hereof, the director shall issue a ROW permit upon determining that the applicant: 
a.  Has submitted all necessary information; 
b.  Has paid the appropriate fees; and 
c.  Is in full compliance with this Code and all other city ordinances. 
In order to avoid excessive processing and accounting costs to either the city or the applicant, the director shall have authority to establish procedures for bulk processing of applications and periodic payment of fees. 
(2)  It is the intention of the city that interference with, damage to, excavation or disruption of or the placement of facilities within the city's rights-of-way should be minimized and limited in scope to the extent allowed by law to achieve the purposes of this Code. When reasonable and necessary to accomplish such purposes, the director may require as alternatives to the proposed ROW work either less-disruptive methods or different locations for facilities, provided that any required alternative: 
a.  Shall not increase expenses by more than ten percent of the applicant's costs for the work as proposed; 
b.  Shall not result in a decline of service quality; and 
c.  Shall be competitively neutral and non-discriminatory. 
The director shall justify to the applicant that the required alternative is reasonable and necessary. 
(3)  Upon receipt of an application, the director shall determine whether any portion of the rights-of-way will be affected by the proposed work and whether the interference disruption or placement of facilities will be more than minor in nature. In determining whether the proposed work is more than minor in nature, the director shall consider the nature and scope of the work, its location and duration and its effect on the rights-of-way, the use thereof and neighboring properties. 
a.  If the applicant can show to the director's reasonable satisfaction that the work involves no interference, disruption, excavation or damage to or only minor interference with the rights-of-way or that the work does not involve the placement of facilities or involves time-sensitive maintenance, then the director shall promptly grant the ROW permit. 
b.  If the director determines that the effect on the rights-of-way will be more than minor in nature and no exemption under the above subsection (b)(3)(a) or any other provision of this Code applies, the director shall schedule and coordinate the work and grant the ROW permit accordingly. When reasonable and necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Code, the director may postpone issuance of a ROW permit and may give public notice of the application in an attempt to identify whether other person(s) intend to do work in the same area within a reasonable period of time, so that all ROW work in the area can be coordinated. Due regard shall be accorded applicants that are required by any law, rule, regulation, license or franchise to provide service to the area defined in the application. The director shall not impose any coordination or scheduling requirements that prevent or unreasonably delay an applicant's access to the ROW or that create a barrier to entry. 
c.  Applicants shall participate in any joint planning, construction and advance notification of such work, including coordination and consolidation of any excavation of or disturbance to the rights-of-way as directed by the director. When deemed necessary to accomplish the goals of this section and to the extent permitted by law, the city reserves the right, when feasible and reasonable, to require the sharing if facilities by ROW users. Applicants shall cooperate with each other and ROW users and the city for the best, most efficient, least intrusive, most aesthetic and least obtrusive use of the rights-of-way. 
d.  The director shall establish procedures allowing applicants to ascertain whether existing capacity may be available from other persons utilizing the rights-of-way along the intended path of any proposed work. The director shall also maintain indexes of all ROW permits issued, both by the ROW user and by the affected rights-of-way. 
(4)  In addition to the foregoing and in addition to any other standards or requirements imposed by this Code with regard to an application filed by a wireless transmission provider, the director shall ensure compliance with the following provisions: 
a.  The design, location and nature of all facilities shall be subject to the review and approval of the director as provided herein. Such review shall be non-discriminatory and competitively neutral and approvals shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
b.  The director may designate certain locations or facilities in the ROW to be excluded from use by the applicant for its facilities including, but not limited to: 
1.  Ornamental or similar specially designed street lights, 
2.  Facilities, equipment, 
structures or locations that do not have electrical service adequate or appropriate for the proposed facilities or cannot safely bear the weight or wind loading thereof, 
3.  Facilities, equipment, 
structures or locations that in the reasonable judgment of the director are incompatible with the proposed facilities or would be rendered unsafe or unstable by the installation, and 
4.  Facilities, equipment, structure or location that have been designated or planned for other use or are not otherwise available for use by the applicant due to engineering, technological, proprietary, legal or other limitations or restrictions. 
c.  If the application of this subsection excludes locations for facilities to the extent that the exclusion conflicts with the reasonable requirements of the applicant, the director shall cooperate in good faith with the application to attempt to find suitable alternatives, but such alternatives may exceed the cost increase limitation established by subsection (b)(2) and the city shall not be required to incur any financial cost or to acquire new locations for the application. 
d.  The grant of a ROW permit shall not eliminate the need of a wireless transmission provider to have obtained a license, permit or other agreement for attaching facilities to other facilities, poles or other structures, whether owned by the city or other person. 
e.  Nothing in this Code shall be construed to require that the city grant wireless transmission providers access to any city facilities or the city's proprietary property, but the city may enter into separate agreements with wireless transmission providers to allow such access. Such agreements may include the payment of reasonable attachment fees for use of city facilities or other city property. All such agreements shall be non-discriminatory and competitively neutral among wireless transmission providers. 
(5)  Each ROW permit shall include: 
a.  Projected commencement and termination dates or, if such dates are unknown at the time the ROW permit is issued, a provision requiring the ROW user to provide the director with reasonable advance notice of such dates once they are determined; 
b.  Length of affected rights-of-way, number of road crossings and identification and description of any pavement or curb cuts included in the work; 
c.  Information regarding scheduling and coordination of work, if necessary; 
d.  The location of any of the applicant's facilities, both those proposed and existing, and the location of any known facilities owned by another person that may be affected by the proposed work; 
e.  An acknowledgment and representation by the applicant to comply with the terms and conditions of the ROW permit and this Code; and 
f.  Such conditions and requirements as are deemed reasonably necessary by the director: 
1.  To protect structures and other facilities in the rights-of-way from damage; 
2.  For the proper restoration of such rights-of-way, structures and facilities; 
3.  For the protection of the public and the continuity of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and 
4.  For the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(6)  An applicant receiving a ROW permit shall promptly notify the director of any material changes in the information submitted in the application. The director may issue a revised ROW permit or require that the ROW user reapply for a ROW permit in accordance with all requirements of this Code. 
(7)  ROW permits inure to the benefit of the applicant and the rights granted there-under may not be assigned or transferred to any other person without the written consent of the director. 
(8)  The director may deny an application, if denial is deemed to be in the public interest, for the following reasons: 
a.  Delinquent fees, costs or expenses owed by the applicant; 
b.  Failure to provide information required by the application or this Code; 
c.  The applicant being in violation of the provisions of this Code or other pertinent and applicable city ordinances; 
d.  Failure to return the ROW to its previous condition under previously issued ROW permits or after prior excavations by the applicant; 
e.  The area is environmentally sensitive as defined by state statute or federal law or is a historic district as defined by local ordinance; 
f.  For an applicant's refusal to comply with alternative ROW work methods or locations required by the director pursuant to this Code; and 
g.  For any other reason to protect the public health, safety and welfare, provided that: 
1.  Such denial does not fall within the exclusive authority of the Missouri Public Service Commission, 
2.  Such denial does not interfere with a ROW user's right of eminent domain of private property, and 
3.  Such denial is imposed on a competitively neutral and non-discriminatory basis. 
(9)  For the purposes of subsection (b)(7), the term "applicant" shall also include, when applicable, the person on whose behalf the applicant is to perform the ROW work. The director may consider good-faith disputes with, or circumstances beyond the control of, the applicant or such person in determining whether to grant or deny the application. 
(c)  ROW permit revocation and code violation prosecution. 
(1)  The director may revoke a ROW permit without fee refund after notice and an opportunity to cure, but only in the event of a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of the ROW permit. Prior to revocation the director shall provide written notice to the ROW user identifying any substantial breach and allowing a reasonable period of time not longer than 30 days to cure the problem, which cure period may be immediate if certain activities must be stopped to protect the public safety. The cure period shall be extended by the director on good cause shown by the ROW user. A substantial breach includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
a.  A material violation of a provision of the ROW permit; 
b.  An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the ROW permit or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its residents; 
c.  A material misrepresentation of fact in the ROW permit application; 
d.  A failure to complete ROW work by the date specified in the ROW permit, unless an extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete the work is due to reasons beyond the ROW user's control; and 
e.  A failure to correct, upon reasonable notice and opportunity to cure as specified by the director, work that does not conform to applicable national safety codes, industry construction standards or the city's pertinent and applicable ordinances, including, but not limited to, this Code, provided that city standards are no more stringent than those of a national safety code. 
(2)  Any breach of the terms and conditions of a ROW permit shall also be deemed a violation of this Code and in lieu of revocation the director may initiate prosecution of the ROW user for such violation as provided in section 24-82(h) hereof. 
(Ord. No. 16-21, § 3, 7-25-16) 
Sec. 24-79. - Work in the rights-of-way. 
(a)  Jurisdiction, inspection and stop work orders. 
(1)  All facilities and ROW work shall be subject to inspection by the city and the supervision of all federal, state and local authorities having jurisdiction in such matters to ensure compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, departmental rules and regulations. 
(2)  The director shall have full access to all portions of the ROW work and may issue stop work orders and corrective orders to prevent unauthorized work, including work not meeting the standards established in subsection (f). Such orders: 
a.  May be delivered personally or by certified mail to the address listed on the application for the ROW permit, the person in charge of the construction site at the time of delivery or the registered person's point of contact; 
b.  Shall state that work not authorized by the ROW permit is being carried out, summarize the unauthorized work and provide a period of not longer than 30 days to cure the problem, which cure period may be immediate if certain activities must be stopped to protect the public safety; and 
c.  May be enforced by equitable action in the Circuit Court of St. Louis County, Missouri, and in such case the person involved in the work shall be liable for all costs and expenses incurred by the city in enforcing such orders, including reasonable attorney's fees in addition to any and all penalties established in this Code. 
(b)  Installation of facilities. 
(1)  In conjunction with the city's long-standing policy favoring underground construction, no person may erect, construct or install new poles or other facilities above the surface of the rights-of-way without the written permission of the city, unless the city's authority has been pre-empted. Such permission may be granted through a ROW permit when other similar facilities exist above ground or when physical conditions are such that underground construction is impossible, impractical or economically unfeasible, as determined by the city, and when in the city's judgment the above ground construction has minimal aesthetic impact on the area where the construction is proposed. 
(2)  During installation of facilities and to the extent authorized by law, existing underground conduits shall be used whenever feasible and permitted by the owner thereof. 
(3)  In the case of new construction or property development, the developer or property owner shall give to all persons registered hereunder reasonable written advance notice of the particular date on which open trenching will be available for installation of facilities. Costs of trenching and easements required to bring facilities within the development shall be borne by the developer or property owner; except that if the facilities are not installed within five working days of the date the trenches are available as designated in the notice given by the developer or property owner, then once the trenches are thereafter closed, the cost of new trenching shall be borne by the person installing the facilities. 
(c)  Relocation of equipment and facilities. 
(1)  In the event of an emergency or where construction equipment or facilities create or are contributing to an imminent danger to health, safety or property, the city may, to the extent allowed by law, remove, relay or relocate such construction equipment or the pertinent parts of such facilities without charge to the city for such action or for restoration or repair. The city shall attempt to notify the owner of the construction equipment or facilities prior to taking such action, but the inability to do so shall not prevent same. Thereafter, the city shall notify the owner of the construction equipment or facilities as soon as practicable. 
(2)  Should the grades or boundaries of the rights-of-way be changed at any time, a ROW user shall, if necessary, at its own cost and expense, relocate or change its facilities so as to conform to the new grades or boundaries. This requirement shall not apply when the ROW user holds a valid easement that existed prior to the date when the area in question became rights-of-way. The ROW user shall bear the burden of establishing to the city's satisfaction the fact of the pre-existing easement. 
(3)  At the city's direction, all facilities shall be moved underground and the cost shall be solely the obligation of the owners (or as otherwise allowed or required by law). 
(4)  Any ROW user shall, on the request of the city or any person authorized by the city, temporarily relocate facilities to permit the moving of buildings or oversized vehicles. 
(5)  Any ROW user shall, within a reasonable time specified by the city, protect, support, disconnect, relocate or remove, at its own expense, construction equipment or discrete portions of its facilities when required by the city by reason of traffic conditions; public safety; rights-of-way construction, maintenance or repair (including resurfacing or widening); change of rights-of-way grade; construction, installation or repair of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks or any type of government-owned communications system, public work or improvement or any government-owned utility; rights-of-way vacation; or for any other purpose where the convenience of the city would be reasonably served thereby. 
(6)  If any action under subsections (c)(4) or (5) is reasonably required of a ROW user to accommodate a person or another ROW user, the ROW user shall, after reasonable advance written notice, take action to effect the necessary actions requested and the actual cost, reasonably incurred, of such actions shall be paid by the person or ROW user upon whose behalf the action is requested. The ROW user taking such action shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. 
(7)  Rather than relocate facilities as requested or directed, a ROW user may abandon the facilities if approved by the city as provided in subsection (e) hereof. 
(8)  No action hereunder shall be deemed a taking of property and no person shall be entitled to any compensation therefor. No location of any facilities within the rights-of-way shall be a vested interest. 
(d)  Property repair and alterations. 
(1)  During any ROW work, the person doing the work shall protect from damage any and all existing structures and property belonging to the city and any other person. Any and all rights-of-way, public property or private property disturbed or damaged during the work shall be repaired or replaced by the person doing the work or the person on whose behalf the work is being done and such person shall immediately notify the owner of the fact of the damaged property. Such repair or replacement shall be completed within a reasonable time specified by the director and to the director's satisfaction. 
(2)  Any alteration to the existing water mains, sewerage or drainage system or to any city, state or other public structures or facilities in the rights-of-way required on account of the construction, installation, repair or maintenance of facilities within the rights-of-way shall be made at the sole cost and expense of the owner of such facilities. 
(e)  Removal, abandonment and transfer of facilities. 
(1)  If a registration is terminated, the city may require that the person having facilities within the ROW remove its facilities from the rights-of-way at the person's expense. In removing its facilities the person shall obtain a ROW permit and restore any excavation that shall be made by it as required by this Code. The liability, indemnity, insurance and bonding requirements as provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during and after the period of removal and restoration and until full compliance by the person with the terms and conditions of this paragraph and the requirements of this Code. 
(2)  If the person having facilities within the ROW fails to remove the facilities and restore the ROW within a reasonable period of time, the city may, to the extent permitted by law, have the removal done at the person's expense. 
a.  Alternatively, the city may permit the abandonment, without removal, of any facilities if the director determines that abandonment will not result in interference with the use or maintenance of the rights-of-way or if ownership of the facilities is transferred as provided herein. 
b.  The city may decide that the ownership of the facilities shall revert to the city or to such person as directed by the city. In either case the owner of the facilities, if required by the city and permitted by law, shall submit a written instrument, satisfactory in form to city, transferring to the city, or to such person as directed by the city, ownership of the facilities. The city may sell, assign or transfer all or part of the facilities reverting to the city. 
(3)  If a person having facilities within the ROW: 
a.  Has installed the facilities without complying with the requirements of this Code, or 
b.  Abandons such facilities under applicable law, the city may deem the facilities abandoned. If such abandonment occurs, the city may require the removal of the facilities, remove the facilities at the expense of the person having facilities within the ROW, allow the abandonment of the facilities without removal or require the transfer of the facilities, all as provided in this subsection. 
(4)  The city shall not remove any facilities unless the existence of such facilities prevents or significantly impairs the use, repair, excavation or construction of the ROW. The city shall not remove or seek to possess or transfer the facilities until 30 days have passed following written notice to the person having facilities within the ROW of the city's intent to so act. The city may choose not to act on good cause shown by the person having facilities within the ROW. 
(f)  Standards for ROW work. 
(1)  Except for emergency ROW work as provided in section 24-78, ROW work shall be performed only upon issuance and in accordance with the requirements of a ROW permit. At all times during the work, ROW permits shall be conspicuously displayed at the work site and shall be available for inspection by the director. 
(2)  If at any time it appears that the duration or scope of the ROW work shall differ from that allowed by the ROW permit, the ROW user shall inform the director. The director may issue a waiver, an extension or a revised ROW permit or require that the ROW user reapply for an ROW permit in accordance with all requirements of this Code. 
(3)  ROW users shall not open or encumber more of the rights-of-way than is reasonably necessary to complete the ROW work in the most expeditious manner or allow excavations to remain open longer than is necessary to complete the work. 
(4)  All ROW work that affects vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be properly signed, barricaded and otherwise protected at the ROW user's expense. The ROW user shall be responsible for providing adequate traffic control to the area surrounding the work as determined by the director. 
(5)  The ROW user shall perform the ROW work at such times that will allow the least interference with the normal flow of traffic and the peace and quiet of the neighborhood as permitted by the director. Unless otherwise provided by the director in the permit, non-emergency ROW work on arterial and collector streets may not be accomplished during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. in order to minimize disruption of traffic flow. 
(6)  The ROW user shall notify the city no less than three working days in advance of any ROW work that would require any street closure or would reduce traffic flow to less than two lanes of moving traffic for more than four hours. Except in the event of emergency ROW work, no such closure shall take place without notice and prior authorization from the city. 
(7)  All ROW work shall be in accordance with all applicable Sections of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, the National Electrical Safety Code and other federal, state or local laws and regulations that may apply including, without limitation, local health, safety, construction and zoning codes and laws and accepted industry practices, all as hereafter may be amended or adopted. In the event of a conflict among codes and standards, the most stringent code or standard shall apply (except insofar as that code or standard, if followed, would result in facilities that could not meet requirements of federal, state or local law). 
(8)  All facilities shall be installed and located to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners, other ROW users and the city. Facilities shall not be placed where they will disrupt or interfere with other facilities or public improvements or obstruct or hinder in any manner the various utilities serving the residents and businesses in the city or public improvements. 
(9)  All facilities shall be of good and durable quality. 
(10)  All ROW work shall be conducted in accordance with good engineering practices, performed by experienced and properly trained personnel so as not to endanger any person or property or to unreasonably interfere in any manner with the rights-of-ways or legal rights of any property owner, including the city, or unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(11)  All safety practices required by law shall be used during ROW work, including commonly accepted methods and devices to prevent failures and accidents that are likely to cause damage, injury or nuisance to the public. 
(12)  Any contractor or subcontractor of a ROW user must be properly licensed under laws of the state and all applicable local ordinances and each contractor or subcontractor shall have the same obligations with respect to its work as a ROW user would have pursuant to this Code. A ROW user: 
a.  Must ensure that contractors, subcontractors and all employees performing ROW work are trained and experienced; 
b.  Shall be responsible for ensuring that all work is performed consistent with the ROW permit and applicable law; 
c.  Shall be fully responsible for all acts or omissions of contractors or subcontractors; 
d.  Shall be responsible for promptly correcting acts or omissions by any contractor or subcontractor; and 
e.  Shall implement a quality control program to ensure that the work is properly performed. 
(13)  It shall be the duty of any person making an excavation in the ROW to properly backfill such excavations and properly restore the surface to its proper condition as determined by the director of public works. In the event the excavations are made in the improved portion of the ROW, 12 inches of granular backfill will be placed over an exposed utility and controlled low strength material (CLSM) will fill the hole within eight inches of the finished surface for concrete pavements. There will be a plastic membrane placed between the rock base and the CLSM to prevent the material from bleeding into the rock base. The remaining eight inches will be restored by placing a 28 day minimum strength, 4,500 psi concrete mix. 
In the event the excavations in the ROW are made in the improved portion of an asphalt or combination street, 12 inches of granular backfill will be placed over an exposed utility and controlled low strength material (CLSM) will fill the hole within nine inches of the finished surface. There will be a plastic membrane placed between the rock base and the CLSM to prevent the material from bleeding into the rock base. The remaining nine inches will be restored by placing a six inch thick, 28 day minimum strength, 4,500 psi concrete mix under a three inch asphalt concrete lift of Type C mix to meet existing grades. 
Construction of asphalt driveway entrances in residential ROW will be constructed of six inches of compacted rock base and three inches of Type C asphalt concrete mix. Construction of asphalt driveway entrances in commercial ROW will be constructed of four inches of compacted rock base, seven and one-half inches of Type X and three inches of Type C asphalt concrete mix. Concrete driveway approaches will consist of a four inch compacted rock base and be a minimum of six inches thick in residential ROW and eight inches thick in commercial ROW. 
Street crossings will be bored at the direction of the director. 
(14)  Above ground facilities shall be a neutral color and shall not be bright, reflective or metallic. Black, gray and tan shall be considered neutral colors, as shall any color that blends with the surrounding dominant color and helps to camouflage the facilities. Facilities shall be located in such a manner as to reduce or eliminate their visibility. A sight-proof landscape screen may be required for any authorized above ground facilities taller than three feet in height or covering in excess of four square feet in size. Such screening shall be sufficient to reasonably conceal the facility. A landscape plan identifying the size and species of landscaping materials shall be approved by the director prior to installation of any facility requiring landscape screening. The person having facilities within the ROW shall be responsible for the installation, repair or replacement of screening materials. Alternative screening or concealment may be approved by the director to the extent it meets or exceeds the purposes of these requirements. 
(15)  Above ground facilities shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner so as not to emit any unnecessary or intrusive noise and shall comply with all other applicable regulations and standards established by the city or state or federal law. 
(16)  If the application of this subsection excludes locations for above ground facilities to the extent that the exclusion conflicts with the reasonable requirements of the applicant, the director shall cooperate in good faith with the applicant to attempt to find suitable alternatives, but such alternatives may exceed the cost increase limitation established by section 24-78 and the city shall not be required to incur any financial cost or to acquire new locations for the applicant. 
(g)  Restoring and maintaining the rights-of-way. 
(1)  To complete any ROW work the ROW user shall restore the ROW and surrounding areas, including, but not limited to, any pavement, foundation, concrete slabs or curbs, in accordance with the standards of subsection (f) and the reasonable conditions of the director. Restoration of the ROW shall be completed within the dates specified in the ROW permit unless the director issues a waiver, extension or a new or revised ROW permit. 
(2)  If an ROW user fails to restore the ROW within the date specified either by the ROW permit or any extension thereof as granted by the director, the city may perform its own restoration. The city may also opt to perform its own restoration regardless of any failure by the ROW user, in which case the ROW permit or any amendment or revision thereto shall note such option. In either event, if the city performs the restoration, the ROW user shall be responsible for reimbursing the city's reasonable actual restoration costs within thirty days of invoice. 
(3)  Every ROW user to whom a ROW permit has been granted shall guarantee for a period of four years the restoration of the ROW in the area where the ROW user conducted excavation and performed the restoration. During this period the ROW user shall, upon notification from the director, correct all restoration work to the extent necessary as required by the director. Said work shall be completed within a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 calendar days from receipt of the director's notice unless otherwise permitted by the director. If a ROW user fails to restore the ROW within the time specified, the city may perform the work and the ROW user shall be responsible for reimbursing the city's reasonable actual restoration costs within 30 days of invoice. The director may extend the cure period on good cause shown. 
(4)  A ROW user shall not be relieved of the obligation to complete the necessary right-of-way restoration and maintenance because of the existence of a performance bond pursuant to subsection (i). 
(h)  Mapping requirements. After the completion of ROW work the ROW user shall provide to the city as-built drawings, maps or other comparable records as determined by the director, drawn to scale and certified to the city as reasonably depicting the location of all facilities constructed pursuant to the ROW permit. Such records may be provided to the director in the form maintained by the ROW user, but when available to the ROW user, shall be submitted in automated formats compatible with city systems, as determined by the director, or in hard copy otherwise. 
(i)  Performance and maintenance bonds. 
(1)  Prior to any ROW work a ROW user shall establish in the city's favor a performance and maintenance bond in an amount to be determined by the director to ensure the restoration of the rights-of-way. The bond shall continue in full force and effect for a period of 24 months following completion of the work. The director shall have the authority to extend the maintenance bond period for up to an additional 24 months in the same manner as provided in subsection (g)(2). The director may waive this requirement when the work involves no disruption or damage or only minor disruption or damage to the rights-of-way. The director shall waive this requirement when the ROW user has $25,000,000.00 in net assets and does not have a history of non-compliance with the ordinances of the city. 
(2)  In the event a ROW user fails to complete the ROW work in a safe, timely and competent manner or if the completed restorative work fails within the time period for the bond (as determined by the director), then after notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the ROW user and the cost of completing work within or restoring the rights-of-way, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the bond. The city may also recover against the bond any amount recoverable against a security fund or letter of credit where such amount exceeds that available under a security fund or letter of credit. 
(3)  Upon completion of ROW work to the satisfaction of the director and upon lapse of the bond period, including any extension by the director, the city shall release the bond. 
(4)  The bond shall be issued by a surety with an "A" or better rating of insurance in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition, shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney and shall contain the following endorsement: 
"This bond may not be canceled or allowed to lapse until 60 days after receipt by the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew." 
(5)  In lieu of the bond required herein, the ROW user may establish in the city's favor such other security as the director may determine to be commensurate with the noted bonding requirements including, but not limited to, an annual bond to be maintained in the minimum amount of $25,000.00. 
(j)  Miscellaneous. 
(1)  Upon failure of a ROW user to commence, pursue or complete any ROW work required by law or by the provisions of this Code to be done in any street within the time prescribed and to the reasonable satisfaction of the city, the city may, at its option, after 30 days' notice, cause such work to be done and the ROW user shall pay to the city the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the city to the ROW user within 30 days after receipt of such itemized report. 
(2)  Upon ten days' written notice and with the supervision of the city or as otherwise provided by law, a ROW user shall have the authority to trim trees that overhang rights-of-way of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with its facilities, at its own expense subject to the supervision and direction of the city. Nothing in this subsection shall authorize the trimming of trees on private property without permission of the property owner. All cut materials shall be properly disposed. 
(3)  During ROW work by a ROW user the city shall have the right to install and to thereafter maintain at its own cost in any excavation to or other applicable disturbance of the ROW any parallel facilities of its own that do not unreasonably interfere with the operations of other facilities. 
(4)  Nothing in this Code shall be in preference or hindrance to the right of the city and any board, authority, commission or public service corporation of the city to use or occupy the rights-of-way or to perform or carry on any public works or public improvements of any description. 
(Ord. No. 16-21, § 3, 7-25-16) 
Sec. 24-80. - Open books and records. 
(a)  Persons subject to rental fees as provided herein shall maintain sufficient records to document accurate payment of such rental fees including, but not limited to, such plans, records or maps showing the approximate location and length of all facilities located within the rights-of-way. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to inspect at a location in the metropolitan St. Louis area all records that are reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the terms of this Code. A person having facilities within the ROW shall be responsible for collecting and producing such information and by registering affirms that it will do so. 
(c)  The director may require provision or retention of additional information, records and documents from time to time as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the city in connection with this Code. 
(d)  All records and information referenced herein shall be subject to inspection and copying by the city, at no cost to the city, to ensure code compliance. All records and information received by the city shall be public except to the extent confidentiality is requested and permitted by the Missouri Open Meetings Law and other applicable state and federal laws. If any records cannot be copied for security or other reasons, the person having facilities within the ROW shall nonetheless make such records available for city inspection and shall reimburse the city for all reasonable costs incurred by the city in inspecting those records. 
(e)  If any records are voluminous, then the person may request that the inspection take place at some other location outside the metropolitan St. Louis area, provided that such person must pay all reasonable travel expenses incurred by the city in inspecting those records. 
(Ord. No. 16-21, § 3, 7-25-16) 
Sec. 24-81. - Rental fee. 
(a)  Finding and intent. The city finds that rights-of-way are valuable public property acquired and maintained at great expense to taxpayers. The city further finds that the grant of permission to locate facilities within the rights-of-way is a valuable property right and eliminates the need to invest substantial capital in the private location of such facilities. Any person that places facilities within the rights-of-way after the effective date of this Code and any person that leaves existing facilities within the rights-of-way more than 90 days after the effective date of this Code shall be deemed to have agreed to pay compensation for such use of the rights-of-way as established herein. It is the intent of this section that the rental fees provided for herein be applied to and be paid by only those persons having facilities within the rights-of-way. This section codifies the city's long-established policy of imposing fees on right-of-way users. 
(b)  Payment to city. Any person having facilities within the ROW shall pay to the city annual rent consisting of, depending on the facility, linear foot fees and antenna fees as set forth in section 7.5-39 as amended from time to time for the use of the affected rights-of-way for the applicable facilities. 
(c)  Not a tax or in lieu of any other tax or fee - Credit for business license taxes or gross receipts taxes. 
(1)  The rental fees are not a tax, license or fee subject to any requirement of voter approval, but rather constitute a charge for special and individualized use of public property. 
(2)  Rental fees are in addition to all other fees and all taxes and payments that a person may be required to pay under any federal, state or local law, including any applicable property and amusement taxes. 
(3)  To promote economic development, any person obligated to pay rental fees shall be granted a credit for all sums paid to the city by such person for applicable business license fees or gross receipts taxes or franchise fees, up to the amount of the rental fees. In no event shall such a credit result in a refund from the city. 
(d)  Payments. 
(1)  The rental fees shall be paid quarterly to the city and shall commence as of the later of the effective date of this Code or the first day on which a person having facilities within the ROW places facilities within the rights-of-way. The city shall be furnished at the time of each payment with a statement certified by the payer's chief financial officer or comparable officer or by an independent certified public accountant reflecting the calculation of the total amount of rental compensation for the payment period. Payments shall be made to the city no later than 45 days following the end of each calendar quarter. 
(2)  In the event any rental fee or other payment due hereunder is not made on or before the date specified herein, interest charges shall also be due, computed from such due date, at an annual rate equal to the commercial prime interest rate of the city's primary depository bank during the period such unpaid amount is owed plus a penalty of two percent of the amount. 
(e)  No accord or satisfaction. No acceptance of any payment by the city shall be construed as a release or an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable as rental fees under this Code or for the performance of any other obligation. 
(f)  Audit. The city shall have the right to inspect all reasonably necessary records and the right to audit and to recalculate any amounts determined to be payable under this Code. Persons subject to rental fees hereunder shall be responsible for providing the records to the city at an office located within the metropolitan St. Louis area except as provided in section 24-80(e). Such records shall be maintained for at least five years. The city's audit expenses shall be borne by the person audited if the rental fees paid during the audit period are less than 95 percent of the amount owed according to the audit. Any additional amounts due to the city as a result of the audit shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to the person by the city of the underpayment, which notice shall include a copy of the audit report. If recalculation results in an additional amount to be paid to the city, such amount shall be subject to interest and penalties as specified in subsection (d)(2) above. 
(g)  Exemption from rental fees. 
(1)  Persons having facilities within the ROW pursuant to a duly-issued, lawful and applicable license or franchise shall be exempt from this section for the duration of such license or franchise, provided they continue to pay on a timely basis all fees due under such license and franchise. 
(2)  Governmental entities having facilities within the ROW shall not be liable for rental fees. 
(Ord. No. 16-21, § 3, 7-25-16) 
Sec. 24-82. - Insurance-Surety-Indemni- fication-Penalties. 
(a)  Insurance required. All ROW users shall maintain, for the duration of any ROW work and, when applicable, for as long as the ROW user has facilities within the rights-of-way, at least the following liability insurance coverage: workers' compensation and employer liability insurance to meet all requirements of Missouri law and commercial general liability insurance with respect to the construction, operation and maintenance of the facilities and the conduct of the ROW user's business in the city in the minimum amounts of: 
(1)  $2,000,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident; 
(2)  $5,000,000.00 for personal bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident; and 
(3)  $2,000,000.00 for all other types of liability. 
    These insurance requirements shall not be construed to limit the liability of any person or to impose any liability on the city. 
(b)  Qualifications of sureties. All insurance policies shall be with sureties qualified to do business in the state with an "A" or better rating of insurance by Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition and in a form approved by the city. 
(c)  Policies available for review. All insurance policies shall be available for review by the city and a ROW user having facilities within the rights-of-way shall keep on file with the city current certificates of insurance. 
(d)  Additional insureds-Prior notice of policy cancellation. All general liability insurance policies shall name the city, its officers, boards, board members, commissions, commissioners, agents and employees as additional insureds and shall further provide that any cancellation or reduction in coverage shall not be effective unless 30 days' prior written notice thereof has been given to the city clerk. A ROW user shall not cancel any required insurance policy without submission of proof that it has obtained alternative insurance that complies with this Code. 
(e)  Exemption from insurance requirements. The director may exempt in writing from the requirements of subsections (a) through (d) any self-insured ROW user, provided that the ROW user demonstrates to the director's satisfaction that the ROW user's self-insurance plan is commensurate with said requirements and that the ROW user has sufficient resources to meet all potential risks, liabilities and obligations contemplated by the requirements of this Code. The director may require a security fund or letter of credit as a condition to a self-insured's exemption. The director shall waive this requirement when the ROW user has $25,000,000.00 in net assets and does not have a history of non-compliance with the ordinances of the city. 
(f)  Indemnification. 
(1)  Any ROW user granted a ROW permit and any person having facilities within the rights-of-way, as partial consideration for the privilege granted, shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, its officials, boards, board members, commissions, commissioners, agents and employees against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings and judgments for damages or equitable relief arising out of: 
a.  Any ROW work including, but not limited to, the construction, maintenance, repair or operation of facilities; 
b.  Failure to secure consents from landowners; or 
c.  Any actions taken or omissions made by the person pursuant to the authority of this Code. 
(2)  The foregoing indemnity provisions include, but are not limited to, the city's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in defending against any such claim, suit or proceeding prior to the person assuming such defense. The city shall notify a person of claims or suits within seven business days of its actual knowledge of the existence of such claim, suit or proceeding. Once a person assumes such defense, the city may at its option continue to participate in the defense at its own expense. 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Code, the city shall not be so indemnified or reimbursed in relation to any amounts: 
a.  Attributable to the city's own negligence, willful misconduct, intentional or criminal acts; or 
b.  Attributable to the city acting in a proprietary capacity to deliver service(s) within the city. 
(g)  Relation to insurance and indemnity requirements. Recovery by the city of any amounts under insurance, a performance bond or otherwise does not limit a person's duty to indemnify the city in any way; nor shall such recovery relieve a person of amounts owed to the city or in any respect prevent the city from exercising any other right or remedy it may have. 
(h)  Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this code shall, upon conviction by the city's municipal court, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day the violation continues may be charged as a separate offense. In addition, where any excavation for which a ROW permit is required by this chapter is started prior to obtaining said permit, the total permit fee shall be doubled by the director. Payment of the doubled fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this chapter, nor from the penalties prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 16-21, § 3, 7-25-16) 
Sec. 24-83. - Dispute resolution and appeals. 
(a)  Dispute resolution by the director. The director shall make a final determination as to any matter concerning the grant, denial or revocation of a ROW permit as provided in this Code. On the request of an applicant or a ROW user and within a reasonable period of time, the director also shall make a final determination as to any other issue relating to the use of the ROW, the imposition of any fee or the application of any provision of this Code; provided however, that this review shall not apply to matters being prosecuted in court pursuant to section 24-79(a)(2)(c) or section 24-82(h) hereof. Any final determination of the director shall be subject to review as provided herein. 
(b)  Chapter 536 review. Any person aggrieved by the final determination of the director may file a petition for review pursuant to Chapter 536, RSMo., as amended, in the Circuit Court of the County of St. Louis. Such petition shall be filed within 30 days after the director's final determination. 
(Ord. No. 16-21, § 3, 7-25-16) 
Sec. 24-84. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Captions. Captions throughout this Code are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this Code. 
(b)  Interpretation of code. The provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed to promote the public interest. This article shall be interpreted in accordance with Sections 67.1830, RSMo., et seq., and 47 U.S.C. Section 332. 
(c)  Expense. Any act that a person is required to perform by this Code or other law shall be done at the person's expense, without city reimbursement, unless expressly provided to the contrary by law. 
(d)  Eminent domain. Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect in any way or to any extent the power of eminent domain held by the city or any other person. 
(e)  Exclusive contracts and anticompetitive acts prohibited. 
(1)  Unless otherwise allowed by law, no person shall enter into or enforce an exclusive contract for the provision of services with any other person or demand the exclusive right to serve another person or location as a condition of extending service to that person or location or any other person or location. 
(2)  No person shall engage in acts that have the purpose or effect of limiting competition for the provision of services in the city, except for such actions as are expressly authorized by law. 
(f)  No recourse against the city. Without limiting such immunities as the city or other persons may have under applicable law, no person shall have any recourse whatsoever against the city or its officials, members, boards, commissions, agents or employees for any loss, costs, expense, liability or damage arising out of any action undertaken or not undertaken pursuant to any provision or requirement of this code or because of the enforcement of this code or the city's exercise of its authority pursuant to this code or other applicable law, unless such recourse is expressly authorized by law. 
(g)  Rights and remedies. 
(1)  The rights and remedies reserved to the city by this Code are cumulative and shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other rights and remedies which the city may have with respect to the subject matter of this Code. 
(2)  The city hereby reserves to itself the right to intervene in any suit, action or proceeding involving any provision of this Code. 
(3)  Specific mention of the materiality of any of the provisions herein is not intended to be exclusive of any others for the purpose of determining whether any failure of compliance hereunder is material and substantial. 
(4)  No course of dealing between any person and the city or any delay on the part of the city in exercising any rights hereunder shall operate as a waiver of any such rights of the city or acquiescence in the actions of such person in contravention of such rights except to the extent expressly waived in writing. No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this Code by reason of any failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance nor shall any inaction by the city be deemed to waive a provision or render void any provision of this Code. 
(h)  Force majeure. A person shall not be deemed in violation of this Code where performance was hindered by war or riots, civil disturbances, floods or other natural catastrophes beyond the person's control and a registration shall not be terminated or a person penalized for such non-compliance, provided that the person takes prompt and diligent steps to bring itself back into compliance and to comply as soon as reasonably possible under the circumstances without unduly endangering the health, safety and integrity of employees or property or the health, safety and integrity of the public, rights-of-way, public property or private property. 
(i)  Public emergency. In the event of a public emergency or disaster as determined by the city, a ROW user immediately shall make facilities, employees and property, as may be reasonably necessary, available for use by the city or other civil defense or governmental agency designated by the city for the term of such emergency or disaster for emergency purposes. In the event of such use, the ROW user shall waive any claim that such use by the city constitutes a use of eminent domain, provided that the city shall return use of the facilities, employees and property to the ROW user promptly after the emergency or disaster has ended. 
(j)  Calculation of time. Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance or doing of any act, duty, matter or payment is required under this Code and a period of time is prescribed and is fixed herein, the time shall be computed so as to exclude the day of the act, event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run and include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period of time, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. If the period is less than seven days, intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. This subsection shall not apply in the context of obligations that continue on a daily basis. 
(k)  Severability. If any term, condition, clause, sentence or provision of this Code shall to any extent be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder hereof shall be valid in all other respects and continue to be effective. In the event of a subsequent change in applicable law so that the provision which had been held invalid is no longer invalid, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect without further action by the city and shall thereafter be binding. 
(Ord. No. 16-21, § 3, 7-25-16) 
Secs. 24-85-24-90. - Reserved. 
Chapter 25 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; housing, ch. 13; motor-propelled vehicles prohibited on common land of subdivisions without consent, § 15-136; parks and recreation, ch. 18; planning and development, ch. 19; sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 21; subdivision signs, § 22-59; streets and sidewalks, ch. 24; sidewalk master plan, § 24-5; trailers and recreational vehicles, ch. 28; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference- Subdivision regulations, RSMo 89.410 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 25-1-25-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SUBDIVISION PLATS 

Sec. 25-26. - Plat submission required. 
    Every subdivision of land within the city shall be shown upon a preliminary plat and submitted to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendation no later than the close of business on the Friday preceding the Monday six weeks before the regularly scheduled meeting of the zoning commission. All preliminary plats, accompanied by the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, shall be submitted to the board of aldermen for its consideration and approval or disapproval. 
(Code 1973, § 23-17; Ord. No. 2366, § 1, 3-14-94; Ord. No. 99-38, § 1, 8-23-99) 
Sec. 25-27. - Provisions of article not applicable in certain instances. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the sale or exchange of small parcels of land to or between adjoining property owners, when the sale or exchange does not create additional lots. All provisions of the applicable zoning must be met and a plat of the revised parcels shall be recorded with the county recorder of deeds. 
    The city planner or other city employee appointed by the city administrator shall determine whether a proposed boundary adjustment is within the purview of this section 25-27. If such boundary adjustment qualifies in accordance with this section, then the city planner or other city employee is authorized to approve such boundary adjustment on behalf of the city so as to enable the property owner or owners to record the revised parcels with the St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds. 
(Code 1973, § 23-18; Ord. No. 00-19, § 1, 3-27-00) 
Sec. 25-28. - Prerequisites to plat approval-Sidewalks. 
    No plat of any proposed subdivision submitted to the board of aldermen shall be approved unless the subdivider shall have previously installed, or shall have included and provided, adequate security, as provided by section 25-32 or 25-33, for the ultimate installation of concrete sidewalks as required in accordance with section 24-4, pertaining to streets and sidewalks, on both sides of all streets, as well as completely surround all cul-de-sacs. 
(Code 1973, § 23-19) 
Sec. 25-29. - Same-Streetlights. 
    No plat of any proposed subdivision submitted to the board of aldermen shall be approved unless the subdivider shall have previously installed, or shall have included and provided, adequate security, as provided by section 25-32 or 25-33, for the installation of streetlights, rated at a minimum of 175 watts and 6,800 lumens of output, or equal, mounted on a post a minimum of three inches in diameter and a minimum of 16 feet in height at intervals of not more than 250 lineal feet upon each street or roadway. 
Sec. 25-29.5. - Provisions for sidewalks and streetlights not applicable in certain instances. 
(a)  Plats of any proposed subdivision submitted to the board of aldermen having three or fewer lots are exempt from the requirements of installing streetlights or sidewalks under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the lots adjacent to the lots proposed to be subdivided do not have existing streetlights or sidewalks; and 
(2)  When the proposed lots abut a private street, road or throughway and are not proposed to be accepted by the city as a public street, road or throughway. 
(b)  When the proposed lots are contained in a subdivision plat or site plan approved by the board of aldermen as part of a development in an R-4 planned multiple dwelling district, C-1 commercial district, C-3 planned limited commercial district, mixed use development district (MXD), or community unit plan, streetlights or sidewalks shall be provided as required by the approved plat or site plan. 
(c)  The security required under section 25-32 or 25-33 shall include an amount sufficient, in addition to other amounts, to pay for the underground installation of and one year's operation or rental of such streetlights or the installation of sidewalks as may be required under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 23-20) 
Sec. 25-30. - Deed restrictions; contents of preliminary plats. 
(a)  Every preliminary plat submitted to the board of aldermen shall be accompanied by copies of any deed restrictions which are too lengthy to be shown on the plat. 
(b)  Preliminary plats submitted to the zoning commission and the board of aldermen shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The boundary lines of the area being subdivided with accurate distances and bearings; also all sections and U.S. survey lines and the boundary lines of sewer, school and other legally established districts within or adjoining the subdivided area. 
(2)  The lines of all proposed streets and alleys with their widths and names and the lines of all sidewalks. 
(3)  The location of all proposed street lighting fixtures. 
(4)  Existing sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, culverts and other underground structures within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto. The location and size of the nearest water main and sewer or outlet are to be indicated in a general way on the plat. 
(5)  The accurate hachured delineation of any property which is offered for dedication for public use. 
(6)  The lines of all adjoining lands and the lines of adjacent streets and alleys with their names and widths. 
(7)  All lot lines and an identification system for all lots and blocks. 
(8)  Building lines and easements for rights-of-way provided for public use, services or utilities with figures showing their dimensions. 
(9)  Name of subdivision and description of property subdivided, showing its location and extent, points of compass, scale of plan and name of owner or subdivider. 
(10)  All stormwater information as required and outlined in section 25-72. 
(11)  The size of all proposed lots in square feet. 
(Code 1973, § 23-21) 
Sec. 25-31. - Record plat. 
(a)  Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the board of aldermen, the petitioner has 120 days to submit the record plat to the city planner. The planner shall verify that the record plat is consistent with the preliminary plat and shall arrange for the signature of the mayor and the city clerk. 
(b)  Every record plat submitted for final review shall be submitted on mylar and shall contain the following: 
(1)  All information required on the preliminary plat. 
(2)  The line of departure of one street from another. 
(3)  All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating boundaries of subdivisions, lots, streets, alleys, easements and building lines, and any other areas for public or private use. The linear dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot. 
(4)  Radii arcs and chords, points of tangency, central angles for all curvilinear streets and radii for all rounded corners. 
(5)  All survey monuments and benchmarks together with their descriptions. 
(6)  Certification by a reputable civil engineer or surveyor to the effect that the plan represents a survey made by him and that the necessary survey monuments are correctly shown thereon. 
(7)  Private restrictions and trusteeships and their periods of existence. Should such restrictions and trusteeships be of such length as to make lettering of the same on plat impracticable and thus necessitate the preparation of a separate document, reference to such instrument shall be made on the plat. The plat shall contain proper acknowledgment of owners and consent of the mortgagee to such plat and restrictions. 
(8)  The intended location of all concrete monuments necessary to establish the subdivision boundaries and all rights-of-way. 
(Code 1973, § 23-22) 
Sec. 25-32. - Guaranteeing completion of subdivision improvements-Surety bond. 
    No plat or development plan of any proposed subdivision submitted to the board of aldermen shall be approved, nor shall any grading or construction of any kind associated with such subdivision begin, or a subdivision permit be issued unless the subdivider has filed with the city clerk one surety bond to secure to the city the actual construction of all subdivision improvements including grading in a manner satisfactory to the board of aldermen, and within a period specified by the board, which period shall not exceed two years. 
(Code 1973, § 23-23; Ord. No. 99-47, § 1, 9-27-99) 
Sec. 25-33. - Same-Cash deposit agreement; release of money. 
(a)  In lieu of the requirements of section 25-32 for the filing of a bond, the person submitting a plat to the board of aldermen may submit cash in the amount of 110 percent of the sum estimated by the city engineer for completion of the subdivision improvements in accordance with the city's standards and specifications at the time the improvements are to be accepted by the city. 
(b)  Upon depositing the cash with the city, the person submitting the cash shall sign an agreement with the city guaranteeing that the improvements set forth in the plat shall be completed within two years of approval of the subdivision plat in conformance with the city's specifications and standards at the time the improvements are to be accepted by the city. 
(c)  The agreement shall allow the person making a cash deposit to request disbursements in the amount of 95 percent of the labor and material used in the construction and installation of the improvements. The city will make such disbursements within 30 days of the request, provided that the city engineer has certified the construction and installation of the improvements in accordance with city specifications and standards and approval of the costs. If the city engineer does not make such certification within 30 days following receipt of the request for disbursements, then, at the request of the person making the cash deposit, a registered professional engineer selected by the city shall make an inspection and issue a report certifying the completion and value of the work or noting any deficiencies and the cost of correcting the deficiencies. The city shall make disbursements for the net amount of the request after deducting the costs for correcting deficiencies. The fees and expenses of the certified engineer shall be paid by the person responsible for making the subdivision improvements. In no event will more than 95 percent of the money deposited be disbursed until the final inspection and acceptance of the improvements is made by the city and approved by the board of aldermen. In no event shall the payment of a progress payment be construed as final acceptance of the subdivision improvements. 
(d)  If the subdivision improvements are not completed within two years of the approval of the subdivision plat, or if construction or installation of the improvements is stopped for 120 days or more, the city may declare the money held as a deposit forfeit to the city as liquidated damages and not as a penalty. 
(Code 1973, § 23-24; Ord. No. 00-15, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 25-34. - Submission fee. 
    Each plat for the subdivision of any tract of land within the city and each plat for the resubdivision of any tract of land previously subdivided which shall be submitted to the board of aldermen shall not be considered or approved by the board of aldermen unless the person applying for the same and submitting the plan to the board of aldermen shall pay to the city clerk the sum of $250.00 per lot of the subdivision, or $1,500.00, whichever amount is the greatest. 
(Code 1973, § 23-25; Ord. No. 2658, § 1, 12-8-97; Ord. No. 04-03, § 3, 1-26-04) 
Sec. 25-35. - Inspection fees. 
    In addition to other applicable fees and permits required to for site improvements made in the city, the following inspection fees associated with the corresponding time required for inspections under the Code shall apply as indicated: 
Site inspection component Fee Streets (including under drains, curb and gutter, paving) $0.50 per linear ft. of curb and gutter Sidewalks $0.25 per linear ft. of sidewalk Sewers $0.30 per linear ft. of pipe Landscaping $12.00 per dwelling unit Retaining walls less than four feet in height $100.00 per retaining wall  
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 2-13-06) 
Sec. 25-36. - Lot platting. 
    Whenever a new residential subdivision is platted with fee simple lots adjacent and contiguous to an existing residential development, the lots in the new subdivision shall be arranged, laid out or platted in a manner that the side yard of any new lot abutting and contiguous to the rear yard of an existing approved, platted and recorded lot in an adjacent contiguous subdivision, shall have a side yard setback of not less than 15 feet regardless of a permitted smaller minimum side yard setback requirement of the zoning district in which the new lot is located. 
(Ord. No. 10-35, § 1, 10-25-10) 
Sec. 25-37. - Subdivision acceptance. 
    Subdivision acceptance shall be based on the following criteria: 
(a)  Design. 
1.  Centerline radii shall generally be a minimum of 125 feet. 
2.  Profile grade shall not exceed six percent without approval of the Board of Aldermen. 
(b)  Construction. All construction shall conform to the current editions, as written, of the St. Louis County Standard Specifications for Highway Construction and the Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District's Standard Construction Specifications for Sewers and Drainage Facilities, except as hereby modified: 
1.  Meramec River gravel shall be used in all concrete pavement, curbs and gutters, and sidewalks. 
2.  All joints in pavement or curbs and gutters shall be saw cut to a depth of one-third the thickness of the concrete at 15-foot intervals. No tooled joints are allowed. 
3.  The pavement surface course shall not be placed until all other construction activity is completed unless authorized by the city engineer. 
4.  The developer shall be responsible for any and all damage or deterioration to site improvements until accepted by the city for public maintenance. 
5.  All trenches and excavations within the public right-of-way and beneath all paved areas shall be granular backfilled. 
6.  All off-site restoration shall be done with like materials. In all cases, turf shall be replaced with matching sod, but no sod shall be placed between April 1 and October 1 without written approval of the city engineer. Seeding with annual grasses or other temporary ground covering vegetation is required during this period. Restoration, including repair or replacement of improvements or landscaping shall be completed within 30 calendar days of initial disruption. The city engineer or city planner may issue time extensions. vegetation must be in place for at least 90 days and living before acceptance. 
(c)  Process for partial escrow releases. 
1.  The developer must request all escrow releases in writing. 
2.  The city engineer or his designee will verify the accuracy of the request. 
3.  Upon verification of accuracy, the city engineer may approve the release up to 95 percent of the escrowed amount for each particular item. 
4.  The city engineer will submit the escrow release to the city administrator for authorization of this release. 
5.  The fully approved and authorized release of cash escrows will be submitted to the finance officer for release. The fully approved and authorized release of letter of credits will be submitted to the issuing bank. Surety bonds cannot be partially reduced. 
(d)  Acceptance. 
1.  Upon request of the developer or upon expiration of the subdivision permit, the city engineer or his designee will inspect the subdivision improvement and prepare a list of corrections, repairs, or uncompleted items. 
2.  The developer will be required to complete all items identified on this "punch" list. The city will not accept any cracked concrete curb and gutter, sidewalk or pavement sections or asphalt that is rutted, sunk, humped, or cracked. The damaged sections shall be replaced or repaired in a manner acceptable to the city engineer. 
3.  All grading and restoration shall have been completed in accordance with the approved plans or any approved amendments to those plans. 
4.  The developer shall furnish the city engineer a copy of MSD's letter accepting the storm and sanitary sewers for MSD's maintenance. 
5.  The developer shall furnish a certification from a professional engineer licensed in the State of Missouri that the stormwater detention basin and water quality facility have been constructed in accordance with the approved plans and it has the required capacity. 
6.  The developer shall furnish the city a copy of the "As Built" drawings. 
7.  Upon receipt of the "As Built" drawings, MSD acceptance for maintenance letter, the detention basin and water quality facility certification and completion of all "punch" list items, the board of aldermen will consider a request to accept the streets and sidewalks for city maintenance provided they are within properly dedicated public rights-of-way and easements. 
8.  The board of aldermen reserves the right to accept any part(s) of the public improvements at any time, regardless of the status of completion of the remaining subdivision improvements and escrow releases. 
(e)  Final release of remaining escrow. All remaining escrows will be released upon completion of all improvements and the items identified in the "punch" list as may be requested by the board of aldermen and upon passage of the acceptance ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11-46, § 1, 9-26-11) 
Sec. 25-38. - Lot split procedure. 
(a)  No lot split shall be recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds unless and until approved by the planning and zoning commission in compliance with this section. 
(b)  Whenever there is a tract or previously subdivided parcel under single ownership which is to be re-subdivided into two lots, and which exists as a legal lot of record, such a division shall be designated as a "lot split" if the following criteria are met: 
(1)  That no additional improvements are required that would necessitate the posting of an escrow or bond, including concrete sidewalks, water mains, and landscaping within a street right-of-way dedication. Establishment of a right-of-way only shall not be construed as an improvement in this section. 
(2)  That no provisions for common land or recreational facilities are included in the proposal. 
(3)  That the use of the lot split procedure does not adversely affect the subject parcel or any adjoining properties. 
(4)  That the proposed lot split is not in conflict with any provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(5)  No variances are required. 
(c)  The procedure for approval of a lot split shall be as follows: 
(1)  Two drawings of a certified survey, prepared by a land surveyor registered in the State of Missouri on paper that is either eight and one-half inches by 11 inches or 11 inches by 17 inches in size showing the following shall be submitted: 
a.  A legal description of both the original lot and each of the proposed lots. This must be surveyed and performed by a registered surveyor. 
b.  North arrow and graphic scale. 
c.  Location of proposed and existing streets and adjoining property. 
d.  Location of all existing buildings. 
e.  Within their boundaries approval of the St. Louis County Water Company and the Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District shown on the tract drawings. 
6.  Name, address, and telephone number of the owner of record and a copy of the deed of record. 
(2)  The following items shall accompany the required survey: 
a.  Filing fee of $750.00. 
b.  Certificate from the office of the St. Louis County collector of revenue showing that there are no delinquent taxes outstanding. 
c.  Verification of fire hydrants and adequacy of water supply from applicable fire protection district. 
d.  Verification of proper placement of survey monuments from the city engineer, or an escrow agreement or land subdivision bond to guarantee installation of survey monuments in accord with subsection 25-31(b)(6) of article. 
(3)  The planning and zoning commission shall conduct a public hearing and review the proposed lot split to ensure compliance with all design and improvement requirements of this ordinance and the zoning ordinance. Lot splits found to be in compliance with the above requirements shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission and shall be recorded with the recorder of deeds of St. Louis County. The lot split plat shall be tendered to the St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds after adoption by the board of aldermen of an ordinance approving same. 
(Ord. No. 17-25, § 1, 10-9-17) 
Secs. 25-39-25-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 25-51-25-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STORM SEWERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Flood hazard areas, ch. 10; sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 21. 

Sec. 25-71. - Required. 
    Plats of subdivisions proposed within the limits of the city shall not be approved unless provision is made in such plats for adequate storm sewers, depending upon the topography and the general makeup of such subdivision. 
(Code 1973, § 23-46) 
Sec. 25-72. - Construction not allowed in subdivisions without adequate storm sewers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any structure in any subdivision, a plat of which is approved after June 10, 1957, unless the subdivision contains storm sewers which meet the requirements of Chapter 11, Article III of the Ballwin Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1973, § 23-47; Ord. No. 11-21, § 1, 6-13-11) 
Sec. 25-73. - Approval. 
    The city engineer and the Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District (MSD) shall approve in writing the layout of storm sewers as set out in plats of subdivisions submitted to the city for approval. 
(Code 1973, § 23-48) 
Sec. 25-74. - Stormwater standards and criteria. 
(a)  Improvement plans. The improvement plans required under section 25-30 shall be prepared in accordance with and so as to reflect the stormwater standards and criteria set forth in this section, as well as any other standards and criteria of MSD. 
(b)  Drainage. All construction, details and specifications pertaining to sanitary and stormwater drainage shall be in accordance with the Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District requirements unless otherwise noted herein. A professional engineer's seal is required on all plans submitted for approval. 
(c)  Design criteria. All stormwater design is to be by the rational method, except that in certain large developments, the use of other methods of analysis such as the unit hydrograph will be considered for stormwater design. However, prior approval must be obtained from the director of public works at the preliminary design state, where use of the unit hydrograph or other methods of analysis is requested. Runoff factors based on a 25-year design frequency are generally as follows: 
Average C.I. (P.I.) Factors in C.F.S. per Acre 
20 Min. Inlet Time    % 
Impervious C or P (Factor) 15 Yr. 25 Yr. 50 Yr. 100 Yr.   5 .37 1.7 2.00 2.18 2.37  10 .39 1.79 2.11 2.30 2.50  15 .41 1.89 2.21 2.42 2.62  20 .435 2.00 2.35 2.57 2.78  25 .455 2.09 2.46 2.68 2.91  30 .475 2.19 2.57 2.80 3.04  35 .495 2.28 2.67 2.92 3.17  40 .52 2.39 2.81 3.07 3.33  45 .54 2.48 2.92 3.19 3.46  50 .56 2.58 3.02 3.30 3.58  55 .58 2.67 3.13 3.42 3.71  60 .60 2.76 3.24 3.54 3.84  65 .625 2.88 3.38 3.69 4.00  70 .645 2.97 3.48 3.81 4.13  75 .665 3.06 3.59 3.92 4.26  80 .685 3.15 3.70 4.04 4.38  85 .705 3.24 3.81 4.16 4.51  90 .73 3.36 3.94 4.31 4.67  95 .75 3.45 4.05 4.43 4.80 100 .77 3.54 4.16 4.54 4.93 _____Rainfall 4.60 5.40 5.90 6.40  
From U.S. Weather Bureau Technical Paper No. 40, Rainfall Frequency Atlas of the United States, for durations from 30 minutes to 24 hours and return periods from one to 100 years. 
(d)  Drainage structures. 
(1)  All structures shall be designed for HS20-44 loading. 
a.  Bridges. 
1. Bridges in floodplain areas shall be designed for 100-year storm frequency and provide one foot of freeboard from bottom of superstructure to high water elevation. 
2. Bridges in nonfloodplain areas shall be designed on a storm frequency of 100 years and provide two feet of freeboard between the bottom of superstructure and high water elevations. 
b.  Culverts. 
1. Crossroad culverts, not at low points, shall be designed on a storm frequency of 25 years, with entrance control and two feet of freeboard at the shoulder line. 
2. Culverts, at or near low points in floodplains, shall be designed on a storm frequency of 100 years with entrance control and two feet of freeboard at the shoulder line. 
3. Culverts, at or near low points not in floodplains, shall be designed on a storm frequency of 50 years, with entrance control and two feet of freeboard at the shoulder line. (Refer to Bureau of Public Roads Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 5 entitled Hydraulic Charts for the Selection of Highway Culverts.) 
4. All crossroad culverts shall be R.C.P. or poured-in-place reinforced concrete. Driveway culverts may be C.M.P. with the approval of the city engineer. 
c.  Roadways. Whenever a watercourse is proposed or exists within proximity of or approximately parallel to an existing or proposed roadway, the low shoulder elevation of the roadway shall be established from the highwater elevation with one foot of freeboard in nonfloodplain areas and two feet of freeboard in floodplain areas. 
d.  Street inlets. In certain cases, where steep grades or other unusual conditions are encountered, a grated trough may be required in lieu of multiple inlet structures upstream in order to eliminate excessive bypass. 
e.  Pipes. 
1. All pipes shall be reinforced concrete except for underground detention facilities. Alternate materials for underground detention facilities having an expected life comparable to concrete pipe may be substituted. Show type and specification of all pipes (e.g.,ASTM,C76,class III). 
2. Pipes normally should be sized using the partial full flow design; however, under special circumstances approved by the city engineer and MSD, full flow design will be allowed, provided hydraulic grade line information is shown indicating adequate freeboard. 
3. For 36-inch-diameter pipes or smaller, a minimum one-percent grade or three feet per second velocity will be required. For pipes larger than 36-inch diameter, the minimum grade is the grade that will establish a self-cleaning velocity of three feet per second. 
(e)  Watercourses. Where a subdivision is transversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided utility easements and drainage easements and access easements of sufficient width and slope to permit access and maintenance if future expansion can reasonably be anticipated, and these easements shall conform substantially with the lines of such watercourses or drainage rights-of-way. The channel capacity shall be improved for and from a 25-year frequency storm in a manner approved by the city engineer. No structure shall be constructed closer than 20 feet to the easement of any creek, stream or other major watercourse. 
(f)  Erosion control. Erosion control for drainage systems within or directly related to the right-of-way will be required in swales, ditches or creeks at inlet structures and at the discharge points of all pipes where the velocity exceeds four feet per second. Silting basins or diversion channels will be required during the construction period to insure that mud and other debris are not washed into natural watercourses, new or previously constructed storm sewers, or onto new or existing streets (public or private). 
(g)  Stormwater retention. Where required by the board of aldermen, stormwater shall be retained onsite and metered out at specific rates to prevent possible flooding and erosion downstream. Detention shall be provided to retain the 25-year pre- and post-development differential runoff. The difference between the 25-year post-development and the 15-year undeveloped runoffs shall be detained. Stormwater and Detention Design Criteria and Guidelines, St. Louis County, as modified by the city and on file with the city engineer, shall dictate the design of all detention/retention basins. The simplified volume formula or an alternative acceptable to the city engineer shall be used. 
    In addition to any other criteria as may be imposed, the city engineer shall direct that: 
(1)  All storm water detention basins with a depth, from the low water flow line to the overflow structure flow line, of four feet or more shall be fully enclosed by a fence, dividing wall or similar structure offering security from access if the side walls have a slope greater than 3:1. 
(2)  All basin enclosing structures must be at least four feet tall when measured on the side facing away from the detention area, and must have a lockable gate large enough to provide access for maintenance equipment. 
(3)  All enclosures must be placed at or above the overflow elevation of the basin. 
(4)  Any basin that is not required to have an enclosure must have side slopes no steeper than 6:1. 
(5)  All basins must be final graded and sodded to a level two feet above the overflow elevation immediately upon the completion of the storm water pipe installation. An extension to this provision may be granted in writing by the city engineer due to weather or other mitigating conditions for a period of not more than 180 days. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  All enclosing structures must be compatible in design and style with the surrounding neighborhood and may contain no openings large enough to allow the passage of a six-inch diameter sphere. 
(h)  Plans and calculations. Plans shall be any scale from one inch equals ten feet through one inch equals 100 feet, so long as the scale is an increment of ten feet. Plans shall be prepared on exhibits 24 inches by 36 inches. All calculations submitted shall be prepared in a legible manner. Plans and calculations shall include the following information: 
(1)  Site drainage map. A drainage map is required and should be developed from a base reproduction of the site plan or grading plan. The map must include the following information: 
a.  The existing and proposed contours at one- or two-foot intervals, for the subject property, extending offsite as required for proper design of proposed improvements. Contour intervals other than the above as determined by the topography must be approved by the city engineer or city planner. Use U.S.G.S. datum only. Locations and elevations of benchmark references are available from the county department of highways and traffic and the Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District. 
b.  The location of existing and proposed property lines, streets, sinkholes, area within the tract subject to inundation by stormwater, railroads, easements of record, and other significant natural features such as wooded areas and rock formations, etc. 
c.  All existing and proposed stormwater facilities, such as inlets, manholes, pipes, culverts, bridges, channels, etc. 
d.  All existing and proposed improvements where required for proper design review, which may include, but not be limited to, pavement, curbs, sidewalks, buildings, utilities, etc. 
e.  The existing waterways, including names; if no name, an indication of creek or river to which the waterways are tributary. 
f.  The runoff details are required, showing flows tributary to each proposed and existing structure and cumulative flows in pipes and gutters. Include "Q" and area. 
g.  All existing bodies of water (such as lakes or ponds) indicating surface area and elevation. 
(2)  Supplemental drainage map. A supplemental map may be required and should be developed from a portion of U.S.G.S. quadrangle map. Map must include the following information: 
a.  The site boundary. 
b.  The watershed tributary to the project area. 
(i)  Surface drainage. For areas not in floodplain. The following shall be included and/or observed: 
(1)  No sheet flow will normally be allowed over retaining walls or terraces that are steeper than a 3:1 slope and/or greater than five feet in height. Berms and/or swales shall be provided to collect the flow at the top of the terrace and carry it to a drainage structure. Total accumulation inside berms and/or swales shall be a maximum of four cubic feet per second. 
(2)  Provide critical cross sections, profiles, and hydraulic computations for ditches and swales with flows in excess of one c.f.s. and creeks with flows in excess of four c.f.s. 
(j)  Drainage structures. The lateral location of all drainage structures shall be shown by street centerline stationing and perpendicular offset distance, in addition to the following requirements: 
(1)  Inlets shall be appropriately sized and spaced, taking into consideration bypass, depth of flow and width of spread of flow in gutters. Width of spread shall not exceed six feet. 
(2)  For inlets in vertical sag curves, the center of the main chambers shall be placed within one foot of the exact mathematical low point. 
(3)  All manholes shall be located outside of proposed roadway pavements. 
(4)  Inlets shall be located as follows: 
a.  Inlet face one foot from back of roadway curbing along driving lanes. 
b.  Inlet face flush with back of roadway curbing along parking shoulders. 
c.  Area inlets in roadway ditches to be compatible with ultimate improvements. 
d.  Inlets shall be placed at intersections such that no part of the inlet structure or sump is in the curb rounding. 
(5)  Bypass shall be minimized at inlet structures and shall be shown on the hydraulic computations and site drainage map. 
(6)  Where termination of pavement occurs, erosion protection in the form of asphalt curb, gutters, additional structures, paving and/or revetment may be required. 
(7)  Data required on plans and/or profiles shall include: 
a.  Type of structure (single, double, grated, etc.). 
b.  Flowline and top elevations. 
c.  "Q" in upstream gutter line and within pipe reach. 
d.  The hydraulic grade line at the structure shall be shown on the plan, profile and computation sheets. 
e.  Hydraulic computations shall be included as part of the site improvement plans. 
(8)  For nonstandard structures two additional sets of plans shall be submitted for review. 
(k)  Pipes. 
(1)  The following information shall be shown on the plans and/or profiles: 
a.  Location of pipes and length. 
b.  Grade. 
c.  Alignment. 
d.  Curve data for radius pipes. 
e.  Material and class. 
f.  Limits of granular backfill. 
(2)  At intake structures, such as flared end section or headwalls, entrance control shall be applied. Two-foot minimum freeboard is required. Check for inundation upstream. Cutoff walls are required to be three feet deep on headwalls. Concrete headwalls are required at the end of the flared end section and at the joint between the pipe and flared end section. 
(3)  Outfall termination shall conform to the following: 
a.  All concrete outfall pipes shall have a reinforced concrete headwall or a flared end section with cutoff wall and revetment or paving. 
b.  Any corrugated metal outfall pipe shall be installed with a cutoff wall. Revetment or paving may be required for erosion control. 
c.  If discharge is at a property line, an attempt will be made to acquire a discharge easement on the adjacent property, prior to approval. A guarantee will be required for future extension of the outfall to the property line. 
(4)  Open trenching of roadway pavements will be permitted only with the prior approval of the city engineer. 
(5)  Road closings will not be permitted without prior approval of the board of aldermen. Contractors will be required to maintain one lane open to traffic at all times. 
(l)  Sanitary sewers. All construction details and specifications shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements for drainage structures and pipes within the road rights-of-way and other MSD requirements. 
(m)  Bridges and culverts. The following shall be included and/or observed: 
(1)  Submit two additional sets of plans for bridges and poured-in-place concrete culverts. 
(2)  Structure widths shall be designed for the ultimate roadway width. Guardrail and fencing shall be required at appropriate locations. 
(3)  Reinforced concrete approach slabs will be required for all bridges. 
(4)  The following information shall be shown for all culverts: 
a.  Size, type, grade, alignment, minimum cover for the loading, wing-walls, and/or erosion protection in the form of paving or revetment or floodwall, if required, cutoff footings, etc. 
b.  Any connections to culverts shall be shown with a detail; no utilities to run through any culvert. Alignment and changes of grades shall be, as previously mentioned, for pipes. Slopes from culverts to roadways shall not be steeper than 3:1 and shall be sodded or protected with paving or revetment where required. 
(n)  Roadway dams. The following shall be included and/or observed: 
(1)  A soil engineering design report shall be submitted indicating the adequacy of the proposed dam construction. 
(2)  Any dam design shall be supported by a soils report prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state. In no case shall side slopes be steeper than 3:1. 
(3)  Adequate top width for pavement and sidewalks shall be provided on dams where the roadway fill serves as the dam. In such cases, the dam shall be designed to store a 100-year 20-minute storm with one foot of freeboard, assuming a blocked overflow structure exists. Berms, guardrail, fence, etc., may also be required. 
(4)  The relief line from the spillway structure or the overflow structure in the dam shall be sized on the total upstream tributary area, using the ultimate runoff factor. 
(5)  An adequate overflow structure shall be provided which will be of reinforced concrete construction, with the openings covered by grates. Such system shall be designed to maintain the required freeboard and storage and shall also be equipped with a drain valve so that the water level may be lowered for maintenance purposes. 
(6)  Erosion protection will be required where the stability of the structure may be endangered. 
(7)  The dam design and soils report may require review by the Corps of Engineers or other agencies designated by the city engineer. 
(o)  Sinkholes. The following shall be included and/or observed: 
(1)  An engineering report shall be submitted indicating the existing sinkhole conditions, intended use and proposed treatment to be accomplished as a part of the development. 
(2)  A sinkhole can be used as a point of drainage, provided that an adequately sized outfall pipe is provided to an existing natural discharge point such as a ditch, creek, river, etc., in case the sinkhole becomes inadequate to discharge at the required rate. 
(3)  Where required sinkholes within a development shall be treated by approved methods. 
(p)  Floodplain study. In order to develop or improve any land subject to flooding and inundation during a 100-year storm (floodplain area), or any land adjacent to a ditch, creek or other drainageway, a property owner or user shall submit a floodplain study to the board of aldermen, MSD, the U.S. Corps of Engineers, state department of natural resources and FEMA, which plan shall show the provisions for adequate flood protection against high water. 
(1)  The floodplain study must be prepared by a registered professional engineer of demonstrated competence in hydrology and must show the protection against high water for the proposed improvements, the effect of proposed improvements on other properties, and such other hydrologic problems as may result from the improvements. 
(2)  Roadway shoulders and low window or doorsill openings of proposed buildings shall be set two feet above the determined high-water elevation. 
(3)  The following information is to be included in the floodplain study: 
a.  Profile of creek or ditch. 
b.  Profile of top of bank. 
c.  Cross sections of critical points on the stream. 
d.  U.S.G.S. map of watershed. 
e.  Computations establishing the "Q" and the high water elevations for use in determining low sill elevations, etc. 
(4)  The above hydraulic computation shall include the average mean velocities. Where velocities in improved channels exceed five feet per second, erosion protection must be provided. 
(5)  Where any portion of the floodplain is filled, a volume equal to the filled volume must be excavated to provide for equivalent storage in the floodplain area. 
(6)  Two copies of the floodplain study shall be submitted for review. 
(q)  Creeks. All creeks within the property being developed within 100 feet of a lot line shall be improved to handle a 25-year storm, and such channel shall be protected from erosion by a means acceptable to the city engineer. The existing 500 feet of downstream channel shall be analyzed as to capacity after development. At the discretion of the board of aldermen, a cash payment to the city in the amount of 110 percent of the estimated cost may be made in lieu of such improvements. 
(Code 1973, § 23-50; Ord. No. 2393, § I, 7-11-94; Ord. No. 2493, § 1, 12-11-95; Ord. No. 2575, §§ 1, 2, 2-24-97; Ord. No. 02-32, § 1, 6-24-02) 
Sec. 25-75. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-6. Any person who constructs or begins to construct any structure in any subdivision which does not contain storm sewers as required by this division shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this division. 
(b)  Any permit for construction or any approval of a plat made in violation of this division shall be null and void. 
(Code 1973, § 23-49) 
Secs. 25-76-25-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STREETS; MONUMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 24. 

Sec. 25-91. - Street construction. 
(a)  All subdivisions that shall be platted in the city and approved by the board of aldermen shall contain streets constructed in accordance with the typical section illustrations of section 24-6 entitled "illustrations." 
(b)  All asphalt streets shall be constructed with a concrete curb and gutter on a crushed limestone base course having a total width of two feet six inches. 
(c)  All streets shall have underdrains beneath the curb and gutters along both sides of the pavement, or as directed by the city engineer. 
(d)  Concrete curbs and gutters shall have sawed transverse joints at a maximum spacing of 12 feet. All joints shall be sealed with a rubberized filler. 
(Code 1973, § 23-56; Ord. No. 2584, § 3, 3-24-97) 
Editor's note- Specific requirements for street and sidewalk construction are available from the city engineer. See also section 24-4, which specifies mix composition and requirements for expansion joints. 
Sec. 25-92. - Grade of streets. 
    All streets and roadways in any subdivision that shall be layed out or established within the confines of the city shall be platted and made according to an engineer's grade survey. Street longitudinal grades greater than six percent must be approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1973, § 23-57) 
Sec. 25-93. - Width of streets. 
(a)  All streets and roadways shown on any subdivision plat hereafter approved by the board of aldermen shall have a pavement width of not less than 26 feet and shall be located in the center of a right-of-way having a minimum width of 50 feet dedicated to the city. Under no circumstances shall any land in the dedicated right-of-way be used in determining the size of any lot within the subdivision. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to construct any street or roadway in any subdivision in the city that is not in accordance with the approved plat and minimum street construction standards of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 23-58; Ord. No. 2056, § 1(23-58), 1-22-90) 
Sec. 25-94. - City engineer to inspect and approve streets. 
    It shall be the duty of the city engineer to inspect all streets constructed under the provisions of this division and it shall be necessary that he give written notification to the city administrator of the approval of streets so constructed when they have been constructed in compliance with this division. If bond has been given for the construction of streets as provided in this division, the obligation of the sureties and principal under the bond shall not be released without the written approval of the city engineer, and if streets are constructed prior to plat approval, approval shall not be given without such written notification. 
(Code 1973, § 23-59) 
Sec. 25-95. - Fees for inspections. 
    The city engineer shall receive a fee of $20.00 per day for making street inspections, and such fee shall be paid by the person who requests plat approval and street inspection. 
(Code 1973, § 23-60) 
Sec. 25-96. - Reserved. 
Sec. 25-97. - Plats and construction of buildings not to be approved if streets not minimum width. 
    The city engineer, board of aldermen or any other official or officials of the city or their deputies or agents shall not approve the plat of any subdivision unless the streets provided for therein comply with the provisions of this chapter. Any approval or any permit for the construction of any building in any subdivision which does not contain streets complying with the provisions of this chapter for which a subdivision plat was approved shall be void. 
(Code 1973, § 23-62) 
Sec. 25-98. - Rental of equipment and services. 
    The city may contract with the trustees of a private subdivision to rent equipment owned by the city and the services of employees of the city to private subdivisions located in the city for use under the direction of city employees. 
(Code 1973, § 23-63) 
Sec. 25-99. - Contracting of rentals; hours and fees. 
    The rentals provided for in section 25-98 shall be by contract, and the city engineer is authorized to execute such contracts on behalf of the city, subject to resolutions of the board of aldermen setting the prices for such use and the hours of such use. 
(Code 1973, § 23-64) 
Sec. 25-100. - Use of rental equipment and services of city does not constitute upkeep by city. 
    The use of the equipment and the services of employees of the city as provided in section 25-98 shall not constitute the repair, maintenance or improvement of streets in the private subdivisions by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 23-65) 
Sec. 25-101. - Conformity with master plan and official map. 
    Any proposed subdivision or development shall conform to the master plan and official map of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 23-66) 
Sec. 25-102. - Street relationship. 
(a)  Conformity. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the official map and master plan and shall be considered in their relationship to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. Where not shown on an official map or master plan, the arrangement and other design standards of streets shall conform to the provisions found in this division. 
(b)  Relation to adjoining street system. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provisions for the continuation of the existing streets in adjoining areas. 
(c)  Projection of streets. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the proper projection of streets. 
(d)  Streets to be carried to property lines. When a new subdivision or similar development joins unsubdivided land susceptible to being subdivided, then the new streets shall be carried to the boundary of the tract proposed to be subdivided. A temporary cul-de-sac shall be constructed where new streets terminate. Where such street extensions are too short to be of value prior to the subdivision of the adjoining property, or where no room exists for the construction of a temporary cul-de-sac, the construction of the street extension and associated sidewalks may be omitted at the discretion of the board of aldermen, providing the adequate right-of-way is dedicated for the eventual construction of the street. In this situation, the developer shall pay the equivalent dollar value of such roadway and sidewalk construction to the city to be held for the eventual construction of the improvements. 
(e)  Cul-de-sacs generally. Cul-de-sacs shall be constructed at all street termini. 
(Code 1973, § 23-67) 
Sec. 25-103. - Placement of monuments. 
    After completion of all site improvements, the subdivision boundary and street right-of-way shall be established with concrete monuments of the standard type and size. Those monuments shall be set by a land surveyor registered in the state, utilizing established standard practices. 
Secs. 25-104-25-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPEN SPACE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 18. 

Sec. 25-121. - Provided. 
(a)  All subdividers or developers of residential property shall provide for reasonable and adequate amounts of open space parks and recreational facilities within their developments. This requirement shall be deemed satisfied by the use of any one of the following alternatives, or a combination of them: 
(1)  Dedication of open space land for public use; 
(2)  Fees in lieu of dedication; or 
(3)  Development of parks and recreational facilities within the subdivision or development. 
The methods selected shall be done in accordance with the requirements of the city planner and shall be reviewed by the zoning commission and the board of aldermen prior to acceptance of the subdivision plat; but in any event acceptance or rejection shall be by ordinance. 
(b)  This provision applies to development of all residential lands in the city, including all subdivisions, lots, tracts and parcels of land. 
(c)  Neighborhood facilities, open space parks and recreational facilities that are developed consistent with the requirements of this article shall be within or near the development area, so that the intention of these requirements, specifically, to serve the needs created by such development is accomplished. 
(d)  No building permits shall be issued until provisions of this article are satisfied. 
(Code 1973, § 23-70; Ord. No. 2293, § 1, 2-8-93) 
Sec. 25-122. - Dedication of open space lands. 
(a)  Schedule. If the dedication of open space land is selected as the compliance of a particular developer with the requirements of this article, dedication shall be by deed or plat and shall be as provided in the following schedule of dedication: 
SCHEDULE OF DEDICATION 
(Minimum Requirement) 
Zoning Amount of 
Dedication 
(percent) R-1A .....  2  R-1 .....  5  R-2 and R-3 .....  9  R-4 and R-5 ..... 12  MXD/PSD ..... 10.5  
The above required open space shall be in addition to minimum required yard areas and space reserved for offstreet parking in the applicable zoning ordinance. The percentage figures of dedicated space shall be computed on gross area of the development or subdivision. 
(b)  Suitability. While specific requirements may vary, all lands to be dedicated shall meet the following general requirements: 
(1)  Size and shape shall normally contain not less than two contiguous acres. 
(2)  Location and accessibility shall be located in or adjacent to the subdivision or area to be served and easily accessible to same. Consideration should be given to placing park areas where they can be added to by future subdivisions, or the addition of open space required by this provision to an existing park. 
(3)  Fifty percent of the land dedicated shall have a grade of less than six percent; it is permissible for the remainder of the dedicated property to be covered with steep slopes, streams, ditches, lakes or other natural features. 
(4)  The land dedicated or to be dedicated should be conveyed in its natural state. Removal of trees, topsoil and other natural features shall be prohibited unless there is previously acquired the written approval from the city administrator. 
(5)  The park board shall review the suitability of the land to be dedicated and provide a written recommendation to the board of aldermen. 
(6)  The board of aldermen shall have the final determination as to the suitability of dedicated lands under this article. 
(Code 1973, § 23-71) 
Cross reference- Zoning, app. A. 
Sec. 25-123. - Credit for private parks and recreational facilities. 
    Any subdivision plat containing suitable facilities to be reserved, constructed and maintained by a private organization to serve the needs of the subdivision being created may satisfy the requirements of this article, provided: 
(1)  They fulfill the area and suitability requirements of this article; and 
(2)  They are reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and the board of aldermen, and are approved by the board of aldermen. 
(Code 1973, § 23-72) 
Sec. 25-124. - Fee in lieu of land dedication. 
(a)  Authorized. When a subdivision is not able to dedicate land as required by section 25-122, or when otherwise approved or required by the board of aldermen, a fee in lieu of dedication shall be paid to the city. The amount of the fee shall be the lesser of the following two formulas: 
(1)  An amount determined by multiplying the percentage of dedication of land from the schedule contained in section 25-122(a) times the actual verified cost of the land (without improvements) being subdivided, provided that the land has been acquired within the past 12 months. Where the land has not been acquired within the last 12 months, a current fair market value for the computed equivalent amount of land shall be determined by negotiations with the city or via independent professional appraisal to be prepared at the developer's cost. 
(2)  An amount determined by adding together the recreation operation contribution and the recreation development contribution which are computed as follows: 
Recreation operation contribution. The current fiscal year's recreation department operating budget, divided by the total number of dwelling units in the city, multiplied by the number of dwelling units or lots (whichever is the larger number) approved for the development. 
Recreation development contribution. The National Recreation and Park Association standard for the number of acres of park land per person, multiplied by the number of dwelling units or lots (whichever is the larger number) approved for the development, multiplied by the average number of persons per household in the city as measured in the most recent Department of Commerce decennial census, multiplied by an average cost per acre of vacant land in the Ballwin area of $150,000.00. 
(b)  Time of payment of fee. The fee in lieu of dedication shall be paid at the time of final plat presentation unless expressed written approval from the city is given as to the terms of any other arrangement. No grading or construction of any kind will be allowed until the fee is paid. 
(c)  Special fund created for fee. All fee-in-lieu-of-dedication payments shall be maintained in a special park account established by the city, and such funds may be used only for the purchase and development of park and recreational facilities. 
(d)  The fee authorized by this section shall be paid by each lot in the subdivision except that a lot that contains an existing single family dwelling that will be continued to be used for residential occupancy shall not be liable for the fee. 
(Code 1973, § 23-73; Ord. No. 2637, § 1, 9-22-97; Ord. No. 05-35, § 1, 8-8-05; Ord. No. 15-20, § 1, 3-23-15) 
Sec. 25-125. - Resubdividing. 
    Any lands resubdivided shall be subject to the provisions of this article, except that any lands previously dedicated or fees in lieu of dedication previously paid will be credited against the requirements mandated by this provision. In no instance, however, will land so previously dedicated or fees previously received by the city be returned or refunded to the developers or subdividers. 
(Code 1973, § 23-74) 
Sec. 25-126. - Natural features. 
    Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be preserved wherever possible. The subdivider shall designate or show at the time of filing of his final plat what trees and other natural features are to be retained. Artificial and natural lakes and wooded areas are to be preserved and encouraged as much as possible. 
(Code 1973, § 23-76) 
Chapter 26 - SWIMMING POOLS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; buildings and structures, ch. 7; health and sanitation, ch. 12; housing, ch. 13; bathing and swimming in parks, § 18-29; sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 21; zoning, app. A; use regulations in public activity districts, app. A, art. VIIIA, § 2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Swimming pool regulations. 
    Any drainage, overflow, leakage, splash out or other discharge of water from a public, semipublic or family swimming pool shall be collected and diverted to a public storm water system through a pipe, hose or similar conveyance. No such discharge shall be allowed to enter any surface drainage way that is located upon or flows through any parcel of land that is not the property upon which the swimming pool is located. Under no circumstances shall any discharge be allowed in a manner that causes standing or stagnant water or creates a nuisance for the owners or tenants of surrounding properties. 
(Ord. No. 02-26, § 1, 5-21-02) 
Secs. 26-2-26-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC POOLS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-26. - Regulations of county health commissioner to be effective; scope of regulations. 
(a)  The rules and regulations promulgated by the county health commissioner shall become effective upon approval by the board of aldermen and shall be filed with the city clerk as a public record. The rules and regulations may provide: 
(1)  The minimum sanitary requirements for the design, equipment, maintenance and operation of swimming pools and bathing places. 
(2)  The qualification of any lifeguard or attendant at any swimming pool or bathing place. 
(3)  The minimum safety facilities and apparatus to be installed and maintained at any swimming pool or bathing place. 
(4)  A maximum bathing load of any swimming pool or bathing place. 
(5)  The minimum sanitary standards of operation for any wading pool or spray pool. 
(6)  The data to be submitted with any application for construction, alteration, extension or modification of swimming pools or bathing places and to provide the manner and terms upon which such approval shall be granted or modified. 
(b)  Any rule or regulation shall meet the minimum standards of the state department of health, but nothing herein shall prevent the county health commissioner from requiring compliance with higher requirements where such higher requirements are essential to maintain a sanitary condition. 
(Code 1973, § 24-17) 
Sec. 26-27. - Amendment of rules and regulations. 
    Any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this article may be amended or repealed. 
(Code 1973, § 24-18) 
Sec. 26-28. - Approval of plans and specifications required. 
    No swimming pool or bathing place shall be constructed, altered, extended or modified unless the plans, specifications and any additional information relating to such swimming pool or bathing place, as requested by the health official, are submitted to the health official and after review by the health official, are found to comply with the minimum sanitary requirements as required by this article and unless written approval for the construction, alteration, extension or modification of the swimming pool or bathing place is issued by the health official. The review of the plans by the health official shall relate only to insuring adequate protection to the public health. 
(Code 1973, § 24-19) 
Sec. 26-29. - Work to conform to building and plumbing codes. 
    Any swimming pool or bathing place, approved by the health official, shall be constructed, altered, extended or modified in accordance with the provisions of the building code and plumbing code. 
(Code 1973, § 24-20) 
Sec. 26-30. - Compliance with sanitary standards required. 
    Every swimming pool or bathing place shall have such equipment and shall be so operated as to comply with the minimum sanitary requirements as are provided for in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 24-21) 
Sec. 26-31. - Records to be submitted. 
    Any person owning or operating a swimming pool or bathing place under this article shall submit such operational and analytical records as may be requested by the health official to determine the sanitary conditions of the swimming pool or bathing place. 
(Code 1973, § 24-22) 
Sec. 26-32. - Periodic inspections, weekly water analysis. 
    The health official shall make such inspections as may be necessary of any swimming pool or bathing place that may be open for public use and may collect and analyze samples to determine that the water shall be of satisfactory bacterial, chemical and physical quality, at least once each week or as frequently as may be necessary, to insure compliance with the minimum sanitary requirements of this article and any rule or regulation promulgated as provided hereunder. 
(Code 1973, § 24-23) 
Secs. 26-33-26-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 26-51. - Required to operate swimming pool or bathing place. 
    Every person owning, operating or maintaining a swimming pool or bathing place under this article is required to hold an unrevoked permit from the county health department. 
(Code 1973, § 24-29) 
Sec. 26-52. - Permit and current certification to be displayed. 
    The permit required by section 26-51 shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in full view of any patron, together with the current certification of the health official as to the satisfactory sanitary condition of the swimming pool or bathing place. 
(Code 1973, § 24-30) 
Secs. 26-53-26-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FAMILY SWIMMING POOLS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 26-71-26-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 26-91. - Required for construction or alteration of pools. 
    No person, whether as owner, contractor, employee or agent, shall construct, alter, improve, remodel, remove or demolish; nor authorize, commence or assist in the construction, alteration, improvement, remodeling, removal or demolition of a family pool unless there has previously been filed with the building commissioner an application in writing for a building or demolition permit, and such permit has been issued, for a family pool. 
(Code 1973, § 24-52) 
Sec. 26-92. - Application. 
    An application for a building permit under this article shall be submitted, in such form as the building commissioner may prescribe, by the owner or lessee, or agent of either; or the architect, engineer or builder employed in connection with the proposed work. Each application shall contain: 
(1)  The full names and addresses of the applicant and of the owner. 
(2)  The principal officers if the owner is a corporate body. 
(3)  A brief description of the proposed work. 
(4)  Such additional information as may be required by the building commissioner for a proper understanding of the proposed work. 
(Code 1973, § 24-53) 
Sec. 26-93. - Plans and specifications to accompany application. 
    Each application for a permit under this article shall be accompanied by four sets of the following, one of which must be black and white: 
(1)  Pool plans. 
(2)  Pool specifications. 
(3)  Plot plan or diagram in form and size suitable for filing permanently with the permit record, drawn to scale with all dimensions figured showing accurately the size and exact location of all proposed new construction. 
(Code 1973, § 24-54) 
Sec. 26-94. - Information to be shown by plans and specifications. 
(a)  Plans, specifications and pertinent explanatory data required to be submitted in connection with an application for a permit to construct a swimming pool under this article or any alteration, addition, remodeling or other improvement to a swimming pool shall comply with the following requirements and shall include the following plans and information as well as such other data as may be reasonably requested by the health department: 
(1)  Plans shall be drawn to scale indicating all dimensions, including the length, width and depth of the pool and the width of the pool deck. 
(2)  A profile plan showing the same information shall also be required. 
(3)  A cross section shall be included of scum gutters and/or skimmers. 
(4)  Pipe diagrams showing the size of all pipes, inlets, outlets, makeup water lines, vacuum lines, waste and discharge lines, circulation and other piping. 
(5)  The pool equipment room layout showing filters and their location, pumps, chlorinators, chemical feeders, flowmeter gauges, sight glass, strainers, hair and lint interceptors, dimensions of filter room and its location, floor drain, sumps and other pertinent information. 
(6)  The liquid capacity of the pool. 
(7)  The liquid capacity of any wading pool. 
(8)  The kind, number and size of filters, including the square footage of the filter area in each unit. 
(9)  The top capacity in gallons per minute. 
(10)  A description of chemical feeders for soda ash and alum. 
(11)  The type, kind and description of chlorinator. 
(12)  A description of the gauges and water flowmeter. 
(13)  A description of the skimmers and scum gutters. 
(14)  The type and range of testing equipment, including chlorine. 
(15)  Pool pump capacity and pressure or head at filter and backwash flow. 
(b)  Plans for in-ground pools must be approved by and bear the seal of a registered architect or of a registered mechanical or civil engineer. 
(Code 1973, § 24-55) 
Sec. 26-95. - Commissioner to approve or disapprove application. 
    If, after examining an application for the construction, alteration, improvement, remodeling, removal or demolition of a family pool, the building commissioner finds the same to be in compliance with the law and ordinances applicable thereto and that the proposed construction or work will be safe and meet the requirements of all applicable ordinances, he shall approve such application and issue a permit for the proposed work as soon as practicable. If his examination reveals otherwise he shall reject such application, note his findings in a report to be attached to the application and deliver the same to the applicant. 
(Code 1973, § 24-56) 
Sec. 26-96. - Work to conform to approved plans. 
    All work performed under a permit issued by the building commissioner under this article shall conform to the approved application and plans and approved amendments thereof. It shall be unlawful to reduce or increase the area or the construction or work provided for in an application hereunder. 
(Code 1973, § 24-57) 
Sec. 26-97. - Revocation of permit for making false statements in application. 
    The building commissioner may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this article if he finds that there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(Code 1973, § 24-58) 
Sec. 26-98. - Permits for work in connection with pool construction not to be issued until plans approved. 
    No permit for building, plumbing, electrical or other work in connection with the construction, alteration, improvement or remodeling of a family pool shall be issued until the plans and specifications for such pool, the application for such permit and pertinent explanatory data shall have been submitted to and approved by the health department. 
(Code 1973, § 24-59) 
Cross reference- Buildings and structures, ch. 7. 
Sec. 26-99. - Pool not to be used until certified. 
    No family pool shall be used in whole or in part until a certificate of swimming pool use shall have been issued by the building commissioner certifying that such pool conforms to the provisions of this article and has been constructed in accordance with the application and the permit therefor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-60) 
Sec. 26-100. - Acceptance of incomplete plans not to constitute waiver of requirements. 
    The acceptance of any plans not showing all the requirements for the granting of a permit shall not be construed as constituting a waiver of any provision of this article or of sanctioning any violation hereof. 
(Code 1973, § 24-61) 
Secs. 26-101-26-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MINIMUM DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 

Sec. 26-116. - Conformance with standards required. 
    No family pool shall be constructed, improved, remodeled or altered and no permit for such construction, improvement, remodeling or alteration shall be issued unless the minimum design and construction requirements as set out in this division are observed in connection with such construction, improvement, remodeling or alteration. 
(Code 1973, § 24-66) 
Sec. 26-117. - Required inspections, fees. 
(a)  The following types of inspection are required and shall be made by the building commissioner of family pools, being constructed, altered, remodeled or improved within the city: 
(1)  Preliminary. 
(2)  Rough. 
(3)  Final. 
(b)  Fees for inspections shall be the same as those outlined in the building code (chapter 7). 
(Code 1973, § 24-67) 
Sec. 26-118. - Commissioner may order discontinuance of work; notice. 
(a)  Whenever the building commissioner finds that construction or work in connection with the erection, construction, alteration or repair of a swimming pool, which is regulated, permitted or forbidden by this article, is being done or conducted in violation of the requirements of this article or in violation of a detailed statement or plans submitted and approved hereunder, or of a permit or certificate issued hereunder, he shall have authority to issue a written notice or order upon the person responsible therefor directing discontinuance of such illegal action and the remedying of the condition which constitutes a violation of the provisions or requirements of this article. 
(b)  Whenever the building commissioner finds by reason of defective or illegal work in violation of a provision or requirement of this article, that the continuation of construction or work is contrary to public health, safety or welfare, he shall have authority to order, either orally or in writing, all further work to be stopped and may require suspension of work until the condition and violation has been remedied. 
(Code 1973, § 24-68) 
Sec. 26-119. - Plumbing to be done by licensed plumber. 
    Plumbing work on a family pool and pool equipment shall be done by a qualified licensed journeyman plumber. 
(Code 1973, § 24-69) 
Sec. 26-120. - Electrical installations. 
    All electrical installations under this article shall meet the requirements of the National Electrical Code and must be done by an electrician licensed by the county. 
(Code 1973, § 24-70) 
Sec. 26-121. - Pools to be flow-through recirculating type. 
    All family swimming pools shall be of the flow- through recirculating type. 
(Code 1973, § 24-71) 
Sec. 26-122. - Pools to be leakproof. 
    All family swimming pools shall be so constructed as to provide a tight, leakproof tank with easily cleaned surfaces and designed to withstand the expected forces to which it will be subjected. 
(Code 1973, § 24-72) 
Sec. 26-123. - Grading. 
    Grading in and about a family pool area shall be such as shall in the judgment of the building commissioner avert surface water entering such pool. 
(Code 1973, § 24-73) 
Cross reference- Grading, mining, filling and clearing, ch. 11. 
Sec. 26-124. - Wall slope. 
    The wall slope shall not be more than two feet horizontal in five feet vertical to a depth up to five feet from top. 
(Code 1973, § 24-74) 
Sec. 26-125. - Inner surfaces to be rounded. 
    The inner surface of a family pool must be coved, rounded or bullnosed at all joints, corners, angles of bases, walls, floors or curbs. No sharp corners or projections will be permitted. 
(Code 1973, § 24-75) 
Sec. 26-126. - Stairways and ladders. 
    Steps and stairways for entering or leaving the pool should be of such construction as to minimize danger. Convex, semicircular or triangular steps shall have rounded corners. Ladders or stairways shall be located at the deep end, if there is only one. Treads or ladders or steps shall be constructed of nonrotting material, shall be slip-resistant and shall be devoid of recesses which may support vegetable or animal life. 
(Code 1973, § 24-76) 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, ch. 5; weeds and vegetation, ch. 29. 
Sec. 26-127. - Runways. 
    Runways at least four feet wide shall be placed adjacent to a family pool, sloped one-fourth inch to the foot away from such pool, and should be of material approved by the building commissioner, which shall be of nonslip texture and easily cleaned. 
(Code 1973, § 24-77) 
Sec. 26-128. - Underwater lights. 
    Lights under water shall be of the wet niche type, shall be equipped with a grounded deck junction box and shall carry the approval of the Underwriters' Laboratory, Inc. 
(Code 1973, § 24-78) 
Sec. 26-129. - Walkways recommended. 
    A walkway is recommended from the dwelling or accessory building when long areas of open ground or lawn must be traversed by bathers before reaching a family pool area. This is to prevent contamination on the feet. 
(Code 1973, § 24-79) 
Sec. 26-130. - Pool heaters. 
(a)  When used, family pool heaters must be approved by the building commissioner and be of a type with a minimum of 10,000 Btu input per hour, or 94,000 Btu per hour for liquid propane gas. They may be powered by natural or artificial gas or a combination of bottled gas or oil and may be direct or indirect heaters. 
(b)  Family pool heaters shall include and be equipped with the following: 
(1)  A thermostat. 
(2)  An automatic safety pilot to prevent the burner from turning on unless the pilot is lit. 
(3)  A pressure regulator to insure constant pressure. 
(4)  A water pressure safety switch to prevent main burners from coming on unless water is flowing under satisfactory pressure. 
(5)  A high limit safety switch to shut off the heater if water gets too hot. 
(6)  A pressure relief valve to relieve any excessive pressure within the tank. 
(c)  Direct injection of steam into a family pool for the purpose of heating the water shall not be allowed. 
(d)  Heating coils in a family pool shall not be allowed. 
(Code 1973, § 24-80) 
Sec. 26-131. - Color of inside surfaces. 
    All family pools shall be white or of a light color on the inside surface. 
(Code 1973, § 24-81) 
Sec. 26-132. - Diving area. 
    The minimum depths and area for diving shall be as follows: 
Deck 
Level* 
Board Residential 
Board One 
Meter 
Board Maximum distance above water 18? 30? 39.37? Minimum depth five feet from tip of the diving board  8'  8'  81/2' Distance from diving wall to deepest point 10' 11' 12' Distance from deep point to transition point 10' 11' 12' Minimum overhang   21/2'   21/2'  3' Minimum width to center of board  7'   71/2'  8'  
*For each one inch of decrease of diving board height below 18 inches, required minimum depth may be decreased one inch. The overhead clearance above the diving board to any obstruction such as a ceiling, tree or shelter must be such that a diver cannot strike such obstruction at any point of a dive. 
(Code 1973, § 24-82) 
Sec. 26-133. - Freshwater inlets. 
    Inlets for fresh or repurified water shall be located to produce a reasonably uniform circulation of water in the maintenance of a uniform concentration of residual disinfectant throughout the entire pool without the existence of "dead" spots. 
(Code 1973, § 24-83) 
Sec. 26-134. - Fill spouts. 
    No over-the-rim fill spout will be accepted unless located under a diving board or in a manner approved by the building commissioner so as to not constitute a hazard. No fill spout shall project more than one inch beyond the inner wall and shall be so located as to prevent backsiphonage. 
(Code 1973, § 24-84) 
Sec. 26-135. - Pumping of pool water. 
    In recirculating pools, proper pipe connections shall be provided to permit water to flow to the recirculating pumps. No direct connection to a storm sewer shall be permitted. All such connections shall be by means of an indirect waste facility into a properly trapped fixture. Pumping of pool drainage to an elevation of any possible sewer backing may be needed in some special cases, and can be permitted by the building commissioner. 
(Code 1973, § 24-85) 
Sec. 26-136. - Valves and connections to be of noncorrosive material; combination valves may be permitted. 
    All connections, valves, replacement units, etc., shall be of brass or other noncorrosive material and located where they are easily accessible. Full way valves shall be installed throughout to insure proper functioning of the filtration and piping system. Combination valves may be used if approved by the building commissioner when the material and design of such valves comply with the intent of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 24-86) 
Sec. 26-137. - Recirculation piping material. 
    Family pool recirculation piping shall be of copper tubing (with a minimum wall thickness of type "L"), brass, galvanized steel pipe or other similar materials approved by the building commissioner. 
(Code 1973, § 24-87) 
Sec. 26-138. - Pools to be equipped with filter and recirculating systems. 
    All family pools shall be equipped with a filter and recirculating system of sufficient capacity to filter the entire contents of the pool in not more than 18 hours. 
(Code 1973, § 24-88) 
Sec. 26-139. - Pool piping. 
    Family pool piping shall be sized to permit the rated flows for filtering and backwashing without exceeding the maximum head at which the pump will provide such flows. 
(Code 1973, § 24-89) 
Sec. 26-140. - Piping system to conform to plan and be approved before covering. 
    A family pool piping system shall conform to the approved plan and shall be proved watertight by the contractor before covering or concealing. 
(Code 1973, § 24-90) 
Sec. 26-141. - Water velocity. 
    The water velocity in a family pool piping system shall not exceed ten feet per second. 
(Code 1973, § 24-91) 
Sec. 26-142. - Cross connections between public water supply and pool to be eliminated. 
    Where a family pool is supplied in whole or part by a water supply system serving the public, cross connections between such water supply system and the family pool water shall be eliminated. 
(Code 1973, § 24-92) 
Sec. 26-143. - Pumps to have strainers. 
    Family pool pumps shall be equipped on the inlet side with an effective type of hair and lint strainer, approved by the building commissioner. The basket of the strainer shall be noncorrosive and have an open screen surface of at least four times the cross sectional area of the inlet pipe. 
(Code 1973, § 24-93) 
Sec. 26-144. - Backflow protection. 
    Backflow protection must be provided where chemical feeding devices are connected to the potable water supply and the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow or back-siphonage. 
(Code 1973, § 24-94) 
Sec. 26-145. - Filter system. 
(a)  Every family swimming pool shall be equipped with a sand pressure filter system or its equal approved by the building commissioner. The filter system shall have sufficient capacity to provide a complete turnover of the pool water in 18 hours or less when operated at a rate not to exceed five gallons per minute per square foot of filter area. The recirculating pump shall be of sufficient capacity to backwash the filter at a rate of at least ten gallons per minute per square foot of filter area when operating against the total head of the system. Pump motors shall not be operated at an overload which exceeds the service factor. 
(b)  Every filter system shall be provided with operating instructions. Filter tanks shall be fabricated to ASME specifications for noncode pressure vessels and shall be built for a minimum of 50-pound working pressure with a safety factor of four. The filter underdrain shall have an effective distribution of at least 25 percent of the cross sectional area of the tank. Tanks placed underground shall be steel plate at least 3/16 inch in thickness with an approved noncorrosive exterior coating. 
(Code 1973, § 24-95) 
Sec. 26-146. - Filter system to have at least two pressure gauges. 
    The filter system shall be equipped with at least two pressure gauges: one on the effluent and one on the influent, an air relief and a backwash sightglass where the backwash to the receptor is not visible from the backwash valves. 
(Code 1973, § 24-96) 
Sec. 26-147. - Aboveground filter tanks. 
    Tanks above the ground shall be supported in a safe, substantial manner satisfactory to the building commissioner. 
(Code 1973, § 24-97) 
Sec. 26-148. - Location of outlet; size. 
(a)  Family pools shall be equipped with an outlet located at the deepest point which shall be at least four times the area of the discharge pipe to reduce suction current. 
(b)  Outlets shall be covered in such manner as to not be readily removable by bathers and shall be flush with the finished surface. 
(Code 1973, § 24-98) 
Secs. 26-149-26-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR PROTECTION OF HEALTH AND SAFETY 

Sec. 26-166. - Conformance to division required. 
    All family pools in the city, whether presently constructed or to be constructed, shall be equipped with the apparatus and shall meet the standards as to quality of water, disinfection, drainage and safety as set out in this division. 
(Code 1973, § 24-105) 
Sec. 26-167. - Authority for health department to order discontinuance of pool use. 
    Whenever the health department finds that a family pool is unhealthy, unsanitary or dangerous, or is contributing to conditions which are unhealthy, unsanitary or dangerous, to such extent that it might cause a nuisance or endanger or threaten health, welfare or property, the health department shall have authority to order the discontinuance of the use of such pool. 
(Code 1973, § 24-106) 
Sec. 26-168. - Indoor pools to have sufficient light to inhibit algae growth. 
    All indoor family swimming pools erected, constructed, altered or modified shall, in addition, have windows or a skylight equal in area to at least one-fourth of the surface area of the pool; provided, that artificial light or chemicals may be used in lieu thereof if approved by the health department upon its finding that such substitutes will safely and adequately inhibit the growth of algae. 
(Code 1973, § 24-107) 
Sec. 26-169. - Chlorine ratio. 
    The ratio of the amount of available or excess chlorine in the water shall not be less than 0.4 parts per 1,000,000 nor more than 0.6 parts per 1,000,000. A hypochlorite feeder may be used to controllably feed the liquid form of hypochlorite. The feeder provides better regulation than when such is done manually. 
(Code 1973, § 24-108) 
Sec. 26-170. - Water to be alkaline. 
    The water, at all times when a family pool is in use, shall show an alkaline reaction in that the hydrogen ion content of the pool shall not fall below seven nor exceed 7.5. 
(Code 1973, § 24-109) 
Sec. 26-171. - Bacteria count. 
    The total bacteria count at 37 degrees Celsius shall not exceed 200 colonies per milliliter, and no Bacillus coli shall be present in a ten-milliliter portion. 
(Code 1973, § 24-110) 
Sec. 26-172. - Visibility. 
    A black disc six inches in diameter on a white field placed in the deepest water on the bottom of a family pool shall be clearly visible from the side of such pool at distances up to ten yards measured from a line drawn across such pool through such disc; or a disc two inches in diameter which is divided into four quadrants in alternate colors of red and white should be clearly visible through an eight-foot depth of water. 
(Code 1973, § 24-111) 
Sec. 26-173. - Scum and dirt to be removed. 
    No visible scum or floating matter should be present in or on a family pool, and no dirt should be present on the bottom of a family pool. 
(Code 1973, § 24-112) 
Sec. 26-174. - Water temperature in heated pools. 
    In heated family pools, the temperature of the water shall not be more than 78 degrees Fahrenheit, and water should not be allowed to enter a family pool at a temperature above 100 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Code 1973, § 24-113) 
Sec. 26-175. - Skimming device required. 
    A recirculating skimming device shall be provided to skim the surface of a family pool. 
(Code 1973, § 24-114) 
Sec. 26-176. - Safety devices required. 
    All family pools over 30 feet in length shall be provided with a pole at least 15 feet long, equipped with a knobbed life hook, and lifeline anchors at the transition point (where shallow and deep water meet). 
(Code 1973, § 24-115) 
Sec. 26-177. - Pool covers. 
    Abandoned and unused family pools and family pools on premises which are not occupied or dwelt in for periods of 30 days or more shall be drained or equipped with a pool cover which is strong enough to support an average adult person. 
(Code 1973, § 24-116) 
Sec. 26-178. - Ring buoys. 
    All family pools shall be equipped with one or more throwing ring buoys not more than 15 inches in diameter and having 60 feet of 3/16 -inch manila line attached. 
(Code 1973, § 24-117) 
Sec. 26-179. - Lines conducting electricity not to be located near pools. 
    No current-carrying electrical conductors shall pass over or under a family pool or within ten feet of such pools. 
(Code 1973, § 24-118) 
Sec. 26-180. - Fencing required; exception. 
(a)  Every outdoor family swimming pool shall be completely surrounded by a fence not less than four feet nor more than six feet in height, which shall be so constructed as not to have openings, holes or gaps larger than four inches in any dimension except for doors and gates; and if a picket fence is erected or maintained, the horizontal space between pickets shall not exceed four inches. A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. Such fences shall not conflict with any other ordinance of the city and shall be constructed of such materials and in such manner as may be satisfactory to the building commissioner. 
(b)  Outdoor family pools having decks four feet above ground level need not have the fencing as required in this section, provided that the deck railing is such that the railing has no opening greater than four inches in width and has a locking, swing-up stairway with hardware cloth, or equal, on the underside of carriages or stringers to prevent children getting through the space between threads. Any gate in the railing of this type of a family pool must be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of the gate. 
(Code 1973, § 24-119) 
Sec. 26-181. - Fence gates to be self-latching. 
    All gates or doors opening through a fence under this article shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device placed at the top of the gate or door for keeping the door or gate securely closed at all times when not in actual use. Such doors or gates shall be securely locked with a padlock or other locking device when the pool is not in use or left unattended. 
(Code 1973, § 24-120) 
Sec. 26-182. - Metal fencing and railings to be grounded. 
    All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to family pools which might become electrically alive as a result of broken overhead conductors or from any other cause shall be effectively grounded. 
(Code 1973, § 24-121) 
Chapter 27 - TAXATION[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; administration, ch. 2; buildings and structures, ch. 7; housing, ch. 13. 
State Law reference- Taxation in fourth class cities, RSMo 94.190 et seq.; taxation and revenue, RSMo Ch. 135 et seq. 

Sec. 27-1. - Sales tax-Imposed. 
    A sales tax at the rate of one percent on the receipts from the sales at retail of all tangible personal property and taxable services at retail within the city is hereby levied and imposed upon all persons selling or furnishing tangible personal property or rendering services for the privilege of engaging in the business of selling tangible personal property or rendering taxable services at retail in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 25-1) 
State Law reference- City Sales Tax Act, RSMo 94.500 et seq.; sales and use tax, RSMo Ch. 144. 
Sec. 27-2. - Same-State law to govern. 
    The sales tax provided for in section 27-1 is imposed to the extent and in the manner provided in RSMo 144.010 through 144.510 and the rules and regulations of the state director of revenue issued pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1973, § 25-2) 
Sec. 27-3. - Same-Revenue collected as result of tax to be deposited in general fund. 
    All revenue collected and received by the city from the imposition of a sales tax shall be deposited in the city treasury to the credit of the general revenue fund. 
(Code 1973, § 25-3) 
Sec. 27-4. - Tax increment financing commission. 
(a)  Creation. That there be and is hereby created a commission to be known as the tax increment financing commission of the City of Ballwin, which TIF commission shall have continuous and perpetual existence unless and until terminated by action of the Board of Aldermen. 
(b)  Composition and organization. That the TIF commission of the city shall consist of 12 members and the composition and organization of the TIF commission shall be in accordance with Section 99.820.2 of the TIF Act. 
(c)  Purpose. That the TIF commission shall serve as an advisory body to the city as it relates to consideration of tax increment financing proposals submitted by interested parties or initiated by any public agency in accordance with the TIF Act. The TIF commission shall hold public hearings and give notice pursuant to Section 99.825 and 99.830 of the TIF Act on proposed redevelopment plans, redevelopment projects and designation of all proposed redevelopment areas and redevelopment projects including amendments thereto, within the time periods prescribed in the TIF Act. 
(d)  Elections. That the TIF commission, upon effective date of this section, shall organize itself and elect from its number, a chairman, vice chairman, and secretary each to serve for one-year terms or until their successors are elected. 
(e)  Regular meetings and procedures. That the TIF commission shall meet regularly and shall adopt such rules and regulations for its operation as shall enable it to maintain an orderly procedure for its business and to effectively and efficiently exercise the powers authorized by the TIF Act and delegated to it by the board of aldermen. 
(f)  Records and minutes. That the TIF commission shall keep records and minutes of its meetings and shall report annually to the board of aldermen respecting its activities. 
(Ord. No. 99-19, §§ 1-4, 6, 7, 4-12-99) 
Chapter 28 - TRAILERS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; buildings and structures, ch. 7; flood hazard areas, ch. 10; health and sanitation, ch. 12; housing, ch. 13; parks and recreation, ch. 18; sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 21. 
State Law reference- Manufactured homes (mobile homes), RSMo Ch. 700. 

Sec. 28-1. - Keeping or occupying trailers or recreational vehicles prohibited; exception. 
    Except for construction trailers in use by contractors on premises where building or land disturbance permits have been issued, no person shall occupy any recreational vehicle, or trailer for living, housekeeping or business purposes; nor shall any person, whether as owner, occupant, contractor or agent, allow to be kept on any parcel of land or premises in the city any recreational vehicle or trailer which is occupied for living, housekeeping, recreation or business purposes. 
(Code 1973, § 26-2; Ord. No. 16-18, § 1, 5-9-16) 
Cross reference- Buildings and structures, ch. 7; zoning, app. A. 
Sec. 28-2. - Parking in primary and secondary front yards restricted. 
(a)  Recreational vehicles and trailers, when parked or stored outside of a completely enclosed garage or building, shall not be parked or kept within the primary front yard of a parcel of land. 
(b)  One recreational vehicle or one trailer may be parked or stored in a secondary front yard on a parcel of land having multiple front yards provided such parking is within only one secondary front yard. 
(c)  Recreational vehicles or trailers parked pursuant to this section must be parked behind the building setback lines establishing all other front yards on the parcel. 
(d)  Recreational vehicles and/or trailers parked within a secondary front yard as provided in this section shall only be parked in a manner that is fully contained within a space extending no more than 12 feet from the exterior wall of the structure that faces the yard in which the parking is permitted. 
(e)  Recreational vehicles and trailers shall only be parked as provided in this section if they are parked upon a paved improved surface. 
(Ord. No. 16-18, § 1, 5-9-16) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-18, § 1, adopted May 9, 2016, amended § 28-2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 28-2 pertained to parking in front of building line prohibited, and derived from Code 1973, § 26-3. 
Sec. 28-3. - Parking for loading or unloading permitted. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 28-2, recreational vehicles and trailers may be parked within the primary front yard for a period not to exceed 24 hours for the purposes of loading or unloading. 
(Code 1973, § 26-4; Ord. No. 16-18, § 1, 5-9-16) 
Sec. 28-4. - Removing transporting devices or fixing to ground prohibited. 
    No person shall remove the wheels or other transporting device from any recreational vehicle, or trailer, except when necessary for repairs, or fix such recreational vehicle, trailer to the ground as to prevent its ready removal. 
(Code 1973, § 26-5; Ord. No. 16-18, § 1, 5-9-16) 
Sec. 28-5. - License and registration required; sticker to be displayed. 
    No person shall keep a recreational vehicle or trailer in the city unless such vehicle is licensed, registered and insured for road use and has affixed thereto a current and valid license plate and inspection sticker as may be required by the United States, the state or the city. 
(Code 1973, § 26-6; Ord. No. 16-18, § 1, 5-9-16) 
Sec. 28-6. - Parking near fuel pump or storage restricted. 
    Except for fueling, no recreational vehicle or trailer shall be parked within 200 feet of a gasoline or fuel oil pump or storage unit. 
(Code 1973, § 26-7; Ord. No. 16-18, § 1, 5-9-16) 
Cross reference- Parking, stopping and standing, § 15-256 et seq. 
Sec. 28-7. - Additional regulations. 
(a)  No more than one recreational vehicle or one trailer may be stored outside of a fully enclosed structure on any parcel of land in any zoning district unless such parcel of land is occupied by a factory franchised dealer of recreational vehicles and/or trailers. 
(b)  Recreational vehicles and trailers of any length may be parked in any residential district within a fully enclosed building, provided all doors are closed while the recreational vehicle or trailer is parked. 
(c)  No trailer parked outside of a fully enclosed building shall remain loaded in any manner while parked or kept on a parcel of land unless it is actively involved in loading or unloading or unless there is a valid building or land disturbance permit in effect for the parcel of land and the trailer and its load are related in some manner to the permit. 
(d)  No trailer parked anywhere in a residential zoning district shall exceed nine feet in height as measured from the ground at the point below the axle to the highest point of the trailer as the trailer is configured when parked. 
(e)  No trailers may be parked outside of a fully enclosed building in the R-4 and R-5 (PIM) zoning districts. 
(f)  Trailers may only be parked outside of a fully enclosed building in the C-1, C-2, C-3, and S-1 zoning district in designated loading zones as shown on site development plans approved via a public hearing process in the city or as authorized by section 15-281(a)(5) and (6). 
(Ord. No. 01-41, § 2, 6-11-01; Ord. No. 13-12, § 3 4-22-13; Ord. No. 16-18, § 1, 5-9-16) 
Sec. 28-8. - Trailer length. 
(a)  The length of a trailer shall be measured from the forward most point of the trailer including the mounting fixture or tongue to the rearmost point of the trailer when it is in a towing configuration. Ramps, fold down gates and similar appurtenances shall not be included in determining the trailer length unless such appurtenances extend the length of the trailer when it is being towed. 
(b)  The maximum length of a trailer that can be parked outside of a fully enclosed building when not actively serving a property or being used in conjunction with a valid building or subdivision permit shall be as follows: 
(1)  Twenty-two feet in the R-1 and R-1A zoning districts. 
(2)  Eleven feet in the R-2, R-2A, R-3, and PSD zoning districts. 
(3)  Trailers of any length may be parked outside of a fully enclosed building in the PA district in conjunction with a governmental land use, but no trailer may otherwise be parked in the PA district. 
(Ord. No. 16-18, § 1, 5-9-16) 
Chapter 29 - WEEDS, VEGETATION AND OTHER NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-40, § 1, adopted October 22, 2012, repealed the former Ch. 29, §§ 29-1-29-7, and enacted a new Ch. 29 as set out herein. The former Ch. 29 pertained to weeds and vegetation and derived from §§ 27-2-27-8 of the 1973 Code; Ord. No. 2391, § I, 7-11-94; Ord. No. 2651, §§ 2-4, 11-10-97; Ord. No. 03-07, § 2, 1-27-03; Ord. No. 05-21, § 1, 4-25-05; Ord. No. 10-32, § 1, 9-27-10. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 12; solid waste, ch. 23; keeping vegetation out of family swimming pools, § 26-126. 
State Law reference- Removal of weeds, RSMo 71.285 

Sec. 29-1. - Weeds and debris to be removed. 
(a)  Any parcel or contiguous parcels of land outside of an enclosed building, or areas visible within a carport, gazebo, porch or other structure (the interior of which is visible from the outside) shall be declared a public nuisance if it has the presence of, vegetation cuttings, dead vegetation, cut and/or fallen trees and shrubs, overgrown vegetation, invasive plants and noxious weeds which are six inches or more in height; refuse; lumber or other construction materials not piled or stacked 12 inches off the ground; broken concrete, rocks or bricks; metal; parts of vehicles or machinery; construction machinery or equipment; broken, non-useable or non-functional furniture, appliances and equipment; any flammable material which may endanger public safety or any material which endangers public health and safety. The storage of such materials within a building such as a carport, gazebo, porch or other structure where the interior of which is visible from the outside, in a manner that such materials remain visible from surrounding properties and rights-of-way may be allowed if such materials are screened 100 percent from view from surrounding properties and rights-of-way. Such screening shall not include tarpaulins or similar temporary flexible coverings, shall be permanent in nature, structurally sound and erected in accordance with all regulations of the City of Ballwin. 
    When a public nuisance as described above exists, the building inspector or other designated person shall so declare and give written notice to the owner of the property by personal service or by regular mail directed to the property address and the owner's taxing address and by conspicuously posting notice upon the property. Such notice shall, at a minimum: 
(1)  Declare that a public nuisance exists; 
(2)  Describe the condition which constitutes such nuisance; 
(3)  Order the removal or abatement of such condition within seven days from the date of service of such notice; 
(4)  Inform the owner that he or she may file a written request for a hearing before the building inspector or other designated person on the question of whether a nuisance exists upon such property; and 
(5)  State that if the owner fails to begin removing the nuisance within time allowed, or fails to pursue the removal of such nuisance without unnecessary delay, the building inspector or other designated person shall cause the condition which constitutes the nuisance to be removed or abated and that the cost of such removal or abatement may be included in a special tax bill or added to the annual real estate tax bill for the property and collected in the same manner and procedure for collecting real estate taxes. 
    If the owner of such property fails to begin removing the nuisance within the time allowed, or fails to pursue the removal of such nuisance without unnecessary delay, the building inspector or other designated person shall cause the condition which constitutes the nuisance to be removed. If the building inspector or other designated person causes such condition to be removed or abated, the cost of such removal shall be certified to the Director of Finance who shall cause the certified cost to be included in a special tax bill in accordance with section 29-3. If the certified cost is not paid, the tax bill shall be considered delinquent, and the collection of the delinquent bill shall be governed by the laws governing delinquent and back taxes. The tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be deemed a personal debt against the owner and shall also be a lien on the property until paid. 
    If weeds are allowed to grow, or if debris or refuse is allowed to accumulate, on the same property in violation of this ordinance more than once during the same growing season in the case of weeds, or more than once during a calendar year in the case of trash, the designated official may, without further notification, have the weeds or trash removed and the cost of the same shall be billed in the manner described in this section. 
(b)  No owner of a contiguous tract of land of more than three acres shall allow weeds, grass and/or similar vegetation to grow to a height in excess of 12 inches upon any right-of-way adjoining such tract or upon such tract within 100 feet of a right-of-way or within 100 feet from any adjoining tract on which there is a building used for human habitation, with the exception that portions of such land with a slope steeper than 3:1 or portions of such land being too rough to mow due to rock outcroppings or similar physical limitations shall be exempt from this provision. 
(c)  Parcels of land that are inaccessible to mowing equipment due to topography or land platting constraints or cannot be mowed due to exceptional roughness or slope steepness may be planted in ground covers that are listed by the University of Missouri Extension as being suitable for the St. Louis Metropolitan region provided that the ground cover constitutes more than 90 percent of the vegetation growing in the planted area. Failure to meet this standard will result in the site being held to the applicable standards of subsections (a) or (b) of this section. 
(d)  Under no circumstances shall vegetation in portions of the public right-of-way be exempt from the vegetation height regulations of (a) and (b). 
(e)  Parcels of land in a wooded state are not required to meet the vegetation height requirements outlined in (a) and (b) above. 
(f)  All common ground or other parcels of land permanently dedicated as open areas or green space by deed or plat, or parcels of land in excess of 5,000 square feet in area may be returned to a wooded state provided they are planted with native trees or trees that are demonstrated to be healthy and acclimatized to the region. Such trees shall be planted at the rate of one tree per 650 square feet of gross land area intended to be returned to a wooded state. Such trees shall have a trunk caliper of two inches or greater when measured at a height of four inches above the ground. Such trees shall be monitored and guaranteed to live for five years by the property owner. The failure of the property owner to replace trees that do not survive will result in the area no longer being considered in a wooded state and no longer exempt from the vegetation height regulations of this chapter. 
(g)  The director of parks and recreation shall develop and maintain a list of trees suitable for planting within rights-of-way as street trees in three size classifications: small, medium and large. A list of trees not suitable for planting as street trees shall also be created. These lists shall be made available to the public upon request and may be amended and updated from time to time as judged necessary by the director of parks and recreation without notice. 
(h)  Owners of real property within Ballwin may plant trees in adjoining city-owned rights-of-way from the list of trees authorized in subsection (g). 
(i)  Property owners shall obtain approval from the director of parks and recreation prior to planting a tree in the right-of-way. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to remove a street or park tree without first obtaining approval from the department of parks and recreation. Topping of street or park trees by a person or firm is prohibited. Unauthorized removal or topping of street or park trees shall be a violation of this chapter. For the purpose of this section, "street tree" shall be defined as any tree within a public right-of-way belonging to the city and "park tree" shall be defined as any tree within a park, as the term "park" is defined in section 1-2 of this Code. 
(k)  The city shall plant, prune, maintain and/or remove vegetation within parks and public grounds as may be necessary to ensure public health; to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such plantings or grounds; to eliminate an unsafe condition; to eliminate hazards to persons and property; to eliminate a condition that, by reason of its nature or location, is injurious to channels, sewers, drainage ways, utility lines, roadways, sidewalks or other improvements within public jurisdiction; or to remove specimens afflicted with any injurious fungus, infestation or other pest. 
    The city shall also plant, prune, maintain and/or remove street trees within public rights-of-way located between the street pavement and any adjacent sidewalk and/or within 12 feet of the street pavement where no sidewalk is installed, provided such trees were initially planted by the city. 
(l)  The owner and/or occupant of every property within the city shall maintain all vegetation in adjoining rights-of-way except street trees maintained by the city in a safe and healthy manner; shall maintain such vegetation appropriately pruned, trimmed or removed so as to avoid hazards to persons and property using the streets, sidewalks and public rights-of-way and shall prevent such vegetation from obstructing vehicular and pedestrian views of any street or sidewalk intersection or approach and all streetlights and traffic control devices. The building commissioner, city engineer or director of parks and recreation or their designees shall notify the property owner and/or occupant and/or agent, in writing or by posting the property, of vegetation that is in violation of this section and creating a hazard to persons and property using the streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way. Such property owner, and/or occupant and/or agent shall remove, trim or prune the vegetation included in such notice within ten days of the mailing or posting of the notice on the property, or appear before the city administrator within such period and show cause why the vegetation should not be removed, trimmed or pruned. 
    Managed stands of native plants, ornamental grasses, or shrubs, and cultivated agricultural crops, vegetable gardens or flower gardens exceeding six inches in height are permitted provided they are maintained free of turf weeds and grasses, nuisance plants, volunteer trees, invasive plants and noxious weeds, are kept at least four feet from a property line, and do not impair sight distance, or constitute a hurt, injury, inconvenience or danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public or residents and occupants in the immediate vicinity. 
    The following vegetation conditions shall be deemed a public nuisance and a hazard to persons and property: 
(1)  Appear dead, diseased, insect-infested, damaged, decayed, dangerous or likely to fall. 
(2)  Are not pruned to a height of 14 feet above the street surface or to a height of eight above the sidewalk surface. 
(3)  Obstruct a curb, gutter, channel, sewer, drainageway, street, alleyway, sidewalk, streetlight, utility line or other public improvement within the right-of-way. 
(4)  Obstruct the view of drivers or pedestrians of roadway and sidewalk intersections, and their approaches so as to constitute a hazard. 
(5)  Introduction and/or maintenance of the following noxious weeds and invasive plants listed in appendix A, section 29-6 as may be amended from time to time. 
(m)  It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city or any of its agents while engaging in and about the maintenance, planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removal of any vegetation addressed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-40, § 1, 10-22-12; Ord. No. 14-23, § 1, 7-21-14; Ord. No. 14-29, § 1, 10-13-14) 
Sec. 29-2. - Reporting violations. 
    Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be reported to the building inspector or other designated person, who shall verify the report by personal inspection. 
(Ord. No. 12-40, § 1, 10-22-12) 
Sec. 29-3. - Special tax bill for costs of abating nuisance. 
(a)  In case the weeds are not cut down and disposed of within the time as ordered by the city administrator, the inspector shall cause the weeds to be cut down and removed and shall certify the costs of cutting and removal to the city clerk, who shall cause a special tax bill therefor against the property to be prepared and to be collected by the collector with other taxes assessed against the property. Each such special tax bill shall be delivered to the collector on or before June 1 of each year. The city may hire a private contractor or utilize city equipment and employees, if available, to cut and remove weeds as ordered. The inspector shall add 20 percent to such bill to cover administrative and processing costs associated with such abatement. 
(b)  Such special tax bills if not paid when due shall bear interest at the rate of eight percent per annum. 
(c)  Each such special tax bill shall be a first lien on the property from the date of its issuance until paid and shall be prima facie evidence of the recitals therein and of its validity. 
(Ord. No. 12-40, § 1, 10-22-12) 
Sec. 29-4. - Charges for use of city equipment and employees. 
    If it is necessary to use city equipment and employees to cut weeds, charges shall be made at the following rates: 
(1)  For each piece of mechanical equipment, together with its operator, per hour or fraction thereof ..... $75.00 
(2)  For each additional employee, with nonmechanical equipment, per hour or fraction thereof ..... $25.00 
(Ord. No. 12-40, § 1, 10-22-12) 
Sec. 29-5. - Penalty. 
    Where the owner, and/or occupant, and/or agent of a parcel, after notice provided for in section 29-1 above, has failed to correct or abate the violation, or appeared before the city administrator and shown cause why there is no violation or the notice was issued in error, a summons may be issued for violation of this chapter. Penalties for violations of this chapter shall be as follows: 
First violation, minimum fine\$250.00 
Second and additional violation on same parcel within one year of date of first violation notice, minimum fine\$1,000.00 
    The procedures authorized in sections 29-1 through 29-6 shall be in addition to the penalty provided in section 1-6 of this Code of Ordinances. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the filing of a complaint for any violation of this chapter in the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 12-40, § 1, 10-22-12) 
Sec. 29-6. - Appendix A. 
    Noxious weeds: As may be amended from time to time by the United States Department of Agriculture Missouri State Listed Noxious Weeds. 
Canada thistle 
Common teasel 
Cut-leaved teasel 
Field bindweed 
Johnson grass 
Kudzu 
Marijuana 
Multiflora rose 
Musk thistle 
Purple loosestrife 
Scotch thistle 
    Invasive plants: As may be amended from time to time by the Missouri Department of Conservation Listed in the Missouri Vegetation Manual. 
Autumn olive 
Black Locust 
Bush honeysuckles 
Common buckthorn 
Crown vetch 
Garlic mustard 
Gray dogwood 
Honey locust (with seeds) 
Japanese honeysuckle 
Leafy spurge 
Osage orange 
Reed canary grass 
Sericea lespedeza 
Sesbania 
Smooth sumac 
Sweet clover (white and yellow) 
Wintercreeper 
(Ord. No. 12-40, § 1, 10-22-12) 
Chapter 30 - WEIGHTS AND MEASURES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Weights and measures generally, RSMo 413.005 et seq. 

Sec. 30-1. - Adoption of St. Louis County weights and measures code. 
    The St. Louis County Weights and Measures Code, as amended, which was adopted by the county on October 14, 1971, is hereby adopted as the Weights and Measures Code of the City of Ballwin, St. Louis County, Missouri, as if fully set out in this section. 
(Code 1973, § 29-4; Ord. No. 2647, § 1, 11-10-97) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
ORDINANCE NO. 557 
An ordinance repealing Ordinance No. 41 and Ordinance No. 175 of the City of Ballwin, Missouri, known as the zoning ordinance, passed and approved on the 23rd day of June, 1958, and all amendments thereto, more particularly being ordinances numbered 190, 192, 194, 217, 220, 231, 232, 232-A, 249, 250, 252, 260, 264, 267, 286, 288, 289, 295, 299, 300, 301, 304, 314, 324, 333, 336, 337, 339, 356, 357, 358, 360, 367, 450, 461, 478, 481, 486, 496, 515, 516, 518, and 548, and enacting in lieu thereof a new ordinance to provide for the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Ballwin, Missouri, and to regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes; to regulate and restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction or alteration of buildings; to regulate and restrict the height, number of stories, and size of all buildings and structures, and the size of all yards and other open spaces surrounding buildings; to regulate and restrict the density of population, and for all said purposes to divide the city into districts; to prescribe penalties for the violations of its provisions; to provide for a board of adjustment and to prescribe their power and duties; and repealing all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix A is derived from Ord. No. 557, enacted July 11, 1966. The ordinance has been set out as enacted. Amendatory provisions have been inserted in their proper places and have been indicated by a history note following the amended section or subsection. Editorial material inserted for clarity and ease of handling has been included in brackets. Uniform systems of capitalization, numbers, punctuation and statutory reference have been used. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1.5 et seq.; department of administration, § 2-221; amusements, ch. 4; buildings and structures, ch. 7; exterior walls to be constructed of brick or masonry, § 7-2; building commissioner, § 7-21 et seq.; fee for occupancy permit, § 7-86; person moving building to comply with zoning ordinance, § 7-152; standards for issuance of permit to move building, § 7-177; restrictions on fences, § 7-224; license for auction and estate sales required, § 14-291; off-street parking in certain districts, § 15-281; riding bicycle on sidewalk in commercial district, § 15-444; planning and development, ch. 19; sign permits, § 22-2; directory signs, § 22-51; subdivisions, ch. 25; dedication of open space lands in subdivisions, § 25-122; swimming pools, ch. 26; keeping or occupying trailers or recreational vehicles, § 28-1. 
State Law reference- Zoning, RSMo 89.010 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - [IN GENERAL] 

Section 1. - [Repeal of conflicting ordinances.] 
    Ordinance No. 41 and Ordinance No. 175, known as the zoning ordinance, passed and approved on the 23rd day of June, 1958, and all amendments thereto, more particularly being Ordinance Nos. 190, 192, 194, 217, 220, 231, 232, 232-A, 249, 250, 252, 260, 264, 267, 286, 288, 289, 295, 299, 300, 301, 304, 314, 324, 333, 336, 337, 339, 356, 357, 358, 360, 367, 450, 461, 478, 481, 486, 496, 515, 516, 518, and 548, are repealed. 
Section 2. - [Short title.] 
    This ordinance shall be known and may be referred to as "the zoning ordinance." 
Section 3. - Special definition of single-family residences. 
    All uses for single-family residences under the zoning ordinance of the city which qualify for single-family use based on state or federal mandated requirements exemplified, for example, by the definition in RSMo. 89.020 shall be subject to the provisions of article XIV, entitled "special use exception regulations" of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2408, § 1, 9-26-94) 
ARTICLE II. - DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES THEREOF 

Section 1. - [Districts enumerated.] 
    In order to classify, regulate and restrict the locations of trades, industries, and the location of buildings designed for specific uses; to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings; to regulate and limit the intensity of use of lots; and to regulate and determine the area of yards, courts and other open spaces within the surrounding buildings, the City of Ballwin, Missouri, is hereby divided into the following zoning districts: 
R-1A single-family dwelling district 
R-1 single-family dwelling district 
R-2 single-family dwelling district 
R-3 single-family dwelling district 
R-4 planned multiple dwelling district 
[R-5 multiple dwelling district] 
PA public activity district 
C-1 commercial district 
C-2 regional shopping district 
C-3 planned limited commercial district 
S-1 service district 
PSD planned single-family development district 
(Ord. No. 963, 6-26-72; Ord. No. 1167, § 1, 1-13-75; Ord. No. 1439, § I, 4-9-79; Ord. No. 1661, § I, 11-14-83) 
Section 2. - [Boundaries.] 
    The boundaries of the districts are hereby established as shown on the map accompanying [the original copy of this ordinance] and made a part of this ordinance, which map is designated as the "district map." The district map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon are, and all amendments thereto made by ordinance shall be, a part of this ordinance and have the same force and effect as if the district map and all the notations, references, other information and amendments thereto shown thereon were all fully set forth or described herein, which district map is properly attested and is on file with the clerk of the City of Ballwin. 
(Ord. No. 1806, §§ I, II, 4-14-86) 
Section 3. - Areas not included within a district. 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by the board of aldermen, the zoning districts adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation, and all area included in the vacation shall be subject to all appropriated regulations of the extended districts. 
(Ord. No. 1284, § 1, 9-27-76) 
ARTICLE III. - COMPLIANCE WITH THE REGULATIONS 

Section 1. - [Generally.] 
    Except as hereinafter specifically provided: 
(1)  No land shall be used except for a purpose permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(2)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, nor shall any building be used, except for a use permitted in the district in which such building is located. 
(3)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the district in which such building is located. 
(4)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered except in conformity with the area regulations of the district in which such building is located. 
(5)  No building shall be erected or structurally altered to the extent specifically provided hereinafter except in conformity with the off-street parking and loading regulations of the district in which such building is located. Off-street parking space being maintained in connection with any existing main building or structure shall be maintained so long as said main building or structure remains unless an equivalent number of such spaces are provided conforming to the requirements of the zoning ordinance; provided, however, that this regulation shall not require the maintenance of more parking space than is required hereinafter for a new building or structure identical to said existing building or structure. 
(6)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, structurally altered, moved or demolished unless a permit therefor has been issued by the building commissioner. 
(7)  The minimum yards, parking spaces, and open spaces, including lot area per family, required by this ordinance, for each and every building existing at the time of passage of this ordinance [July 11, 1966] or for any building hereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as part of the yard or parking space or open space required for any other building, nor shall any lot area be reduced below the requirements of this ordinance for the district in which such lot is located. 
(8)  Except for developers of subdivisions, who may construct not more than five buildings for display purposes, and except as may otherwise be provided herein, every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot as herein defined; and in no case shall there be more than one main building on one lot. The yards and open spaces required in a district in which display buildings are erected shall be provided for and shall not be encroached upon by any display building. 
(9)  Nothing contained in this ordinance shall prevent the use of land for the raising of crops, orchards or forestry, nor require permits therefor. 
(10)  Secondary dwelling units are prohibited in the zoning classifications provided in and by articles III-A, IV, V, V-A, VI, VIII-A, and XII-A. Secondary dwelling units shall be permitted by special use exception in the zoning classifications provided in and by articles IX, X, XI, XII subject to all other provisions of those respective articles. 
(Ord. No. 652, 5-13-68; Ord. No. 03-61, § 2, 10-27-03) 
ARTICLE III-A. - R-1A SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Section 1. - [Generally.] 
    The regulations set forth in this article are the regulations in the R-1A single-family dwelling district. These regulations are supplemented and qualified by additional general regulations appearing elsewhere in this ordinance and which are incorporated as part of this article by reference. 
(Ord. No. 1439, § II, 4-9-79) 
Section 2. - Use regulations. 
    Except as otherwise provided, business and industry are specifically prohibited and a building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Parks, playgrounds and community buildings owned or operated by public agencies. 
(3)  Public libraries. 
(4)  Public schools, elementary and high, and educational institutions having a curriculum similar to that ordinarily given in public schools. 
(5)  Golf courses, except miniature courses and driving tees operated for commercial purposes. 
(6)  Churches. 
(7)  Accessory buildings, including private garages and uses customarily incident to the above uses, not involving the conduct of a business. Any accessory building that is not part of the main building shall be located not less than 60 feet from the front lot line. 
(8)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
(9)  Church or public building bulletin boards not exceeding 20 feet in area, and temporary signs not exceeding six square feet in area appertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises. 
(Ord. No. 1439, § II, 4-9-79) 
Section 3. - Height regulations. 
    No building shall exceed 35 feet in height nor contain more than three stories except as may be otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 1439, § II, 4-9-79) 
Section 4. - Area regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 50 feet, except for land lying along and adjacent to Manchester Road, which shall have a yard having a depth of not less than 60 feet. 
(2)  Side yard. Except as hereinafter provided in sections 2 and 3 of article XVI hereof, there shall be a side yard on each side of a building having a width of not less than 15 feet. Driveways may be built and maintained within the side yard. 
(3)  Rear yard. Except as hereinafter provided in sections 2 and 3 of article XVI hereof, there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 35 feet. 
(4)  Intensity of use of lot. Every lot shall have an area of not less than 40,000 square feet; except that if a lot has less area than herein required and the plat thereof has been duly recorded prior to the date of the passage of this ordinance [April 9, 1979], in the recorder's office of St. Louis County, Missouri, such lot may be used for a single-family dwelling. 
(5)  Width of lot. No buildings shall be erected on any lot having a width of less than 150 feet at the street line, except in cases of lots on curved streets and roads, in which cases such lots shall be at least 150 feet in width at the building line. 
(6)  Dwelling area. 
(1)  No single-story dwelling shall be erected which does not contain at least 2,200 square feet on the ground story thereof covered by a permanent roof and permanently enclosed and designed for yearround use by occupants. Porches, garages, carports, breezeways and other adjacent structures shall not be included in computing the minimum area required. 
(2)  No two-story dwelling shall be erected which does not contain at least 1,600 square feet on the ground story thereof and a total floor area, excluding the floor area of basements, covered by a permanent roof and permanently enclosed and designed for yearround use by occupants of not less than 2,600 square feet. In the case of two-story dwellings, porches, carports, breezeways and other adjacent structures, including garages, shall not be included in computing the minimum area required. 
(Ord. No. 1439, § II, 4-9-79) 
ARTICLE IV. - R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Section 1. - [Generally.] 
    The regulations set forth in this article are the regulations in the R-1 single-family dwelling district. These regulations are supplemented and qualified by additional general regulations appearing elsewhere in this ordinance and which are incorporated as part of this article by reference. 
Section 2. - Use regulations. 
    Except as otherwise provided, business and industry are specifically prohibited and a building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Parks, playgrounds and community buildings owned or operated by public agencies. 
(3)  Public libraries. 
(4)  Public schools, elementary and high, and educational institutions having a curriculum similar to that ordinarily given in public schools. 
(5)  Golf courses, except miniature courses and driving tees operated for commercial purposes. 
(6)  Churches. 
(7)  Accessory buildings, including private garages and uses customarily incident to the above uses, not involving the conduct of a business. Any accessory building that is not part of the main building shall be located not less than 60 feet from the front lot line. 
(8)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
(9)  Church or public building bulletin boards not exceeding 20 square feet in area, and temporary signs not exceeding six square feet in area appertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises. 
Section 3. - Height regulations. 
    No building shall exceed 35 feet in height nor contain more than three stories except as may be otherwise provided herein. 
Section 4. - Area regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 40 feet, except for land lying along and adjacent to Manchester Road, which shall have a yard having a depth of not less than 60 feet. 
(2)  Side yard. Except as hereinafter provided in sections 2 and 3 of article XVI hereof, there shall be a side yard on each side of a building having a width of not less than ten feet. Driveways may be built and maintained within the side yard. 
(3)  Rear yard. Except as hereinafter provided in sections 2 and 3 of article XVI hereof, there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet. 
(4)  Intensity of use of lot. Every lot shall have an area of not less than 20,000 square feet; except that if a lot has less area than herein required and the plat thereof has been duly recorded prior to the date of the passage of this ordinance [July 11, 1966], in the recorder's office of St. Louis County, Missouri, such lot may be used for a single-family dwelling. 
(5)  Width of lot. No buildings shall be erected on any lot having a width of less than 100 feet at the street line except in cases of lots on curved streets and roads, in which cases such lots shall be at least 100 feet in width at the building line. 
(6)  Dwelling area. 
(1)  No single-story dwelling shall be erected which does not contain at least 1,150 square feet on the ground story thereof covered by a permanent roof and permanently enclosed and designed for yearround use by occupants. Porches, garages, carports, breezeways and other adjacent structures shall not be included in computing the minimum area required. 
(2)  No two-story dwelling shall be erected which does not contain at least 850 square feet on the ground story thereof and a total floor area, excluding the floor area of basements, covered by a permanent roof and permanently enclosed and designed for yearround use by occupants of not less than 1,700 square feet. In the case of two-story dwellings, porches, carports, breezeways and other adjacent structures including garages shall not be included in computing the minimum area required. 
(Ord. No. 597, 5-25-67) 
ARTICLE V. - R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Section 1. - [Generally.] 
    The regulations set forth in this article are the regulations in the R-2 single-family dwelling district. These regulations are supplemented and qualified by additional general regulations appearing elsewhere in this ordinance and which are incorporated as part of this article by reference. 
Section 2. - Use regulations. 
    The use regulations are the same as those in the R-1 single-family dwelling district. 
Section 3. - Height regulations. 
    The height regulations are the same as those in the R-1 single-family dwelling district. 
Section 4. - Area regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. The front yard regulations shall be the same as those in the R-1 single-family dwelling district. 
(2)  Side yard. The side yard regulations shall be the same as those in the R-1 single-family dwelling district. 
(3)  Rear yard. The rear yard regulations shall be the same as those in the R-1 single-family dwelling district. 
(4)  Intensity of use. Every lot shall have an area of not less than 20,000 square feet with the following exceptions: 
(1)  If a lot [shall] have less area than herein required and the plat thereof has been duly recorded in the office of the St. Louis County recorder prior to the date of passage of this ordinance, such lot may be used for a single-family dwelling; or 
(2)  If a lot [shall] have access to and buildings thereon are connected to a private or public sanitary sewer, which has been approved by the City of Ballwin for the common disposal of waste and refuse, such lot shall have an area of not less than 12,500 square feet. 
(5)  Width of lot. No building shall be erected on any lot having a width of less than 100 feet at the street line, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  If a lot be located on a curve or arc of a street or roadway, no building shall be erected thereon unless such lot shall have a width of not less than 100 feet at the building line; or 
(2)  If a lot have access to and buildings thereon are connected to a private or public sanitary sewer, which has been approved by the City of Ballwin for the common disposal of waste and refuse, such lot shall have a width of not less than 85 feet at the building line, but the width at the street line shall be not less than 45 feet. 
(6)  Dwelling area. The dwelling area requirements and regulations shall be the same as those in the R-1 single-family dwelling district. 
(Ord. No. 623, 11-19-67) 
ARTICLE VA. - R-2A SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Section 1. - [Generally.] 
    The regulations set forth in this article are the regulations in the R-2A single-family dwelling district. These regulations are supplemented and qualified by additional general regulations appearing elsewhere in this article and which are incorporated as part of this article by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2674, § 1, 3-23-98) 
Section 2. - Use regulations. 
    Except as otherwise provided, business and industry are specifically prohibited and a building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Parks, playgrounds and community buildings owned or operated by public agencies. 
(3)  Public libraries. 
(4)  Public schools, elementary and high, and educational institutions having a curriculum similar to that ordinarily given in public schools. 
(5)  Golf courses, except miniature courses and driving tees operated for commercial purposes. 
(6)  Churches. 
(7)  Accessory buildings, including private garages and uses customarily incident to the above uses, not involving the conduct of a business. Any accessory building that is not part of the main building shall be located not less than 60 feet from the front lot line. 
(8)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
(9)  Church or public building bulletin boards not exceeding 20 square feet in area, and temporary signs not exceeding six square feet in area appertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises. 
(Ord. No. 2674, § 2, 3-23-98) 
Section 3. - Height regulations. 
    No building shall exceed 35 feet in height nor contain more than three stories except as may be otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2674, § 3, 3-23-98) 
Section 4. - Area regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet; except for land lying along and adjacent to Manchester Rd., which shall have a front yard having a depth of not less than 60 feet; and land lying along Ries Rd., New Ballwin Rd., Clayton Rd., Henry Rd., Baxter Rd., and Oak St. shall have a front yard having a depth of not less than 40 feet. 
(2)  Side yard. There shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet on each side of a building, except as provided hereafter in sections 2 and 3 of article XVI. Driveways to garages may be located within the required side yard. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear year of not less than 15 feet, except as provided hereafter in sections 2 and 3 of article XVI. 
(4)  Intensity of use. Every lot shall have an area of not less than 20,000 square feet except: 
(a)  If a lot has less area than herein required and the plat thereof had been duly recorded in the office of the St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds prior to February 1, 1998, such lot may be used for a single-family dwelling; or 
(b)  If a lot has access to a public sanitary sewer for common disposal of waste and refuse, and buildings thereon are connected to said public sewer, and such lot has an area of not less than 15,000 square feet, such lot may be used for a single-family dwelling. 
(5)  Width of lot. No building shall be erected on any lot having a width of less than 100 feet at the building line: 
(a)  If a lot is located on a curve or arc of a street or roadway, no building shall be erected thereon unless such lot shall have a width of not less than 100 feet at the building line; or 
(b)  If a lot has access to a public sanitary sewer for the common disposal of waste and refuse, and building thereon are connected to said public sewer, such lot shall have a width of not less than 70 feet at the street line; provided that if a lot be located on a curve or arc of a street or roadway, no building shall be erected thereon unless such lot shall have width of not less than 70 feet at the building line and not less than 45 feet at the street line. 
(6)  Dwelling area. 
(a)  No single-story dwelling shall be erected which does not contain at least 1,150 square feet on the ground story thereof covered by a permanent roof and permanently enclosed and designed for year-round use by occupants. Porches, garages, carports, breezeways and other adjacent structures shall not be included in computing the minimum area required. 
(2)  No two-story dwelling shall be erected which does not contain at least 850 square feet on the ground story thereof and a total floor area, excluding the floor area of basements, covered by a permanent roof and permanently enclosed and designed for year-round use by occupants of not less than 1,700 square feet. In the case of two-story dwellings, porches, carports, breezeways and other adjacent structures including garages shall not be included in computing the minimum area required. 
(Ord. No. 2674, § 1, 3-23-98) 
ARTICLE VI. - R-3 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Section 1. - [Generally.] 
    The regulations set forth in this article are the regulations in the R-3 single-family dwelling district. These regulations are supplemented and qualified by additional general regulations appearing elsewhere in this ordinance and which are incorporated as part of this article by reference. 
Section 2. - Use regulations. 
    The use regulations are the same as those in the R-1 single-family dwelling district. 
Section 3. - Height regulations. 
    The height regulations are the same as those in the R-1 single-family dwelling district. 
Section 4. - Area regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 20 feet; except for land lying along and adjacent to Manchester Road, which shall have a front yard having a depth of not less than 60 feet; and land lying along Ries Road, New Ballwin Road and Oak Street shall have a front yard having a depth of not less than 40 feet. 
(2)  Side yard. There shall be a side yard of not less than eight feet on each side of a building, except as provided hereafter in sections 2 and 3 of article XVI. Driveways to garages may be located within the required side yard. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 15 feet, except as provided hereafter in sections 2 and 3 of article XVI. 
(4)  Intensity of use. Every lot shall have an area of not less than 20,000 square feet except: 
(a)  If a lot have less area than herein required and the plat thereof has been duly recorded in the office of the St. Louis County recorder prior to June 1, 1991, such lot may be used for a single-family dwelling; or 
(b)  If a lot has access to and buildings thereon are connected to a public sanitary sewer for common disposal of waste and refuse and such lot has an area of not less than 10,000 square feet, such lot may be used for a single-family dwelling. 
(5)  Width of lot. No building shall be erected on any lot having a width of less than 100 feet at the street line, except: 
(a)  If a lot be located on a curve or arc of a street or roadway, no building shall be erected thereon unless such lot shall have a width of not less than 100 feet at the building line; or 
(b)  If a lot has access to and buildings thereon are connected to a private or public sanitary sewer, which has been approved by the City of Ballwin, for the common disposal of waste and refuse, such lot shall have a width of not less than 70 square feet at the street line; provided that if a lot be located on a curve or arc of a street or roadway, no building shall be erected thereon unless such lot shall have a width of not less than 70 feet at the building line, and not less than 45 feet at the street line. 
(6)  Dwelling area. 
(1)  No single-story dwelling shall be erected which does not contain at least 900 square feet on the ground story thereof covered by a permanent roof and permanently enclosed and designed for yearround use by occupants. Porches, garages, carports, breezeways and other adjacent structures shall not be included in computing the minimum area required. 
(2)  No two-story dwelling shall be erected which does not contain at least 700 square feet on the ground story thereof and a total floor area, excluding the floor area of basement, covered by a permanent roof and permanently enclosed and designed for yearround use by occupants of not less than 1,500 square feet. Porches, garages, carports, breezeways and other adjacent structures shall not be included in computing the minimum area required. 
(Ord. No. 623, 11-19-67; Ord. No. 2167, § 1, 6-10-91) 
ARTICLE VII. - R-4 PLANNED MULTIPLE DWELLING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Section 1. - [Generally.] 
    The regulations set forth in this article are the regulations in the R-4 planned multiple dwelling district and are established to provide an opportunity for modern and imaginative architectural design, site arrangement, and city planning for certain areas within the City of Ballwin suitable for multifamily development, other provisions of this zoning ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding. These areas shall be established by the board of aldermen by ordinance and approval of a preliminary site plan after a report and recommendation is received from the zoning commission in accordance with article XXIII, Amendments. 
(Ord. No. 969, 7-10-72) 
Section 2. - Application for planned multiple dwelling district. 
    The owner or owners of any tract of land comprising an area of not less than two acres may petition the board of aldermen for the establishment of the planned multiple dwelling district. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  Legal and general description of the area to be encompassed in said district; 
(2)  Evidence of unified ownership or control of the area applied for; 
(3)  Statement of petitioner's experience and background in real estate development and residential or commercial construction; 
(4)  The city's standard petition form with all information completed and filled in; and 
(5)  Preliminary site plan, showing the legal out-boundary property dimensions and bearings, existing and proposed topography, all proposed buildings, drainage facilities, paving, parking, existing proposed right-of-way dedications, streets, landscaping and open areas to remain undeveloped, the proposed use of all buildings and land areas within the project and the type and number of living units proposed. The plan shall list the estimated percentage of total land area used for: 
(a)  Buildings; 
(b)  Streets, drives and parking; 
(c)  Recreation and open space. 
(6)  Before any action shall be taken as provided in this article, the party or parties petitioning for an R-4 site plant petition shall pay a fee of $500.00. Under no circumstances or condition shall the fee or any portion be refunded for failure of said change to be adopted by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 969, 7-10-72; Ord. No. 2668, § 1, 2-23-98) 
Section 3. - Establishment of R-4 planned multiple dwelling district. 
    Upon establishment of the planned multiple dwelling district by the board of aldermen, the petitioner shall record a copy of the ordinance and a linen or mylar copy of the approved preliminary site plan which has been certified and signed by the mayor with the St. Louis County recorder of deeds. Three copies of the recorded plan shall be submitted to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 969, 7-10-72) 
Section 4. - Use regulations. 
    A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family dwellings, row houses, and other group house arrangements of attached or detached buildings. 
(3)  Golf courses, except miniature courses and driving tees. 
(4)  Public and private not-for-profit libraries, parks, parkways, playgrounds and swimming pools. 
(5)  The following commercial uses when located within a multiple-family structure, provided these occupy not more than five percent of the floor area of the structure, or if provided in a separate structure or structures of a multistructure development, the floor area occupied by such commercial uses shall not exceed five percent of the total floor area of the multiple-family structures within the development; and provided further that no displays are visible from the outside of the structure: 
(a)  Foodstore or drugstore; 
(b)  Barber or beauty shop; 
(c)  Self-service laundry facility; 
(d)  Restaurant, by special use permit; 
(e)  Cigar or newspaper stand. 
(Ord. No. 969, 7-10-72) 
Section 5. - Height regulations. 
    No building shall exceed 35 feet in height nor contain more than two stories, except, however, when the tract to be developed, as set out in the preliminary site plan, abuts land which is not a right-of-way for an existing public street, in which case no building may be erected along the ten-foot perimeter, described in the area regulations, which exceeds 12 feet in height. A building may be erected one additional foot in height over 12 feet for each foot by which the building is set back from the ten-foot perimeter, subject, however, to the overall 35-foot height limitation. 
(Ord. No. 969, 7-10-72; Ord. No. 1597, § I, 8-23-82) 
Section 6. - Area regulations. 
(1)  No building shall be erected nearer than ten feet to the perimeter of the entire tract, as set out in the preliminary site plan; except, however, that no building shall be erected nearer than 60 feet to the right-of-way boundary of any public street nor closer than 60 feet to an existing single-family use or zoning requirement. Building setbacks from internal streets shall be a minimum of 20 feet. 
(2)  For the purpose of interpreting and enforcing the yard requirements of this article, the entire area included within the R-4 planned multiple dwelling district shall be considered as a single lot; more than one building or structure may be erected thereon, and the only front, rear and side yards that need to be observed are those provided for in subsection (1) of section 6. 
(Ord. No. 969, 7-10-72; Ord. No. 1597, § I, 8-23-82; Ord. No. 2433, § 1, 3-27-95) 
Section 7. - Intensity of use. 
    The tract of land approved by the board of aldermen as planned multiple dwelling district shall contain not less than 2,000 square feet of area for each dwelling unit. The petitioner may request approval of a plan which includes fewer units than the maximum number that would be allowed, and the board of aldermen may limit the number of units to less than the maximum number of units that would be allowed by the 2,000-square-foot requirement. 
    In any case, no single building in the development shall have more than six individual units, and the average [number] of units for the development shall be no more than five units per building. No single unit in any building in the development shall be smaller than 900 square feet, and all units in a single building shall average a minimum of 1,200 square feet of usable living area, exclusive of basement storage areas. The use intensity described above shall be applied both on a per building basis and a per site plan or development basis. 
(Ord. No. 969, 7-10-72; Ord. No. 1597, § I, 8-23-82) 
Section 8. - Parking regulations. 
    Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of two attached, enclosed garages per unit with space in the driveway for two additional vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 969, 7-10-72; Ord. No. 1597, § I, 8-23-82) 
Section 9. - Open space and recreational land. 
    Not less than 40 percent of the area of a planned multiple dwelling district shall be open area. Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be preserved wherever possible. The applicant shall designate or show at the time of filing of the final plat what trees and other natural features are to be retained. Artificial and natural lakes and wooded areas are to be preserved and encouraged as much as possible. 
    The city also shall require the payment of a fee allocable for recreation in the city. The amount of such fee shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of section 25-124 of this Code. Such fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of any grading, development or building permit. 
(Ord. No. 05-45, § 1, 10-24-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-45, § 1, adopted Oct. 24, 2005, deleted the former § 9, and enacted a new § 9 as set out herein. The former § 9 pertained to recreational areas, and derived from Ord. No. 969, adopted July 10, 1972; Ord. No. 1597, § I, adopted Aug. 23, 1982; Ord. No. 03-60, § 1, adopted Oct. 27, 2003. 
Section 10. - Final development plan. 
    The final development plan submitted for approval by the applicant shall contain the following: 
(1)  A drawing to scale, with contour lines at intervals not exceeding five feet, which shall show the following: 
(a)  The location, use and heights of all buildings and structures on the tract. 
(b)  The location of recreational, wooded areas, streets, parking areas, and proposed landscape areas. 
(c)  The egress facilities for all automobile traffic entering or exiting the development. 
(d)  The legal property lines, distances and bearings. 
(e)  All utilities, sewers, easements, drainage facilities, and site improvements. 
(f)  Legal script for recording as directed by the board of aldermen. 
    Four prints and the original mylar or linen final development plan shall be submitted. Upon approval by the board of aldermen, the original shall be signed and returned to the petitioner for recording. After recording, the petitioner shall furnish three certified copies of the recorded plan to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 969, 7-10-72) 
Section 11. - Approval of final development plans. 
(1)  The final development plans contemplated by this article may be either the final development plans for the entire project or may consist of the final development plan of any particular phase, portion or section of the project. 
(2)  Upon establishment of the planned multiple dwelling district by the board of aldermen, the petition shall be referred back to the zoning commission for consideration of the filed development plan, which shall be submitted to the zoning commission by the applicant within 180 days after the establishment of the planned multiple dwelling district by the board of aldermen. If no final development plan is submitted within said 180 days by the applicant, the board of aldermen may proceed to rezone the property to the zoning district classification that prevailed prior to the approval of the planned multiple dwelling district. The zoning commission shall recommend the approval or disapproval of the final development plan to the board of aldermen and shall refer such plan back to the board of aldermen for approval or disapproval. 
(3)  The board of aldermen may not approve a final development plan that differs substantially from the recorded preliminary site plan. 
(4)  No building permit shall be issued by the building commissioner for any structure in the project or any phase thereof that does not conform to the approved and recorded final development plan. During the course of construction, no changes shall be made in the final development plan unless approved by the board of aldermen. 
(5)  If substantial work or construction is not started within one year of the date of the approval of a final development plan by the board of aldermen, no further building permits for the project shall be issued; and the board of aldermen may move to rezone the property or any portion thereof to the zoning district classification that prevailed prior to the approval of the planned multiple dwelling district. 
(6)  The reissuance of building permits may be authorized and the time limitations specified in this section may be extended by the board of aldermen for reason. 
(7)  If the project is developed in phases, each phase shall contain land area in proportion to the percentage of total authorized living units included in that phase. For example, if 25 percent of the total authorized living units are included in a phase, or in an accumulation of phases at any time, then at least 25 percent of the total project area must be included in that phase or in all of the phases included up to that time. The tract or tracts included in a particular phase need not be continuous. 
(8)  The board of aldermen shall refer each proposed final development plan for each phase to the planning and zoning commission and the city engineer for recommendation of approval or disapproval. 
(Ord. No. 969, 7-10-72; Ord. No. 981, 8-14-72) 
Section 12. - Assurance of site improvements. 
    Upon approval of a final development plan by the board of aldermen and before any building permit shall issue for the erection of buildings under that plan, the applicant shall file a bond with a corporate surety in a sum equal to the estimated cost of all site improvements, such as area lighting, recreation facilities, streets, sewers, walks, parking areas, and retaining walls, if any, for that phase of the project which has been approved. The bond shall be payable to the city and conditioned upon the completion of all such site improvements. In lieu of a surety bond, the applicant may place in escrow assets of a total value to ensure the completion of site improvements and shall file with the city an escrow agreement, previously approved as to form by the city. The purpose of a bond or escrow arrangement required by this subsection [sic] is to assure that each such phase, as approved by the board of aldermen, be a suitable development in the event the balance of the project or the next phase be not undertaken or completed for any reason. 
(Ord. No. 969, 7-10-72) 
Cross reference- Parking, stopping and standing, § 15-256 et seq.; sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 21; streets and sidewalks, ch. 24. 
Section 13. - Amendment of recorded preliminary site plan. 
    The owner or owners of any tract or project for which a planned multiple dwelling district preliminary site plan has been recorded and who desire to change the development plan and to depart from the recorded preliminary site plan, may petition for an "amended preliminary site plan in a planned multiple dwelling district" in accordance with section 2 of this article and article XXIII. After recommendation from the planning and zoning commission and a public hearing, the board of aldermen may approve an "amended preliminary site plan" which shall be processed and recorded as described in this article for a preliminary site plan. 
(Ord. No. 969, 7-10-72) 
Section 14. - Amendment of recorded final development plan. 
    The owner or owners of any tract or project for which a planned multiple dwelling district final development plan has been recorded and who desire to change the development plan and depart from the recorded final development plan, may petition for an "amended final development plan in a planned multiple dwelling district" in accordance with sections 10 and 11 of this article and article XXIII. After recommendation from the planning and zoning commission and a public hearing, the board of aldermen may approve an "amended final development plan" which shall be processed and recorded as described in this article for a final development plan. 
(Ord. No. 969, 7-10-72) 
ARTICLE VIII. - R-5 Planned Infill Multiple (PIM) Family Dwelling District Regulations[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2704, § 1, repealed the former Art. VIII, §§ 1-4, and added a new Art. VIII as set out herein. The former Art. VIII pertained to R-5 multiple dwelling district regulations and derived from Ord. No. 623, adopted Nov. 19, 1967, and Ord. No. 963, adopted June 26, 1972. 

[Sec. 0.1.] - Purpose. 
    The regulations set forth in this article are the regulations of the R-5 planned infill multiple family dwelling district (PIM). These regulations are established with the purpose of providing modern, imaginative and site-appropriate opportunities for architectural design, site arrangement and city planning for certain areas and parcels of land within the city. Utilization of this zoning district is intended to facilitate the development of vacant or underutilized parcels of land that are typically surrounded by a mixture of existing and viable developments. These parcels may be suitable and appropriate for multiple family land uses, but cannot be developed under the provisions of the R-4 planned multiple family dwelling district due to one or more of the following issues: small size, unique character, unusual shape, topographic limitations or inappropriate zoning. These parcels of land shall be identified and established by the board of aldermen by ordinance and approval of a preliminary site development plan after a report and recommendation from the zoning commission in accordance with article XXIII, amendments of the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2704, § 1, 10-26-98) 
Sec. 1. - Application for planned infill multiple family dwelling district. 
    The owner or owners of any tract of land comprising an area of not more than two acres may petition the board of aldermen for the establishment of a planned infill multiple family dwelling district (PIM). The application shall include the following: 
1.  The legal description of the property being requested for the zoning district change. 
2.  A vicinity map drawn at a scale of not less that 1:1000 showing the location of the parcel(s) contained in the legal description. 
3.  A copy of the official record of ownership of the property (deed). 
4.  Evidence of legal interest in the property to allow a petition for rezoning and development if the petition is not submitted by the owner. 
5.  A statement of the petitioner's experience and background in multiple family real estate development and residential construction. 
6.  A fully executed and notarized city petition form with all required information provided. 
7.  A preliminary site development plan with accompanying documentation and materials as needed to show the following: 
The out boundaries, bearings and dimensions of the property described in the legal description. 
The existing and proposed topography of the site at no less than two-foot intervals. 
All proposed buildings, pavement and other site improvements. 
All drainage facilities and a clear indication of the post development drainage patterns within the site and from the site onto adjoining properties. 
A preliminary computation of pre and post development runoff characteristics of the site showing discharge rates and directions. 
A preliminary computation of the size, location and discharge rate of any detention basin. 
All parking facilities. 
All landscaped and open areas to remain undeveloped. 
The number of dwelling units proposed, the floor area of each unit and sufficient information about the height of each unit to verify that it will comply with the height regulations of the district. 
A computation of the total land area used for buildings, pavement, recreation areas and open space. 
(Ord. No. 2704, § 1, 10-26-98) 
Sec. 2. - Review process. 
1.  A petition for a planned infill multiple dwelling district rezoning shall be reviewed according to the general process outlined in article XXIII of the city zoning ordinance. The preliminary site development plan shall be reviewed in accordance with the general process outlined for special use exceptions in article XIV, section 3, Application/petition procedure (1)-(5) of the city zoning ordinance. The particular code requirements of article XIV shall be deemed to reference the particular code requirements of this article. 
2.  Once the board of aldermen holds a public hearing, it shall decide if the PIM district zoning change and the preliminary site development plan shall be approved. Both must be accepted and/or approved at the same time. 
3.  The zoning change and the preliminary site development plan shall be approved for a period of 120 calendar days following the date of approval. In that time, the developer shall submit a final development plan with final engineering which is substantially in accordance with the approved preliminary development plan. The failure of the petitioner to submit a final development plan within the 120-day period shall result in the automatic revocation of the preliminary site plan approval and reversion of the zoning classification to the previous district classification(s). 
(Ord. No. 2704, § 1, 10-26-98) 
Sec. 3. - Parcels. 
1.  No parcel or groups of parcels of land shall be considered for a PIM district classification which is greater than two acres in size. 
2.  Multiple parcels of land may be submitted as a single petition. A single development plan shall be separately but simultaneously submitted for each parcel. Setback regulations shall apply on a parcel by parcel basis. 
(Ord. No. 2704, § 1, 10-26-98) 
Sec. 4. - Use regulations. 
    A building or premises in the PIM district shall only be used for the following purposes: 
1.  Multiple family dwelling units including owner occupied and rental units. 
2.  Accessory buildings and structures and spaces customarily incidental to the allowed uses. 
3.  Open space that is permanently dedicated and guaranteed in perpetuity, by covenant, to stay in an open space configuration. 
(Ord. No. 2704, § 1, 10-26-98) 
Sec. 5. - Height regulations. 
1.  Maximum height. The maximum height of any structure in the PIM district shall be the mean of the maximum structure heights allowed in all of the adjoining districts. In no case shall the maximum height exceed 45 feet. 
2.  Setback height. The maximum height of any structure, including fences, within the required yard setback from any property line abutting a non PIM district or a publicly dedicated roadway shall be eight feet. Except as outlined herein, the height of any part of any structure shall not exceed the distance of that portion of the structure from the property line plus eight feet. 
(Ord. No. 2704, § 1, 10-26-98) 
Sec. 6. - Yard setback regulations. 
    All yard setbacks shall be the same as those of the R-2 single-family dwelling district except as follows: 
1.  Side and rear yard setbacks in the PIM district for such yards abutting single-family residential districts shall be the same as that required in the abutting residential district for the same yard set-back. (Example: a PIM side yard abutting a R-1 district shall have a ten-foot side yard which is the side yard required in the R-1 district. In the case of a PIM rear yard abutting the R-3 district, the required rear yard would be 15 feet, the rear yard of the R-3 district.) 
2.  No front yard shall be used for parking, although driveways providing access to other portions of the site that do not exceed 16 feet in width and are not planned as parking areas may be placed within a required front yard. 
3.  No paved or impervious surfaces of any kind, including but not limited to driveways, sidewalks, patios, parking areas, etc., shall be allowed within the required minimum side and rear yard setback areas. These shall be preserved exclusively for landscaping and green space buffers. 
4.  For the purpose of interpreting and enforcing the yard requirements of this article, the entire area included within the PIM site development plan shall be considered as a single lot and the only front, rear and side yards that need to be observed are those provided for in subsection 2. of section 3 and subsection 7. of section 1 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2704, § 1, 10-26-98) 
Sec. 7. - Intensity of use. 
1.  A minimum land area per dwelling unit of 2,750 square feet must be provided within any PIM development in which there is constructed, or created by the conversion of an existing structure originally intended for a different purpose, multiple family dwelling units. The petitioner may request approval of a plan with more land area per dwelling unit. The board of aldermen may limit the number of dwelling units to less than the theoretical maximum provided by this section if it is determined that such limitation is in the best interests of the community. 
2.  No single building shall have more than six individual dwelling units. 
3.  No individual dwelling unit shall have less than 900 square feet of living area not including unfinished spaces such as basements, attics, storage areas, and vehicular parking spaces. 
4.  The average living area of all dwelling units within a PIM district development shall be no less than 1,000 square feet. 
5.  More than one building shall be allowed on a single parcel. 
6.  Where multiple buildings are proposed for a single parcel of land, there shall be a minimum spacing between such buildings of 30 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2704, § 1, 10-26-98) 
[Sec. 8. - Reserved.] 
Sec. 9. - Internal vehicular circulation and parking. 
1.  Any internal roadway which connects to two or more existing or proposed public roadways, including two connections to the same roadway, which, because of their design and placement are subject to frequent utilization by the general public, shall be built to minimum public roadway, right-of-way and construction standards as set out in chapters 24 and 25 of this Code and shall be dedicated as a public roadway. Frontage on such roads shall meet all front yard regulations of this article. 
2.  Internal roadways and drives serving only the residents of the development shall be built to commercial parking lot pavement and dimensional standards and shall be a minimum of eight feet wide for one-way flow and a minimum of 16 feet wide for two-way flow. Such roadways and drives shall be the maintenance responsibility of the property owner, or his/her/its assigns, heirs or successors. 
3.  Parking shall be provided at a rate of two enclosed garages per dwelling unit plus one and one-half visitor spaces per dwelling unit. All parking spaces shall meet minimum city and ADA standards of design. No on-street parking within any publicly dedicated right-of-way shall be considered toward meeting this parking requirement. 
4.  All driveways and parking areas shall be built in accordance with the design standards specified for commercial parking areas provided in article XX of the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2704, § 1, 10-26-98) 
Sec. 10. - Recreation. 
1.  A minimum of ten percent of the total land area of the PIM site development plan shall be devoted to active recreational amenities. (Example: swimming pools, tennis and basketball courts, trails, playgrounds, etc.) Such facilities shall be available to all residents of the development. 
2.  As an alternative to dedicating a portion of the development for active recreational amenities, the petitioner may elect to pay a fee in lieu thereof. The amount of such fee shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of chapter 25, article IV, section 25-124 of this Code of Ordinances. If this option is chosen, such fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of any grading, development or building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2704, § 1, 10-26-98) 
Sec. 11. - Open space. 
1.  A minimum of 25 percent of the total land area of a PIM development petition shall be devoted exclusively to open space. Dedicated open space areas shall not include any sidewalk, driveway, roadway or other paved area, however, unenclosed and uncovered patio type areas developed at grade level and all spaces designated as active recreational amenities shall be counted toward the open space requirement. Hallways, porticos, and other interior and covered common areas shall not be included in the definition of open space. 
(Ord. No. 2704, § 1, 10-26-98) 
Sec. 12. - Storm water control. 
1.  Runoff. All parcels of land developed pursuant to this article shall include plans for the collection and distribution of storm water runoff. Under no circumstances shall the rate of storm water discharge and/or runoff from any portion of a site after development or during the period of development and construction exceed the undeveloped (vegetation only) discharge rate. This provision shall apply on a spot measurement basis at all points around the perimeter of the site and within existing storm water systems as well as on a total site discharge basis. 
2.  Detention. Detention shall be provided for all differential runoff, regardless of the amount or size of the parcel. Such detention shall be provided on-site, in above ground or buried facilities, in accordance with accepted practices and in compliance with the more restrictive of the regulations of the metropolitan sanitary sewer district or the city as stipulated by board of aldermen policy and chapter 25 of this Code of Ordinances. 
3.  [Discharge.] All detention facility discharge shall be made into existing piped storm water systems. Surface discharge shall only be allowed where no piped system can be utilized within 300 feet of the site or where significant surface flow-ways such as Fishpot or Grand Glaize Creeks are available. 
(Ord. No. 2704, § 1, 10-26-98) 
Sec. 13. - Approval of final site development plan. 
1.  Upon approval of the PIM district and the preliminary site development plan by the board of aldermen, the petitioner shall have 120 days to submit a final development plan for review and approval. The final development plan shall cover the entire area of the approved preliminary development plan. 
2.  The review of the final site development plan shall follow the same process as the review of the preliminary development plan. 
3.  The board of aldermen may not approve a final site development plan that differs substantially from the preliminary site development plan. Should such a plan be submitted it shall be reviewed as an amended preliminary site development plan or it shall be rejected. 
4.  No building, construction or grading permit shall be issued for any element in the project or any phase thereof that does not conform to the approved final site development plan. During the course of construction, no changes shall be made to the final site development plan unless approved by the board of aldermen. 
5.  If substantial work or construction is not started within one calendar year of the date of the approval of the final site development plan by the board of aldermen, all issued building permits shall terminate, no additional permits shall be issued for the project and the board of aldermen shall hold a public hearing to consider the rezoning of the parcel(s) or any portion thereof to the zoning district classification that existed prior to the approval of the PIM zoning district change. 
6.  The resumption of issuance of building permits may be authorized and the time limitations specified in this section may be extended by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 2704, § 1, 10-26-98) 
Sec. 14. - Recording of final site development plan. 
    Within 120 days of the date of approval of the final development plan by the board of aldermen, the petitioner shall record a copy of said plan in the office of the St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds. No building, construction or grading permits shall be issued until such recording is completed and a copy of the recorded document is provided to the city planner. 
(Ord. No. 2704, § 1, 10-26-98) 
Sec. 15. - Amendment of approved preliminary or final site development plan. 
    The petitioner or owner of any tract or project for which a PIM district designation and preliminary or final site development plan have been approved, who wishes to depart from the approved preliminary or final site development plan may petition for an "amended preliminary or final site development plan" in accordance with section 1 of this article. After recommendation from the zoning commission, and a public hearing, the board of aldermen may approve an "amended preliminary or final site development plan" which shall be processed as described in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2704, § 1, 10-26-98) 
ARTICLE VIIIA. - PA PUBLIC ACTIVITY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Section 1. - [Generally.] 
    The regulations set forth in this article are the regulations in the PA public activity district. The PA district is intended to accommodate those uses and groupings of uses which have a distinctly public rather than private character and to encourage the retention of certain properties in a relatively undeveloped state, such as a public or private recreation use. These regulations are supplemented and qualified by additional general regulations appearing elsewhere in this ordinance and which are incorporated as a part of this article by reference. 
(Ord. No. 1167, § 2, 1-13-75) 
Section 2. - Use regulations. 
    Except as otherwise provided, business and industry are specifically prohibited; and a building, premises or lot shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Public parks, playgrounds, recreational grounds and facilities, including golf courses and swimming pools. 
(2)  Semipublic or private parks and recreational areas and facilities, including swimming pools, when owned and operated by a nonprofit organization. 
(3)  Public buildings and properties of a cultural, recreational, administrative or service type, including supporting, maintenance and storage facilities, libraries and food and beverage service in places of public or private assembly. 
(4)  Public or private wildlife preservation and conservation areas, including stream valley drainage easements or floodplains. 
(5)  Special uses: Public utilities and services, including special rights-of-way and easements may be allowed as special uses in accordance with the procedures provided in article XIV, provided that the exterior appearance of any building so permitted shall be in keeping with the character of the neighborhood in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 1167, § 2, 1-13-75) 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 18; swimming pools, ch. 26. 
Section 3. - Height regulations. 
    No building or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height nor contain more than three stories. 
(Ord. No. 1167, § 2, 1-13-75) 
Section 4. - Area regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 40 feet, except for land lying along and adjacent to Manchester Road, which shall have a yard having a depth of not less than 60 feet. 
(2)  Side or rear yard. Except when a lot line abuts a residential use located within the same or within a different use district, no side or rear yard is required. In the case where a lot line abuts a residential use located within the same or within a different use district, side or rear yards shall be provided in accordance with the regulations for side and rear yards in the R-1 single-family dwelling district. 
(Ord. No. 1167, § 2, 1-13-75) 
ARTICLE IX. - C-1 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-27, § 1, adopted July 28, 2008, repealed the former Art. IX, §§ 1-7, and enacted a new Art. IX as set out herein. The former Art. IX pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 667, 9-8-68; Ord. No. 681, 11-16-68; Ord. No. 964, 6-26-72; Ord. No. 966, 6-26-72; Ord. No. 1075, § 1, 10-8-73; Ord. No. 1160, § 1, 12-23-74; Ord. No. 1185, § 1, 4-28-75; Ord. No. 1438, § I, 3-26-79; Ord. No. 1632, § I, 6-13-83; Ord. No. 1677, § I, 3-26-84; Ord. No. 1691, § I, 2-13-84; Ord. No. 1733, § II, 2-11-85; Ord. No. 1742, § I, 4-22-85; Ord. No. 1798, § II(A-I), 3-24-86; Ord. No. 1833, § II, 7-14-86; Ord. No. 2313, § 1, 5-24-93; Ord. No. 2320, § 1, 6-28-93; Ord. No. 99-41, §§ 1-4, 9-27-99; Ord. No. 00-20, § 1, 4-10-00. 

Section 1. - Generally. 
    The regulations contained in this article are the regulations in the C-1 commercial district. These regulations are supplemented and qualified by additional general regulations appearing elsewhere in this ordinance and which are incorporated as part of this article by reference. 
(Ord. No. 08-27, § 1, 7-28-08) 
Section 2. - Use regulations. 
(1)  A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Park, playground and community buildings owned or operated by any department of the city, county, state or federal government. 
(2)  Public elementary, middle and high schools, and private educational institutions of a similar character and having a curriculum the same as ordinarily given in public schools. 
(3)  Buildings for religious worship and customary accessory uses but excluding facilities for the burial, storage, entombment or other internment of human remains. 
(4)  Outdoor athletic fields owned and operated by a government or a not for profit entity 
(5)  Bakery for the production and sale at wholesale and retail of bakery goods provided that no less than 25% of the gross floor area of the space is utilized exclusively for retail sales on the premises. 
(6)  Barbershop, beauty, nail or tanning salon and similar personal grooming and hygiene uses but not including public baths, tattooing, body piercing, massages or similar uses. 
(7)  Massage therapist providing the business produces proof of education and state licensing for all employed practitioners. 
(8)  Gym, exercise, fitness, dance and martial arts and similar facilities, both public and private, offering facilities, equipment and classes for exercise, training, skill enhancement, fitness, weight loss, and similar uses. 
(9)  Dressmaking, millinery, drapery, sewing, alterations and /or tailoring shop (employing not more than five persons). 
(10)  Retail dyeing, dry cleaning or laundry shops provided that not more than five employees shall be engaged at any time on the premises in any processing use. 
(11)  Veterinarian offices, hospitals/clinics for small animals and/or animal grooming, including treatment and consultation rooms and commonly related indoor facilities and equipment but not including outdoor kennels. 
(12)  Private clubs and lodges, such as philanthropic, fraternal, civic and social. 
(13)  Messenger service, telephone exchange or switching or outdoor telephone booth. 
(14)  Nursery, prekindergarten, day care school and play school. 
(15)  Business offices. 
(16)  Professional offices including consultation and treatment rooms and related indoor facilities and equipment. 
(17)  Office and business services such as copying, packaging, mailing, printing, telephone answering, secretarial and similar uses. 
(18)  Painting and decorating shop provided at least 25% of the gross floor area is dedicated to retail sales of decorating supplies and materials. 
(19)  Store for the sale at retail of live household pets and accessories including pet grooming. 
(20)  Photographer, art gallery or artist or other similar studio. 
(21)  Parking lots and multiple-level parking facilities as accessory uses to an existing or proposed adjacent use which is allowed by right or by special use exception in the C-1 District on the same property as the primary use or as part of an approved multiple parcel master development in which the parking use is shared by multiple primary uses when conforming to the standards and requirements specified in article XIV and article XV of the zoning ordinance. 
(22)  Retail rental self-service laundry shop or laundromat. 
(23)  Store for the indoor display and sale of new merchandise, including wholesale and retail sales and including the service and assembly thereof unless otherwise limited, controlled or permitted by the ordinances of the City of Ballwin. 
(24)  Store for the sale of used merchandise in conjunction with the sale of new merchandise, provided that the sale of used merchandise: 
(1)  is accessory and subordinate to the sale of new merchandise; 
(2)  is limited to a maximum of 25 percent of the gross floor area of the store; and 
(3)  is limited to 25 percent of the annual gross receipts of such store. The business shall provide proof of compliance with this requirement at the time of the annual business license renewal. 
(25)  Warehousing or processing/manufacturing of new merchandise, but only when such use is in the same building as a store where all products warehoused, processed or manufactured are sold at retail on the premises and where there is adequate off-street loading and unloading space for trucks and commercial vehicles; provided not less than 25 percent of the gross floor area shall be used for retail sales. The business shall provide proof of compliance with this requirement at the time of the annual business license renewal. 
(26)  Mortuary/funeral home including visitation, ceremonial and cremation facilities. 
(27)  Usual accessory uses and buildings incident to the above uses. 
(28)  Service, cleaning or repair shops for jewelry, appliances, upholstery, household electronic and mechanical equipment, other household items, shoes and wearing apparel within a fully enclosed building but not including vehicles or nonresidential machinery or other items of any kind otherwise regulated by Ballwin ordinances. 
(29)  Store for the sale of new books, music and other communications media, including the sale of used communications media, but excluding the sale of any obscene material or material infringing upon copyrights or trade marks. The sale of used materials cannot exceed 25 percent of the gross floor area or 25 percent of the annual gross receipts of the business. The business shall provide proof of compliance with this requirement at the time of the annual business license renewal. 
(30)  Establishments for the sale of lottery tickets as permitted by the laws of the State of Missouri, provided that it is only in conjunction with the operation of a commercial business at retail permitted in this district. 
(31)  Store for the sale of coins, stamps, baseball cards, comic books or similar small collectible items, including the sale of these items as used merchandise. This use does not include furniture, automobiles or other large collectible items, the sale of which is either prohibited or regulated by other code provisions. 
(32)  Outside storage of merchandise subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Only businesses licensed in Ballwin to do business on the premises shall be allowed to conduct this activity. 
b.  This activity shall be allowed only in the C-1 district, and may be subject to additional limitations imposed by the MRD and NCD overlay districts which may prohibit this use or require special additional criteria for implementation. 
c.  Any display-for-sale outside of a fully enclose structure needs to be done in a manner that the merchandise is not subject to being moved, toppled over or otherwise disrupted by storms, customers and gravity. 
d.  Any display-for-sale outside of a fully enclosed building must be conducted on a sidewalk that is located along and adjacent to the facade wall of the unit or space occupied by the business in which the principal pedestrian customer entrance is located. No such display-for-sale shall be allowed on any part of a site other than said front sidewalk adjacent to the façade wall. In the case of a corner entrance or multiple entrances on multiple sides, the front facade wall shall be the wall facing the primary adjoining roadway or primary parking lot. Only one facade wall per business may be utilized for outdoor display-for-sale. 
e.  Merchandise displayed outdoor for sale pursuant to this section shall only be displayed in front of the store from which it is being sold. No sidewalks area suitable for outside storage may be rented or allowed to be utilized by a business, person or entity not occupying the store in front of which the merchandise is being displayed. 
f.  Any use of a sidewalk for display-for-sale shall not block any building exits nor reduce the portion of the sidewalk available for pedestrian use to less than three feet in width or at all in front of store entrances. The minimum sidewalk space required pursuant to this section shall be provided at the side of the sidewalk away from the façade wall of the building. No such display-for-sale shall be permitted within three feet of any door opening. 
g.  No merchandise shall be stacked in a manner that exceeds four feet in height. This does not preclude individual items that exceed four feet in height from being placed on a sidewalk as long as they are properly tied down or restrained from blowing around or toppling over. 
h.  Marked fire lanes shall not be used for the display and storage of any product or merchandise. 
i.  The City of Ballwin cannot assure security for merchandise stored and displayed in this manner. 
j.  Outdoor placement of displays of merchandise and display racks and facilities shall only be allowed when the business is open. Merchandise and display facilities must be taken inside when the business is closed. 
k.  No parking lot or green space areas shall be used for any display-for-sale activity. 
l.  Merchandise displayed for sale pursuant to and in compliance with this section shall be displayed in portable fixtures or other facilities designed to be easily portable and built of materials suitable and intended for outdoor use. No pallets, cardboard boxes, untreated or unpainted wood or other non-weatherproof or similarly unsuitable materials shall be used for such display at any time. 
m.  Small point-of-sale price stickers are permitted for outdoor displays but all signage shall be subject to the Ballwin Sign Code and sign permits may be required. 
(Ord. No. 08-27, § 1, 7-28-08; Ord. No. 14-30, § 3, 10-27-14) 
Section 3. - Height regulations. 
    No building shall exceed 45 feet in height, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 08-27, § 1, 7-28-08) 
Section 4. - Area regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth not less than 40 feet, except for: 
(i)  Land lying along and adjacent to Manchester Road, which shall have a front yard having a depth of not less than 60 feet; and 
(ii)  Land lying along and adjacent to the south side of Orchard Lane, which shall have a front yard having a depth of not less than ten feet. 
(iii)  Land lying along Manchester Road may have a front yard with a depth of 20 feet along a maximum of 75 percent of the Manchester Roadway frontage of the combined parcels of a proposed development. Front yards allowed by this section shall only be utilized for landscaping, pedestrian circulation improvements and public amenities. No parking shall be allowed in such front yards. No curb cuts shall be allowed within such front yard, except those shared by two or more adjoining developments. Driveways accommodating cross access between adjoining developments may be allowed in such front yard provided landscaping, pedestrian circulation improvements, and public amenities also are present. 
(iv)  There shall be a minimum of a ten-foot deep landscaping area provided along the roadway frontage in conjunction with all new developments, redevelopments, building expansions and/or site improvements to all parcels in the C-1 district, which area may include a six-foot wide sidewalk. 
(2)  Side yard. A side yard is not required, except for a lot or tract of ground which adjoins a dwelling, a dwelling district or the public activity district, in which case there shall be a side yard of not less than twenty five (25) feet. Such side yards shall be landscaped and screened in accordance with standards described in section 4(3)(i) of this article. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet. 
(i)  In all cases where rear yards abut properties in a zoning district other than the C-1, C-2, C-3, and S-1 districts in Ballwin and similar commercial and/or industrial districts in adjoining jurisdictions, such required rear yards shall be fully landscaped and free of all structures, pavements, new above ground utility systems or service laterals and similar improvements. The landscaped area shall be permanently maintained with plantings of sufficient quantity and size to provide a 100 percent site-proof screening to a height of six feet above ground level. The landscaped screening shall consist of a mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs. 
(ii)  If the lot is less than 125 feet in depth and the plat thereof has been duly recorded in the office of the St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds at the time of the passage of this ordinance [July 28, 2008], the rear yard need not exceed 20 percent of the depth of such lot. In the case of such shallow lots, a site-proof fence may be substituted for the vegetation screening. The fence shall be constructed in a manner and of materials that are architecturally compatible with the proposed development and the neighborhood, and shall be maintained in place for as long as the site development plan is in effect. Fencing materials must have a reasonable expectancy of surviving for 20 years in this location, and under no circumstances shall any form of modified chain link fence be allowed for this purpose. Landscaping materials shall be placed to supplement any screening provided by a fence. Such plantings shall be provided on the basis of one six-foot evergreen tree, one two-inch caliper tree or one five-gallon size shrub per 25 linear feet of property line. 
(iii)  If a parcel contains physical building improvements existing prior to April 10, 2000 that are proposed to be reused and retained in conjunction with a redevelopment, a building expansion, site improvements, an amendment to an existing special use exception, and/or an application for a new special use exception, and there is insufficient room to provide the 25-foot landscaped rear yard required in subsection 3(i) above, then the screening provisions of subsection 3(ii) above shall apply. 
(iv)  Rear yards abutting commercial or industrial zoning districts shall provide screening via a six-foot tall fence or landscaped [area] in accordance with the provisions of section (ii). 
(4)  Intensity of use. When a lot is improved with a single-family dwelling, the intensity of use regulations shall be the same as those required in the R-2 single-family dwelling district. 
(Ord. No. 08-27, § 1, 7-28-08) 
Section 5. - Parking and loading regulations. 
(1)  Off street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with requirements for specific uses set forth in article XV. 
(2)  Parking for shopping centers, plazas and office complexes with two or more tenants and having more than 100,000 square feet of gross floor area may be allowed to reduce the required minimum parking by as much as 20 percent in exchange for the provision of expanded landscaped areas, pedestrian corridors, public plazas and gathering areas, and amenities such as benches, fountains, sculptures, kiosks, and other such similar amenities. 
(Ord. No. 08-27, § 1, 7-28-08) 
Section 6. - Development application and review. 
    All new development, redevelopment, building expansion and/or site improvements proposed in the C-1 district and fronting on a roadway under the jurisdiction of the Missouri Department of Transportation (MoDOT) shall be submitted to MoDOT for review and comment upon its formal receipt by the City of Ballwin. Under no circumstances is Ballwin required to implement, impose or abide by any suggestions, recommendation or directives contained within any such MoDOT review. 
(Ord. No. 08-27, § 1, 7-28-08) 
Section 7. - Site development regulations. 
(1)  Curb cuts from sites with new developed, redeveloped, building and/or site improvements within the C-1 district shall have curb cuts limited to no closer than 500 lineal feet from centerline to centerline. No parcel shall be denied at least one direct vehicular access to Manchester Road because of this requirement. Access via a shared curb cut with an adjoining property or properties guaranteed via a recorded cross access easement or written agreement between private property owners shall be considered direct access to Manchester Road regardless of whether the curb cut is actually on the subject property. Absent such agreements or easements, properties with less than 500 lineal feet of frontage will be allowed only one Manchester Road curb cut. Such curb cut shall be located in a manner to minimize congestion and conflict points on Manchester Road. 
(2)  All new developments, redevelopments, building expansions and/or site improvements on parcels within the C-1 district shall include the construction of a six-foot wide and four-inch thick concrete sidewalk including access ramps built to ADA standards along the entire frontage of Manchester Road. The sidewalk shall include ramp connections to applicable roadways. Concrete sidewalks built to the same specifications but with a width of five feet shall be built along the entire length of all other public and or private roadway frontages. The construction of these sidewalks on private property within maintenance easements to Ballwin will be permitted if construction in the right-of-way is not feasible or advised due to conflicting uses or improvements that cannot be removed. 
(3)  In order to minimize the negative traffic impact of development in the C-1 district on adjoining roadways, all new developments, redevelopments, building expansions and/or site improvements shall provide to Ballwin a cross access, and driveway/parking lot vehicular interconnection easement on all sides of the site where, in the judgment of the board of aldermen, the interconnection of parking lots and/or driveways is necessary to minimize traffic congestion and vehicular conflict points on and near Manchester Road. The Board of Aldermen may waive the requirements for the granting and/or recording of such easement if topographic or other conditions prevent such desired interconnections from being built or utilized. Such easements shall run from the closest curb cut to the adjoining property line. The easement shall be at least as deep from the right-of-way as the minimum required front yard depth of the C-1 district and under no circumstances shall such easement be so shallow as to prevent the construction of a 25-foot wide two-way vehicular roadway. Should such an easement be not feasible in the front yard, but possible in a side or rear yard, then the latter location may be approved by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 08-27, § 1, 7-28-08) 
ARTICLE X. - C-2 REGIONAL SHOPPING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Section 1. - [Generally.] 
    The regulations set forth in this article are the regulations in the C-2 regional shopping district. These regulations are supplemented and qualified by additional general regulations appearing elsewhere in this ordinance and which are incorporated as part of this article by reference. 
Section 2. - Use regulations. 
    A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Automobile filling station, when a special use permit has been granted according to the requirements of article XIV; but not more than one station shall be permitted for every 900 vehicular parking spaces provided in the entire district. 
(2)  Bank. 
(3)  Barbershop and beauty parlor or similar personal service shop. 
(4)  Bowling alley and structure accommodating recreational activities. 
(5)  Bus depot, cabstand and transportation depot. 
(6)  Candy, ice cream or bakery shop and shops selling similar commodities, whose products are sold at retail on the premises. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  Hospital and clinic for animals, but not open kennels. 
(9)  First aid room for emergency treatment. 
(10)  Laundromats or self-service laundries and shops where laundry and dry cleaning may be picked up or delivered, but no commercial laundering or dry cleaning shall be done on the premises. 
(11)  Medical and dental clinic. 
(12)  Messenger and telegraph service station. 
(13)  Offices. 
(14)  Painting and decorating shops. 
(15)  Pet shop. 
(16)  Photographer, artist or similar studios. 
(17)  Reserved. 
(18)  Radio or television broadcasting stations. 
(19)  Savings and loan associations. 
(20)  Retail store and shop, including department store, for the sale and display of new merchandise, new equipment or new machinery. 
(21)  Sales and display rooms where orders may be taken for any type of new merchandise, new machinery or new equipment. 
(22)  Service, cleaning or repair shops for jewelry, appliances, radio, other household items, shoes and wearing apparel. 
(23)  Tailor or dressmaking shops. 
(24)  Theaters, except open air drive-in theaters. 
(25)  (a) 
Accessory buildings and uses clearly necessary to the above uses, including storage and service areas within the structures, garages for delivery trucks, laundry and dry cleaning facilities for their own employees, central heating and air conditioning plants, and storage areas, yards, shops and similar facilities that are used solely for operating, servicing or maintaining the activities and improvements within the district. Accessory buildings and uses shall also include dwellings occupied by watchmen, janitors, maintenance and similar employees engaged upon the premises, but no dwellings shall be erected for any other purpose, except as otherwise expressly provided for by this ordinance; nor shall any dwelling unit contain less than 500 square feet of living area. 
(b)  Accessory uses shall also include signs and nameplates, but the size and location of any sign shall conform only to the following requirements, the requirements of any other ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding: 
(i)  They shall pertain only to the name of the shopping center, the stores or to the products sold or service provided therein. 
(ii)  Except as provided in (iii) below, they shall be attached to one or more facades of the structure but shall not project more than 30 inches from any facade except in connection with canopies. The total area of a sign for any shop or establishment shall not exceed one percent of the floor area, including basement, of such shop or establishment in the building to which they are attached. 
(iii)  One directory sign containing not more than 200 square feet for shopping centers and office buildings containing less than 50,000 square feet of gross floor space, and not more than 400 square feet for shopping centers and office buildings containing more than 50,000 square feet of gross floor space may be unattached from any structure and erected on private property in front of any shopping center or plaza, provided such sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained in such a manner as to not obstruct free and clear view of traffic at entrances and exits to adjoining streets or property and any adjoining intersection of streets, and is limited to advertising the shopping center, its stores, offices, shops, merchandise or services. 
(26)  Establishments for sale of lottery tickets as permitted by the laws of the State of Missouri, provided that it is only in conjunction with the operation of a commercial business at retail permitted in this district and the establishment has a minimum of 100 parking spaces of off-street parking. That sellers of lottery tickets, known as "instant game" (a game in which a preprinted ticket is purchased and upon removal of a covering on the ticket, the ticket bearer determines his or her winnings, if any) are exempt from the parking requirements of this provision. 
(Ord. No. 964, 6-26-72; Ord. No. 1076, § 1, 10-29-73; Ord. No. 1160, § 2, 12-23-74; Ord. No. 1428, § I, 1-22-79; Ord. No. 1767, §§ I, II, 9-9-85; Ord. No. 1833, § III, 7-14-86) 
Section 3. - Parking regulations. 
    Whenever any building is erected on land used for any of the purposes permitted in section 2 in this article, there shall be provided and permanently maintained within the district an area that is improved with a satisfactory and durable surface for the movement and parking of autos and which area shall be conveniently accessible to public streets and highways that provide access to the district from the region. The amount of area that is provided and permanently maintained for vehicular parking shall not be less than two times 70 percent of the floor area of any and all structures erected for the purposes permitted in section 2. 
Cross reference- Parking, stopping and standing, § 15-256 et seq. 
Section 4. - Height regulations. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section or in article XVI hereof, no building or portion thereof shall exceed 45 feet in height; provided, however, that a single structure, having a maximum area on any floor not exceeding ten percent of the total area in the C-2 district, and which is located not less than 250 feet from any street, highway or boulevard boundary affording primary access to the district and not less than 100 feet from any other boundary of the district, may be erected to a height of not more than 90 feet, and provided further that a sign, spire or tower that is used solely for ornamental or decorative purposes, the base area of which does not exceed one percent of the first floor area of the building to which it is attached, may be erected to any height notwithstanding other ordinances and regulations of the City of Ballwin. 
Section 5. - Area regulations. 
(1)  Yards and setbacks. 
(1)  No building, structure or accessory building shall be erected or maintained within 135 feet of any boundary of a C-2 regional shopping district, except that buildings may be erected and maintained within 60 feet of not more than ten percent of the perimeter of the entire boundary of any C-2 regional shopping district. The area between the buildings and the boundary line may, however, be occupied by drives, vehicular parking, sidewalks, landscaping and similar facilities. 
(2)  Any boundary of a C-2 regional shopping district contiguous to and adjoining any lots in a residential district shall be provided with a fence not less than three feet nor more than eight feet in height and screened with trees and shrubs, or buffer zone and border planting, according to plans to be provided and which plans are to be approved by the board of aldermen prior to the issuance of the building permit. 
(3)  For the purpose of interpreting and enforcing the yard regulations of this article, the entire area included within the C-2 regional shopping district shall be considered as a single lot; more than one building or structure may be erected thereon, and the only front, side and rear yards that need to be observed are those provided for in section 5.1(1). 
(2)  Intensity of use. No dwellings are permitted in the C-2 regional shopping district except as are expressly provided for herein. 
ARTICLE XI. - C-3 PLANNED LIMITED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Section 1. - [Generally.] 
    The regulations set forth in this article are the regulations set forth in the C-3 planned limited commercial district. These regulations are supplemented and qualified by additional general regulations appearing elsewhere in this ordinance and which are incorporated as part of this article by reference. 
Section 2. - Use regulations. 
(1)  A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Business, charitable, finance, professional and consulting offices, including offices of industrial or commercial establishments, the plants or outlets of which are not permitted in the planned limited commercial district. 
(2)  Hotel or motel. 
(3)  Medical and dental clinic. 
(4)  Private clubs and lodges, such as fraternal, civic and social. 
(5)  Savings and loan associations. 
[(6)  Reserved.] 
(7)  Bank. 
(8)  Drugstore, cigar or news stand, barber or beauty shop or florist shop when the combined uses of which occupy not more than ten percent of the total floor area of a building. 
(9)  Multiple dwellings when in conjunction with commercial building. 
(10)  Off-street parking facilities, including parking structures and storage garages. 
(11)  Accessory building. 
(12)  Reserved. 
(13)  Establishments for the sale of lottery tickets as permitted by the laws of the State of Missouri, provided that it is only in conjunction with the operation of a commercial business at retail permitted in this district and the establishment has a minimum of 100 parking spaces of off-street parking. That sellers of lottery tickets, known as "instant game" (a game in which a preprinted ticket is purchased and upon removal of a covering on the ticket, the ticket bearer determines his or her winnings, if any) are exempt from the parking requirements of this provision. 
(2)  None of the uses specified in subsection (1) above, except offices, private clubs, restaurants, cocktail lounges, when in conjunction with a private club or the business of a restaurant, or multiple dwelling units, shall be permitted above the first story of a building. 
(Ord. No. 964, 6-26-72; Ord. No. 1798, §§ III, IV, 3-24-86; Ord. No. 1833, § IV, 7-14-86) 
Section 3. - Height regulations. 
(1)  Where a building occupies all of the buildable portion of a lot, as determined by the front, side and rear yard requirements prescribed in section 4 of this article, the maximum height of the building shall not exceed 45 feet. 
(2)  Where the building is located on a lot so as to provide additional open space over and above that required by section 4, the maximum building height may be increased by two feet for each foot by which the building is set back in addition to the required front, side and rear yards, provided that no part of the front wall of the structure shall be closer to the centerline of the abutting street than 50 percent of the height of such point above grade. 
Section 4. - Area regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 40 feet, except for land lying along and adjacent to Manchester Road, which shall have a front yard having a depth of not less than 60 feet. 
(2)  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of a building having a width of not less than ten feet. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 feet. 
(4)  Intensity of use and floor area. 
(1)  A lot on which there is erected a multiple dwelling shall contain an area of not less than 500 square feet for each family. 
(2)  Each dwelling unit or apartment shall contain no less than 500 square feet of floor space. 
Section 5. - Parking regulations. 
(1)  Whenever a building or any portion thereof is erected, converted or structurally altered for dwelling purposes, there shall be provided 11/2 off-street parking spaces on the lot, either garage or surfaced area, for each dwelling unit in such building. 
(2)  Whenever any building is erected and used for any of the other purposes permitted in section 2 of this article, there shall be provided and permanently maintained on the lot or within 300 feet of any lot line a surfaced area or structure for the parking of motor-driven vehicles, which area or structure shall be conveniently accessible to existing streets. The amount of area that is provided and permanently maintained for vehicular parking shall be in the ratio of 11/2 parking spaces for each 300 square feet of floor space used for nonresidential purposes. 
Section 6. - Application for planned limited commercial district. 
    The owner or owners of any tract of land may petition the board of aldermen for the establishment of the planned limited commercial district. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  Legal description of the area to be encompassed in said district; and 
(2)  Evidence of unified ownership or control of the area applied for; and 
(3)  Statement of petitioner's experience and background in real estate development and residential or commercial construction; and 
(4)  Preliminary site plan indicating the number and types of buildings, provisions for stormwater drainage, number of living units contemplated, area to be devoted to uses other than residential, topography, off-street parking facilities, utility easements, sanitary sewer facilities and entrance and exit driveways; and 
(5)  Be accompanied by a plat (in duplicate) drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and shape and location of the building and accessory building to be erected and locations of nearby streets. 
Section 7. - Approval of final development plans. 
(1)  Upon establishment of a planned limited commercial district by the board of aldermen, the petition shall be referred back to the zoning commission for consideration of the final development plan, which shall be submitted to the zoning commission by the applicant within 180 days after the establishment of the planned limited commercial district by the board of aldermen. The zoning commission shall recommend the approval or disapproval of the final development plan to the board of aldermen and shall refer such plan back to the board of aldermen for approval or disapproval. 
(2)  Upon approval by the board of aldermen of the final development plan, three copies thereof shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(3)  No building permit shall be issued by the building commissioner for any structure in a planned limited commercial district that does not conform to the final development plan as approved by the board of aldermen. During the course of construction, no changes shall be made in the final development plan unless approved by the board of aldermen. 
(4)  If substantial work or construction is not started within one year of the date of the approval of a final development plan by the board of aldermen, no further building permit for the project shall be issued and the board of aldermen may move to rezone the property or any portion thereof to the zoning district classification that prevailed prior to the approval of the planned limited commercial district. 
(5)  The reissuance of building permits may be authorized and the time limitations specified in this section may be extended by the board of aldermen for reason. 
(6)  The final development plan submitted for approval by the applicant shall contain the following: 
(1)  A drawing to scale, with contour lines at intervals not exceeding five feet, which shall show the following: 
(a)  Location, use and heights of all buildings and structures on the tract. 
(b)  The location of streets, off-street parking facilities, proposed landscaping, utility easements and storm and sanitary sewer facilities. 
(c)  Ingress and egress facilities for all motor-driven vehicles entering or exiting the development. 
(2)  Front, rear and side elevations of each structure contemplated in the development, including the type of construction proposed and the construction materials to be used. 
(3)  Proposed construction schedule for the development. 
ARTICLE XII. - S-1 SERVICE DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Section 1. - [Generally.] 
    The regulations set forth in this article are the regulations in the S-1 service district. These regulations are supplemented and qualified by additional general regulations appearing elsewhere in this ordinance and which are incorporated as part of this article by reference. 
Section 2. - Use regulations. 
(1)  A building, premises or lot shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Bakeries, other than those whose products are sold at retail only on the premises. 
(2)  Business, professional and governmental offices, not including uses whose principal activity on the premises is the sale of retail goods. 
(3)  Bottling plant. 
(4)  Contractor's establishment and construction equipment dealer. 
(5)  Dyeing and cleaning works using a cleaning fluid whose base is of a material other than petroleum or one of its derivatives. 
(6)  Laundries. 
(7)  Machine shop. 
(8)  Printing plants, shops or publishers. 
(9)  Public garage. 
(10)  Research or testing laboratories. 
(11)  Sheetmetal or tin smithing shop. 
(12)  Storage warehouses and wholesale establishments, but not including lumberyards, nor the storage of live animals, explosives, flammable gases or liquids, and only when off-street facilities for loading and unloading of trucks are provided in the structure or on the lot; and such facilities shall not be provided in the required minimum yards. 
(13)  Any plant assembling or processing parts or goods from previously prepared materials but not requiring any treatment or processing which would be offensive because of the emission of smoke, gas, dust, noise, odor, glare, heat or vibration. No permit shall be issued for the construction, alteration, operation or occupancy of any such plan unless first approved by the board of aldermen under the provisions of section 1, article XIV. 
(14)  Outdoor storage of new automobiles, pickup trucks and small vans by a factory franchised dealer provided that the vehicles are parked or stored on a paved surface built in accordance with the provisions of article XV, section 3, entitled "off-street parking and loading requirements", and are not parked or stored within 25 feet of a dwelling, dwelling district or a public activity district. 
(2)  Unless specifically listed in subsection (1) above, of this section 2 of article XII, uses permitted in residential and commercial districts are not permitted in the S-1 service district. 
(Ord. No. 1838, § II, 8-11-86; Ord. No. 2311, § 1, 5-24-93) 
Section 3. - Height regulations. 
    No building or structure shall exceed 45 feet in height, except as may be otherwise provided. 
Section 4. - Area regulations. 
    No building or structure shall be erected or reconstructed within 100 feet of the perimeter of a tract of land zoned S-1 service district. Screening in the form of a suitable ornamental fence of landscaping shall be located within the 100 feet buffer zone to preserve and protect the character of the districts adjacent thereto. 
ARTICLE XIIA. - PLANNED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2201, § 1, adopted Aug. 26, 1991, repealed former Art. XIIA, which pertained to the mixed use development district, and enacted a new Art. XIIA to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Section 1. - Purpose. 
(1)  [General.] The purpose of the planned single-family dwelling development (PSD) is to permit greater flexibility in the development of residential areas. 
(2)  Application. That tracts of land, upon request of a property owner or owners or the board of aldermen, may be zoned subject to the provisions contained herein. 
(3)  [Fee.] Before any action shall be taken as provided in this article, the party or parties seeking approval for a PSD shall pay a fee of $500.00. If a request for a PSD is submitted in conjunction with a subdivision petition, only the fee required by this section or the fee required because of the subdivision, whichever fee is larger, shall apply. Under no circumstances or condition shall the fee or any portion be refunded for failure of the board of aldermen to approve, in whole or in part, the PSD. 
(Ord. No. 1609, § 1, 11-8-82; Ord. No. 2201, § 1, 8-26-91; Ord. No. 2669, § 1, 2-23-98) 
Section 2. - [Supplementary regulations.] 
    The regulations contained in this article are supplemented and qualified by additional general regulations appearing elsewhere in this ordinance which are incorporated as part of this article by reference. 
(Ord. No. 1609, § 2, 11-8-82; Ord. No. 2201, § 1, 8-26-91) 
Section 3. - Use regulations. 
    [The following uses are permitted in the mixed use development district:] 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings or single-family attached dwelling provided that such attached dwelling shall not exceed two units per separate free-standing building. 
(2)  Institutional and governmental uses such as public libraries, parks and playgrounds, elementary and high schools, private schools with a curriculum similar to that used in public schools. 
(3)  Churches. 
(4)  Accessory buildings and structures customarily incidental to the above uses. 
(5)  Open space that is permanently dedicated and guaranteed in perpetuity by covenant to stay in an open space configuration. 
(Ord. No. 1609, § 3, 11-8-82; Ord. No. 1733, § III, 2-11-85; Ord. No. 1742, § II, 4-22-85; Ord. No. 1797, § III(A, B), 2-24-86; Ord. No. 1833, § V, 7-14-86; Ord. No. 1837, § II, 8-11-86; Ord. No. 2201, § 1, 8-26-91; Ord. No. 00-35, § 1, 7-12-00) 
Section 4. - Height regulations. 
    No building shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 1609, § 4, 11-8-82; Ord. No. 2201, § 1, 8-26-91) 
Section 5. - Area regulations. 
    No front, side or rear yard requirements are established, but no building, accessory building or structure in excess of four feet in height, except fences and screens, may be constructed or erected: 
(1)  Within 15 feet of any street easement or right-of-way line except land facing any neighborhood collector street or state highway shall have a front yard with a minimum depth of 40 feet along such street or highway and 60 feet minimum depth when facing on Manchester Road; and 
(2)  Within 20 feet of any existing building, accessory building or structure located on any adjacent lot or tract of land is not developed; and 
(3)  Within ten feet of the side or rear lot line if the adjacent lot or tract of land is not developed; and 
(4)  Within 20 feet of the perimeter of the PSD and any single-family zoned district; or 
(5)  Except as designated on a site plan or plat showing the location and dimensions of each proposed building, accessory building or structure and adjacent easements, rights-of-way, and existing buildings, accessory buildings or structures located in the PSD district and within an area outside the PSD district which is determined by drawing a parallel line 50 feet outside the perimeter line of the PSD district, provided the site plan or plat is approved by the board of aldermen as required herein. 
(Ord. No. 2102, § 1, 7-23-90; Ord. No. 2201, § 1, 8-26-91) 
Section 6. - Parcel size. 
    A minimum of one acre of land shall be necessary in order to be considered under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1609, § 6, 11-8-82; Ord. No. 1797, §§ I, II, 2-24-86; Ord. No. 2201, § 1, 8-26-91) 
Section 7. - Parking regulations. 
(1)  For each dwelling unit, there shall be two off-street spaces of not less than 200 square feet each. 
(2)  Parking shall be arranged so as to prevent through traffic to other parking areas. 
(3)  Joint parking lots (owned in common by the development) shall be screened from adjacent structures, roads, and traffic arteries with hedges, dense plantings, earth berms, changes in grade, walls, fences or other means of similar style and scale. 
(4)  No more than 15 parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous row without being interrupted by landscaping. 
(5)  All streets, parking areas and any off-street loading areas shall be paved and the design thereof in compliance with applicable Ballwin standards. 
(6)  Parking shall be provided in accordance with articles I and XV of the zoning ordinance. 
(7)  All joint parking lots shall be lighted. All such lighting shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from adjoining residences. 
(8)  All impervious surfaces including parking lots, rooftops, etc., shall be graded and/or drained so as to dispose of all surface water without erosion, flooding and other inconveniences. 
(9)  All parking facilities serving residential developments shall be provided within 200 feet of the residential structure. 
(Ord. No. 1609, § 7, 11-8-82; Ord. No. 2201, § 1, 8-26-91) 
Cross reference- Parking, stopping and standing, § 15-256 et seq. 
Section 8. - Streets and traffic circulation. 
(1)  Vehicular access points to an PSD area shall be designed to permit smooth and safe traffic flow and shall conform to St. Louis County standard specification for highway construction as modified by the City of Ballwin. Pedestrian circulation systems shall be insulated from vehicular circulation systems. Nonresidential uses within an PSD classification shall have direct access to major roadways. All streets constructed within an PSD zoning classification shall be in compliance with those set out in this ordinance. Rights-of-way and pavement widths within an PSD zoning classification shall be in accordance with the following table: 
Type of Street Dwellings 
Served Minimum 
R.O.W. Minimum 
Pavement 
Width Local street  1-100 50 26 Neighborhood collector over 
100 50 30  
(Ord. No. 1609, § 8, 11-8-82; Ord. No. 2201, § 1, 8-26-91) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 15; streets and sidewalks, ch. 24. 
Section 9. - Perimeters. 
(1)  The perimeter of an PSD is that portion which abuts adjoining land uses which are not a part of the PSD. 
(2)  A minimum of a 60-foot buffer zone shall be maintained from any commercial or multiple-family use and any structure intended for human occupancy within a PSD. 
(3)  All buffer zones must be kept free of buildings or structures and must be landscaped, screened or protected by natural features, so that adverse impacts on surrounding areas are minimized. 
(Ord. No. 1609, § 9, 11-8-82; Ord. No. 2201, § 1, 8-26-91) 
Section 10. - Internal buffers. 
(1)  Within a PSD, the minimum spacing between buildings shall be the mean of the minimum spacings allowed in adjoining residential zoning districts provided that such spacing shall not be less than 12 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1609, § 10, 11-8-82; Ord. No. 1661, § I, 11-14-83; Ord. No. 2201, § 1, 8-26-91; Ord. No. 00-35, § 2, 7-12-00) 
Section 11. - Open space. 
(1)  All PSD districts shall have open space and useable open areas incorporated in their design in accordance with the following definitions and standards: 
(i)  Open space shall include all the land and water areas of a site that are not covered by structures (except recreational), roadways, driveways, parking areas and loading zones. Useable open areas may be included in open space computations. Undeveloped building sites, proposed right-of-way and similar areas are not to be considered in open space computations. 
(ii)  A useable open area shall be defined as an open and unobstructed space having an area of at least 6,000 square feet. The smallest dimension shall be no less than 40 linear feet. A useable open area may have no slope in excess of six percent. 
(2)  All residential development within an PSD shall provide that 15 percent of the total parcel be open space. As a part of this requirement, one area meeting the definition of useable open areas must be provided for each 100 dwelling units, or fraction thereof. 
(3)  Useable open space shall be distributed throughout the project in relation to the residential units. Accessibility is very desirable and connecting linkages between open spaces are necessary. 
(4)  At least 70 percent of the land dedicated for open space shall have an overall finished grade of not more than eight percent. 
(5)  Recreational structures and improvements are acceptable in an open space; however, no more than five percent of any open space shall be covered with such facilities. 
(6)  Buffer zones may be counted as open space or useable open area, but buffer zones may not contain aboveground structural improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1609, § 11, 11-8-82; Ord. No. 1661, § I, 11-14-83; Ord. No. 2201, § 1, 8-26-91) 
Section 12. - Environmental design and landscaping. 
(1)  A general landscaping plan shall be required at [the] time of initial submission to be followed by a detailed landscape plan as part of the final development plan. All sizes and types of landscape materials shall be indicated in the final landscape plan. 
(2)  All floodplains delineated by the Federal Flood Insurance Administration will be preserved as permanent, common, open ground. 
(3)  A grading plan must be submitted as part of the initial plan. All efforts should be made to maintain as many of a site's native characteristics as possible. 
(4)  Special considerations for hillsides should be made to ensure that they are stable and protected from erosion. No slope shall be allowed in excess of a 3:1 ratio. 
(Ord. No. 1609, § 12, 11-8-82; Ord. No. 2201, § 1, 8-26-91) 
Section 13. - Site plan approval. 
(1)  [Petition.] When designated as qualifying for development and meeting the requirements of section 6 of this ordinance [article], the owner or owners of any tract of land zoned PSD may petition the board of aldermen for approval of an PSD development plan. 
(2)  Preliminary development plan. 
A.  [Purpose.] The purpose of the preliminary development plan is to allow the developer to propose a conceptual plan, with some detail without having to provide a complete set of engineering drawings and specifications. 
B.  Written documents and information to be provided. 
1.  Application form. 
2.  A statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the PSD through the particular approach proposed by the applicant. This should include a description of the character of the proposed development and the rationale behind the choices and assumption made by the applicant. 
3.  Quantitative data for the total number and type of dwelling units, parcel size, percentage of the total proposal devoted to each use, approximate gross residential density, total amount of open space and useable open space and traffic generation. 
C.  Design documents to be provided. 
1.  Existing site conditions including contours on a two-foot interval, watercourses, floodprone areas, unique natural and manmade features and vegetation cover. Isolated trees with a caliber of eight inches or more should be singled out. 
2.  Overall site plan. 
3.  The location, floor area and height of all existing and proposed structures. 
4.  The size and number of all proposed dwelling units. 
5.  The location and size of all useable open space areas and the ratio of the open space to the whole project. 
6.  The existing and proposed circulation system, including off-street parking and loading areas, pedestrian and bicycle ways. Indication should be made as to eventual ownership (public or private). 
7.  The proposed locations, volumes and capacities of all stormwater control structures, lines, pipes, etc. 
8.  The proposed locations of all sanitary sewer lines. 
9.  A general landscape plan with a grading plan showing the nature and topography of the site before and after construction. 
10.  The proposed extent and treatments of all perimeter areas. 
11.  Information on surrounding development, including ownership and size of adjacent land; distance to and nature of surrounding structures, circulation systems and zoning designations. 
D.  [Intent.] The preliminary development plan is intended to provide a conceptual basis on which the final development can be evaluated by the board of aldermen. The preliminary development plan may not have to provide all detailed engineering and design information, nor is it intended to be absolute with regard to the location or nature of any plan elements, but sufficient information to understand the nature, scope and neighborhood impact of the proposal will be required. 
E.  [Approval.] The preliminary development plan shall be approved by the board of aldermen according to the following procedure: 
1.  A preliminary site plan shall be submitted to the city by petition. 
2.  A petition fee shall be paid at the time of submission. 
3.  The preliminary plan shall be reviewed for compliance with this ordinance. If the preliminary plan is in such compliance, the petition shall be forwarded to the planning and zoning commission of the City of Ballwin. 
4.  The planning and zoning commission of the City of Ballwin shall review the preliminary plan, taking into account the matters set forth in article XIV, section 2 of this zoning ordinance and shall forward a report on those conditions to the board of aldermen. 
5.  Upon receipt of the report of the city planning and zoning commission, the board of aldermen shall hold a public hearing in relation to the matter, shall give notice of the time and place by causing a notice thereof to be published at least one time in a newspaper, printed, published or of general circulation of the City of Ballwin. The publication of said notice shall be at least 15 days prior to the day of the hearing. 
6.  After the hearing, the board of aldermen shall determine whether such plan will substantially increase traffic hazards or congestion, or adversely affect the character of the neighborhood, or adversely affect the general welfare of the community, will over-tax public utilities, is consistent with good planning practices and whether the proposed development can be operated in a manner that is not detrimental to single-family dwelling district developments, and whether the proposal can be developed and operated in a manner that is visually compatible with both the PSD development and surrounding areas. The board of aldermen shall approve the preliminary plan by ordinance, and a finding adverse to petitioner with respect to any of the above requirements shall be grounds for denial of the ordinance. 
(3)  Final development plan. 
A.  Within 12 months after the approval of the preliminary development plan, the applicant shall submit a final development plan to the board of aldermen which details the information that was conceptualized in the preliminary development plan. This plan will show detailed engineering and design criteria for the location and construction of all structures. 
B.  No building or grading permits will be issued until the board of aldermen has approved the final development plan. 
C.  If the applicant fails to obtain final development plan approval, for any reason, within the alotted time, the preliminary approval shall be deemed revoked. 
D.  Final approval shall be granted via ordinance and shall be valid only upon the recording of a record plan, showing the approved plan, with the St. Louis County recorder of deeds. 
E.  The board of aldermen may not approve a final development plan which differs substantially from the approved preliminary site plan. 
(Ord. No. 1609, § 13, 11-8-82; Ord. No. 1661, § I, 11-14-83; Ord. No. 2201, § 1, 8-26-91) 
ARTICLE XIIB. - PLANNED OVERLAY DISTRICTS (POD) REGULATIONS 

Section 1. - Purpose. 
    Several planned overlay districts (PODs) have been established for the purpose of promoting and implementing the goal of the city's comprehensive community plan, which is to be a family-oriented community of predominantly single-family neighborhoods supported by a unique, well planned commercial-retail business sector. 
    The overlay districts provide a process for permitting and regulating uses located in the areas designated as "overlay" on the future land use map. These districts are the Manchester Rd. revitalization overlay district (MRD), the conservation subdivision overlay district (CSD), the neighborhood residential overlay district (NRD) and the neighborhood commercial overlay district (NCD). The PODs establish a mechanism to allow additional or alternate developmental regulations to be applied in conjunction with the underlying zoning districts to facilitate greater flexibility in the site planning process than is allowed by the underlying zoning requirements. The intent of the PODs is to improve the quality of life and economic sustainability in Ballwin by promoting development and/or redevelopment in underutilized or aging commercial and residential areas. 
    The establishment of a POD requires a petition review and public hearing before the planning and zoning commission and final approval by the board of aldermen via the passage of a governing ordinance. Such ordinances will specify development controls and the land uses allowed in the associated development. The approved uses will be from those allowed in the underlying district. Uses allowed only by a special use exception in the underlying district may be allowed by appropriate language in a POD governing ordinance subject to the procedures of establishing and/or amending a POD district. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 2. - Intent. 
    The intent of the POD districts is to allow the development of land in a manner that is consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and to promote the following development objectives: 
(1)  Encourage development that is at the forefront of evolving trends in site design, marketing, placemaking and branding. 
(2)  Encourage development that is green, sustainable and compatible with surrounding built and natural environments. 
(3)  Flexibility in the utilization of land use regulations by allowing greater variety and market responsiveness in site design, the arrangement of site improvements, building locations and land uses. This may include a development-specific waver, approved by the board of alderman via the governing ordinance, for modifications to the requirements of the underlying district and other development regulations provided the development is consistent with the stated purpose and requirements of the respective overlay district(s). 
(4)  Provide for new development and redevelopment that are in accordance with the guidelines and intent of comprehensive community plan and, where appropriate, advance the concepts of a mixed use district that provides a blend of retail, commercial service, office and residential activities. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 3. - When required. 
    Any change to the development characteristics of an existing site or parcel(s) of land located within a designated overlay area, as depicted on the future land use map of the comprehensive community plan, that includes any of the following shall require the establishment of an applicable POD. 
(1)  The expansion of any single building or the total floor area of all buildings on a site by ten percent or more. 
(2)  An increase of ten percent or more in the percentage of impervious coverage of a site. 
(3)  Any decrease in a site's landscaping/green space. 
(4)  Any amendment to an approved site development plan. 
(5)  At the request of the property owner. 
    The following shall not be a basis for requiring the establishment of a POD. 
(1)  Any change to the legal occupancy of all or a portion of an existing building. 
(2)  The reconfiguration of occupied spaces within a building. 
(3)  The granting of a special use exception that does not involve the modification of the existing site or an amendment to an approved site development plan. 
(4)  The exterior renovation, upgrading or remodeling of architecture provided such changes do not materially alter the neighborhood character, traffic volumes, patterns or congestion or unduly burden public improvements or finances. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 4. - Petition for a pod zoning district approval. 
    A petition for the approval of a planned overlay district shall follow the same procedure as that utilized for special use exception petitions as outlined in article XIV, Section 3 (1)-(5). A petition shall include, at a minimum, the submittal of the following: 
(1)  A fully executed city petition form signed by the property owner(s) identified by the current deed with all required information and accompanying documentation. 
(2)  A copy of the current deed(s) for the property(ies) involved. 
(3)  The legal description(s) of all properties to be encompassed in said district. 
(4)  Evidence of unified ownership or control by the petitioner of all properties encompassed in said petition. 
(5)  Statement of petitioner's experience and background in real estate development and residential or commercial construction. 
(6)  A nonrefundable petitioning fee of $1,500.00. 
(7)  A preliminary site development plan measuring no more than 24? × 36? and bearing the seal and signature of a licensed professional engineer or architect. The site development plan shall include the following information: 
a.  The number, type(s), use and height dimensions of all proposed buildings. 
b.  Provisions for stormwater control and drainage including pre and post development drainage maps (including contributory off-site drainage), detention and clean water facilities including preliminary capacity computations, stormwater pollution prevention plan, and other information and documentation as required in chapter 25 sections 25-71 through 25-75. 
c.  A pre and post development grading plan with topographic intervals at no greater than two feet and extending 100 feet beyond the perimeter of the subject site. 
d.  The number of dwelling units contemplated. 
e.  The total floor area by floor of all buildings. 
f.  A parking and traffic circulation plan including ingress/egress to adjoining roadways and sites and cross access to adjoining properties or the dedication of cross access easements to Ballwin for future connections to adjoining developments if connections cannot be established at the time of petition submittal. 
g.  Preliminary utility locations. 
h.  A vicinity map drawn at a scale of not less that 1:1000 showing the location of e parcel(s) contained in the legal description. 
i.  The out boundaries, bearings and dimensions of the property described in the legal description with respect to the surrounding community. 
j.  The locations and improvements of all streets and properties complete with dimensions and ownership information within 100 feet from the perimeter of the site. 
k.  All areas proposed for landscape treatments or to remain undeveloped. 
l.  A computation of the total land area in square feet and as a percentage of the entire site used for buildings, roadways, other pavements, recreation, landscape/green space and other major land uses. 
m.  A preliminary architectural elevation showing all sides of all buildings with dimensions, materials, colors, and architectural treatments. 
n.  Locations of all vehicular service entrances, loading areas, refuse containers, ground mounted utilities, HVAC, etc. 
o.  Other information as may be reasonably necessary to understand the character, scope and impact of a development proposal. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 5. - POD zoning district petition review procedure. 
    Rezoning to a POD district and the associated site plan approval process is initiated by a petition submitted by a person(s) or entity with a valid and demonstrable legal interest in the lots or tracts of land involved with the petition. The procedures for application, review and approval of a planned overlay district shall be as follows: 
(1)  The planning and zoning commission meets on the first Monday of each month. Petitions shall be submitted no later than the close of business on the Friday preceding the Monday six weeks before the regularly scheduled meeting of the planning and zoning commission. 
(2)  A petition shall consist of the application form available from the city and the required information, documents and submittal information as set forth above in Section 4 and in the individual POD district regulations. 
(3)  The petition shall be reviewed for compliance with the minimum submittal requirements and provisions of the zoning ordinance, the subdivision ordinance and other applicable ordinances of the city. If the petition is properly submitted and in compliance with the minimum submittal requirements, the city planner shall advertise the public hearing and place the petition on the next available agenda of the planning and zoning commission for consideration. 
(4)  If the petition is found to not meet minimum submittal requirements, the city planner shall notify the petitioner within 30 days of the date of submission of the deficiencies of the petition. The city reserves the right to not process incomplete applications. 
(5)  If the city planner fails to notify the petitioner that the petition does not meet minimum submittal requirements within the specified 30-day period, the petition shall be deemed to have been properly submitted and shall be advertised for public hearing and placed upon the next available agenda of the planning and zoning commission. 
(6)  Initially, only one copy of the petition documents must be submitted. After submission is determined to be in compliance with minimum submittal requirements, 25 sets of folded plans, drawings and other documents on paper not to exceed 24? × 36? must be submitted for distribution to the planning and zoning commission and board of aldermen for review before the issue will be advertised for public hearing or placed on an agenda. 
(7)  The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing on all petitions for a planned overlay district (POD) following the same public notice procedure as required for changes and amendments to the zoning regulations pursuant to article XXIII, amendments, of the Ballwin Zoning Ordinance and chapter 6, section 6-76. 
(8)  The planning and zoning commission shall review the petition for consistency with the general guidance of the goals, policies and recommendations of the comprehensive community plan, compliance with the appropriate overlay district and underlying district regulations and consider the comments and testimony from the petitioner's presentation, the public hearing, the petition review report and make findings accordingly and submit said findings to the board of aldermen. The commission shall submit its findings to the board of aldermen in writing. 
(9)  If the overlay district and the underlying zoning district standards appear to be in conflict, the more restrictive standard shall be applied, and if the overlay district does not delete or amend a regulation of the underlying district, such regulation shall be in force and a requirement of the governing ordinance. 
(10)  The petition and the findings of the planning and zoning commission shall be placed on the Aldermanic agenda falling on the fourth Monday of the month of the meeting at which the planning and zoning commission voted on its findings, or the next subsequent available Aldermanic meeting, for the board of aldermen's consideration. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 6. - Final planned overlay zoning district approval. 
    The POD district shall be approved by an ordinance (the governing ordinance) of the board of aldermen which shall grant the specific new zoning district classification, approve the site development plan, set forth the permitted uses, building bulk, setback and density limits and other restrictions or limitations to the uses and requirements of the underlying zoning districts, and set the general development parameters and conditions upon which permits for grading and construction are contingent. 
    Minor changes and adjustments to the approved site development plan may be made without subsequent planning and zoning commission or aldermanic approval as long as such changes are within the scope of the provisions of the approving ordinance. The city planner shall be responsible for determining if proposed changes are within said scope or constitute a substantial deviation from the ordinance. 
    In the case that it is determined that the changes constitute a deviation from the ordinance, the changes shall be considered an amendment to the approved site development plan and subject to the procedures established herein for considering such amendments. In the event that the determination of the city planner is disputed by the petitioner, the matter may be resolved via appeal to the Ballwin Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions of chapter 6, article V of the Ballwin Code of Ordinances. 
    Upon final approval of a fully engineered final site development plan by the City of Ballwin and all agencies with jurisdiction over the site, the petitioner shall provide mylar copies for recording and four paper copies and a digital copy on DVD or CD of the final site plan for the city's records. 
    No building permit shall be issued for any structure in a POD that does not conform to the final site development plan and governing ordinance as approved by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 7. - When underlying regulations apply. 
    The governing ordinance shall specify site development regulations. Where the governing ordinance is silent on such matters, the underlying zoning district and development regulations will control. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 8. - Planned overlay zoning district amendment. 
    The owner of any tract of land or project for which a planned overlay district governing ordinance has been approved by the board of aldermen, who desires to make a change that is a substantial deviation from the ordinance, may petition for a POD ordinance amendment in accordance with the petitioning procedures established for approving the original petition as established in this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 9. - Period of validity. 
    The approval of the final site development plan shall be valid for one year following the date of the approval of the governing ordinance. If no construction or grading commences within a one year period, the site development approval shall expire, no construction or other development activity shall commence and no construction or grading permits shall be issued until a new site development plan is submitted and approved subject to the provisions of sections 5 and 6 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
ARTICLE XIIC. - MANCHESTER ROAD REVITALIZATION OVERLAY DISTRICT (MRD) 

Section 1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the MRD is to promote the local economy and mixed-use development within the Manchester Road corridor while simultaneously maintaining the functional capacity of the highway. The MRD encourages a wide range of well-planned, market sensitive commercial and mixed use development scenarios. The preferred land development pattern in the area will offer a pedestrian oriented development with a mix of residential and/or commercial uses that provide high quality services and amenities that prolong and enhance the shopping, working and living experience. Special effort should be given to tenant mixes and the configuration of tenant spaces to maximize convenience, visibility and aesthetics. 
    Development within the MRD shall fulfill the following objectives: 
(1)  Define a consistent scale and character for the streetscape. 
(2)  Accommodate a mixed variety of retail, commercial, business and residential uses that will attract residents and customers from a larger market area. 
(3)  Introduce commercial and/or mixed-use development that is pedestrian oriented, connects with the adjoining neighborhoods physically and visually, is compact, energy efficient and representative of the latest retail and commercial development trends. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 2. - Permitted uses. 
    The uses permitted by right or by special use exception in an underlying zoning district and multiple family land uses in a mixed-use configuration may be allowed in the MRD subject to the governing ordinance passed by the board of aldermen. The land uses allowed in an MRD governing ordinance shall be determined based on their compatibility with existing surrounding land uses, other uses permitted in the underlying district, the MRD and POD regulations and/or the adjoining land uses recommended in the comprehensive community plan, and shall be specifically listed in the governing ordinance. 
    Nothing in this regulation prohibits the submission of an underlying zoning district change petition in conjunction with an MRD district petition. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 3. - Intensity of use. 
    The intensity of any development shall be governed by the regulations of the underlying zoning district(s). The MRD governing ordinance may allow relief from the underlying zoning district and development regulations and may establish alternate regulations subject to the developer demonstrating that such relief and alternate regulations achieve the purposes of this ordinance. Alternate regulations shall be enforceable subject to final site development plan and governing ordinance approval by the board of aldermen and the petitioner's proceeding with the development. If not specifically waived or substituted in the governing ordinance, all provisions of the underlying zoning and development regulations shall apply in the MRD. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 4. - Height regulations. 
    All development pursuant to MRD zoning that fronts Manchester Road shall include buildings with a minimum height of two stories. This requirement may be reduced on a case by case basis for no more than 50 percent of the linear building frontage of all roadway fronting buildings in the development if the petitioner can demonstrate that the proposed buildings and site development plan are in accordance with section 1 of this article ("purpose") and achieve the purposes of this ordinance or that the existing buildings being incorporated into the plan are structurally incapable of having additional levels added. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 5. - Parking and loading regulations. 
    The MRD imposes no minimum parking or loading requirements. It is the petitioner's responsibility to demonstrate the parking needs of the proposed development and to provide parking accordingly as part of the rezoning and site plan review process. Parking facilities not provided in an on-road configuration shall be concentrated in central areas and/or structures that are landscaped and buffered to minimize views from major rights-of-way and adjoining properties. All parking facilities shall follow the following standards: 
(1)  On-street parking shall be encouraged where site design and traffic patterns permit. 
(2)  In no case will the minimum dimensional requirement for parking spaces or ADA requirements be waived or amended. 
(3)  Parking facilities shall be concentrated in areas that are landscaped and buffered to minimize visibility from major rights-of-way, residential units and adjoining properties. 
(4)  Parking not provided within a dedicated right-of-way shall be located behind the primary use, in a parking structure that is architecturally compatible with the building or on a surface lot. 
(5)  Perimeter landscape buffers and curbed planting islands shall be required in all parking lots of five or more spaces. 
(6)  All parking lots shall be screened from public streets and sidewalks, public open spaces, and adjacent properties by complying with one of the following landscaping options, and a two-foot car overhang area shall be provided in any planting area adjacent to parking stalls not intended for parallel parking. 
a.  The outside perimeter of all parking areas and drive aisles shall include a landscaped area 12 feet in width offering a mixture of deciduous trees of a caliper of two inches or more or evergreen trees at least six feet in height planted on 50-feet centers and three shrubs per tree in no smaller than five-gallon containers. When a parking lot abuts a public right-of-way, the trees shall be planted no less than 30 feet on center; or 
b.  A five-foot wide perimeter-landscaped area with metal ornamental fencing or a masonry wall supplemented with clusters of three shrub plantings of five-gallon size container on 30 feet spacings, or a continuous hedge of two-gallon size shrubs interspersed with two-inch caliper deciduous street trees planted every 50 feet. 
(7)  Parking lot landscaping shall include a minimum of one tree for every ten parking spaces, or portion thereof. 
(8)  All planting areas within or adjacent to a parking lot or vehicular use area shall be irrigated. 
(9)  Unless part of a rain garden or similar runoff collection system, all landscaped areas shall be delineated by a vertical concrete curb no more than six inches tall. 
(10)  All newly planted trees shall meet the city's minimum species and planting requirements for street trees. 
(11)  Surface lots may abut, parallel or otherwise adjoin, without an intervening occupied structure or site improvement and not including the landscaped screening strip required in subsection (6) herein, a dedicated right-of-way for no more than 50 percent of the parcel frontage. 
(12)  Surface parking areas shall be interrupted with landscaped areas. No more than 20 continuous parking spaces shall be allowed in a row without a landscaped separation. In larger developments, surface parking shall be planned in sub-areas accommodating no more than 100 vehicles with landscaped separations. Parking separation areas shall be no less than 15 feet in width and landscaped according to subsection (6)a. herein. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 6. - Setbacks. 
    All buildings located on a parcel fronting a public or private dedicated street right-of-way shall be oriented towards such right-of-way and subject to the following standards: 
1.  All new buildings shall maintain no more that a ten-foot setback from the right-of-way. The intent is to mass the building on the property line, but up to 20 percent of a building's facade may be notched, recessed or extended to accentuate entrances, dining areas, windows or the outdoor display of merchandise when permitted. 
(2)  Infill development may be set back a distance equal to the average setback of the adjacent uses from the adjoining right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 7. - Pedestrian access. 
    Pedestrian access shall be an integral part of the overall design of each development. Pedestrian access shall provide safe and convenient access throughout, to and from off-street parking areas and connect with abutting properties, rights-of-way, developments and transit facilities. 
(1)  All buildings or occupied spaces, regardless of setback distance, shall have an identifiable entrance and a path of entry from the street or adjoining sidewalk or central plaza feature. 
(2)  Sidewalks at least six feet in width shall be provided along all sides of a lot that abuts a public or private right-of-way or major internal driveways. A continuous internal pedestrian sidewalk of at least six feet in width shall be provided from public sidewalks adjoining the site to the principal customer entrance(s) and internal pedestrian circulation system. 
(3)  Sidewalks shall be provided along the full length of all building facades featuring customer entrances and along any facade abutting a parking area or a public roadway and shall be at least 12 feet wide. The utilization of the sidewalk for tables and seating for restaurants or leisure, entertainment, sidewalk sales and the limited display of merchandise on a temporary basis is encouraged provided that it does not block the utilization of the sidewalk as a pedestrian way or otherwise create a nuisance. Such sidewalks shall be located in close proximity to the building facade to enhance the relationship to the structure. 
(4)  All sidewalks shall feature landscaping areas, benches, fountains, artwork, shade structures, room for tables and chairs, pavement enhancements and other pedestrian amenities and placemaking features. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 8. - Use limitations. 
(1)  No outdoor storage or permanent outdoor display or sale of items such as, but not limited to, merchandise, equipment, fixtures, vehicles and materials is allowed except as provided by the approving ordinance. Temporary display and/or sale to the public during operating hours shall be permitted on the premises provided that the display does not block sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, roadways, etc., does not interfere with vehicular and pedestrian circulation, is only conducted on the sidewalk adjoining the unit occupied by the business conducting the sale and does not create a public nuisance. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the outdoor sale, display or storage of merchandise that may be otherwise allowed by the underlying zoning or an approved SUE unless specifically prohibited by the governing ordinance. 
(2)  All uses allowed by right or by special use exception in the underlying district may be allowed by right in the MRD provided it is approved pursuant to the POD process, the use is specifically listed in the approving ordinance and any applicable site limitations or requirements are met. 
(3)  Any development containing drive through facilities shall be subject to the following conditions and restrictions: 
(a)  Sufficient space to allow queuing for a minimum of 15 vehicles (22-foot spaces) shall be provided from the order pick up location to ensure that public right-of-way or driveway areas will not be blocked. An escape lane shall be provided for each order box and drive-through window. 
(b)  No order box or pick up window shall be located within 75 feet of any residentially zoned or occupied property; provided however, that the 75-foot distance may be decreased by 25 percent if the residentially zoned or occupied property is classified as any nonresidential category on the future land use map of the 2007 Comprehensive Community Plan. 
(c)  A solid screening fence or wall is required between any property used for a drive-through facility and any adjoining residentially zoned or occupied property. Such screening shall provide a 100 percent visual screen to a height of 6 feet. Associated landscape areas shall be a minimum of 25-foot wide and shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements of the parking lot landscape requirements (subsection (3)) of section 8 the NRD regulations. 
(d)  Each applicant requesting a drive through facility shall be required to furnish the city with an assessment of traffic impacts, unless the study is waived by the city planner. Such study shall be conducted by a traffic engineer or individual certified by training or experience to conduct such studies with the cost for the study to be paid by the developer. 
(4)  Any development containing a vehicle washing facility shall be subject to the following conditions and restrictions: 
(a)  Car washing facilities shall be a minimum of 100 feet from the nearest residential zoning district or use. 
(b)  A noise assessment study completed and sealed by an acoustical engineer or other professional certified by experience or training to prepare such a study shall be conducted. Such study shall certify that the proposed facility will meet all applicable city and county sound level standards. 
(c)  Hours of operation shall be 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. or as authorized by approval of the governing ordinance. 
(d)  Car wash facilities shall be shown to have no negative impact on the level of service (LOS) of any adjoining roadway segment or intersection within 500 feet of the building housing the carwash, as determined in a study prepared by a traffic engineer. 
(e)  Sufficient space to allow queuing for a minimum of 15 vehicles (22-foot spaces) shall be provided between the vehicular entrance of the car wash building and the adjoining public right-of-way or driveway areas to assure that such way will not be blocked. An escape lane shall also be provided. 
(5)  The type, number, and location of all entrances, exits, and circulation patterns on any site containing a car wash shall be clearly delineated on the site development plan. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 9. - Architectural and site design standards. 
    No building shall be erected or more than 50 percent of an existing building altered that does not address the following development guidelines: 
(1)  A minimum of 50 percent of each exterior wall shall consist of one or more of the following materials: 
a.  Stone material used for masonry construction that may consist of granite, sandstone, slate, limestone, or other hard and durable all-weather stone material. 
b.  Brick material used for masonry construction which shall be composed of hard fired (kiln fired) all-weather common brick or other all-weather facing brick. 
c.  Stucco or similar exterior insulated finish system (EIFS). 
d.  Decorative metal panel systems that offer a function and durability that is equivalent to the materials listed above. 
(2)  Building rooftops shall have the following features: 
a.  Parapets, screens, false facades or other architectural treatments that conceal flat roofs and roof top equipment and fixtures. 
b.  Overhanging eaves, recessed entrances or similar structures or architectural treatments defining the pedestrian areas of the facade and at least partially protecting entrances and walkways from the weather. 
(3)  The treatment of walls in excess of 1,500 square feet of exposed exterior area shall avoid treatment with a single color or texture, minimal detailing and lacking architectural treatments. Architectural wall treatments shall be utilized on such walls to create visual interest through the use of texture variations, multiple complementary colors, shadow lines, contrasting shapes, applied features and related architectural devices. 
(4)  The overall size, shape and proportion of the elements of a building, the building as a whole, the building's relationship to other structures, the site, open space and site improvements shall be consistent or compatible with like measures and features of existing developments in the surrounding area. Where large structures are proposed with overly-long facade walls, and the horizontal dimension exceeds the perpendicular dimension in excess of a ratio of 2:1, the building mass shall be articulated with variations in the building wall planes and wall height and through the use of other architectural design or site planning features such as, but not limited to, towers, monuments, pergolas, artwork, entablatures, porticos, texture, shadow lines, landscaping, etc. 
(5)  Architectural treatments and the use of screening devices shall be consistent and compatible on all facades of all buildings visible from off site and throughout the site. 
(6)  The following approaches shall be considered for all large-scale developments to further enhance the pedestrian experience and the visual appearance of buildings from all sides: 
a.  Configure the facades of large uses or tenants that are over 100 feet long with smaller uses, tenant spaces or secondary access points that physically express internal functions or departments of large users or tenants to break the architectural massing of the long, tall and blank walls that are common of larger tenants. 
b.  Building front facades in excess of 30 linear feet shall incorporate design features such as specially enhanced pedestrian oriented areas, generous landscaping, retaining walls and raised planters, variations in building wall planes, materials and color, towers, monuments, pergolas, artwork, entablatures, porticos, texture, shadow lines, and other features that help define the human scale. Long, tall, continuous wall planes should be avoided. 
(7)  Landscaping shall be used to complement and enhance a building's design, color and material. All landscaping areas shall be irrigated to promote the longevity and a healthy appearance and utilize native or acclimatized species that thrive in the environments in which they are planted. 
(8)  Screening in excess of 80 percent to a height of six feet above the grade, landscape buffering and open space must be utilized wherever a commercial development abuts a residential, recreational, institutional or similar area of lesser density/intensity. Visual and sound screening from upper levels of adjoining parcels and structures must be provided in the planning and design of landscaped areas and structural screens. 
(9)  Roof and ground-mounted equipment, including ventilators, cooling towers, HVAC equipment, antennae, generators, trash and grease receptacles, etc. shall be screened from view (100 percent opacity) or isolated so as not to be visible from adjoining public rights-of-way, parcels and structures. The appearance of structural screening shall be architecturally coordinated with the building to maintain a unified appearance. 
(10)  Loading docks, trash enclosures, approved or authorized outdoor storage and sale and similar facilities and uses shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building and site, shall generally be located near the service entrances of buildings and shall be 100 percent screened from view from adjoining rights-of-way and residential uses with vegetation or structures in a manner that is architecturally compatible with the development. 
(11)  Community gateway features are encouraged in all developments and shall be incorporated into the design on any site that has been identified as a gateway location. Gateway design features may consist of monument structures, distinctive building design elements, unique landscaping, lighting, public art, or similar features. Entrance, gateway or decorative features shall be incorporated into the site's design, coordinate with the architecture of the site and establish the identity of the development. Such design features may consist of monument structures, distinctive building designs, unique landscaping, lighting, public art, or similar features and may be located within the right-of-way provided that they do not create a hazard to pedestrians or drivers, do not interfere with anticipated future roadway work, are within proper maintenance easements to the property owner and are approved by the jurisdiction having authority over the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 10 - Urban design elements. 
    The following urban design guidelines shall be considered when reviewing a proposed MRD and the associated request for relief from the underlying zoning district and development requirements. 
(1)  Edges (natural such as waterways and ridgelines and manmade such as roadways and property lines) signaling transitions between adjoining land uses, landmarks and public art shall be used to define a sense of place for neighborhoods, commercial projects, the overlay districts and the city limits. 
(2)  Streetscapes shall be enhanced with lighting, pedestrian amenities and landscaping in or within ten feet of the right-of-way. 
(3)  All proposed development shall provide methods of physically and visually connecting to adjoining properties, land uses and secondary roadways. Ingress and egress strategies that draw traffic away from the major arterials, such as developing alternative access roadway systems and providing access from side streets and adjoining properties are required providing that such access is available and does not negatively impact surrounding neighborhoods. 
(4)  Access management is necessary within the Manchester Road corridor to mitigate traffic congestion and roadway capacity problems. Shared utilization of points of ingress and egress, significant curb cut spacings and parking lot interconnections are required for multi-tenant developments and encouraged between separate but adjacent properties whenever possible. Where shared site access or parking lot interconnections are not possible, the dedication of cross access and/or driveway/parking lot vehicular interconnection easements dedicated to Ballwin may be required to facilitate future access or interconnection in accordance with the requirements of the C-1 district regulations. 
(5)  The use of a multi-way(s), roadways placed parallel to Manchester Road but separated from the roadway by a landscaped pedestrian median, that provide parking and access to uses along the corridor while separating through traffic is recommended as the primary access management strategy for parcels of land fronting on Manchester Road. Multi-ways shall be designed for extension as redevelopment occurs on adjacent sites. 
(6)  Multi-story construction in excess of the two-story requirement that fully utilizes the capacity of a site is encouraged. 
(7)  The erection of landmark features, such as public art, gateways or other significant architectural or landscape elements at the locations designated on the future land use map of the comprehensive community plan is encouraged. 
(8)  Clustering and stacking of residential, office, business and retail uses as an alternative to conventional strip-type development with large unlandscaped parking lots is encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
ARTICLE XIID. - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Section 1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the conservation subdivision overlay district (CSD) is to preserve undisturbed natural areas within the city's expected annexation limits by allowing higher density residential development on portions of development sites via relief from the area, density and building bulk limitations of the conventional residential districts. The CSD allows the set aside of undisturbed natural areas through the site design flexibility allowed by modifications to the standards for setbacks, lot dimensions and building bulk; however, the maximum overall density(s) for the entire site allowed in the underlying zoning district(s) shall be maintained. This allows the clustering of residential lots and units on portions of sites and thus creates the option of leaving portions of sites undisturbed in their natural state. These undisturbed natural areas provide community benefits including: Aesthetics, privacy, flood control, water quality preservation, cleaner air, noise mitigation, reduced erosion and undisturbed natural wildlife habitat. The intention of the CSD is to establish a mechanism to provide the flexibility needed to respond to conditions and constraints that may be unique to specific sites and the characteristics and constraints that are inherent to residential development in general. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 2. - Permitted uses. 
    The conservation subdivision overlay district is intended for use with new residential development of all kinds within the conservation residential designated areas of the comprehensive community plan, and in residential areas within the city limits as a development option. The uses permitted by right or by special use exception in an underlying zoning district may be allowed in the CSD subject to the governing ordinance passed by the board of aldermen. The development patterns and land uses allowed in a CSD shall be determined based on compatibility with surrounding developments, the unique characteristics and constraints of the site and the CSD and POD regulations, and shall be specifically listed in a CSD governing ordinance that specifies all approved variations from the underlying zoning and development regulations. 
    Nothing in this regulation prohibits the submission of an underlying zoning district change petition in conjunction with a CSD district petition. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 3. - Density. 
    A CSD development shall be "density neutral" in terms of the number of dwelling units that can be created on a site. This means that the unit count (density) of a CSD plan cannot exceed the unit count (density) that would be permitted by the applicable underlying zoning and development regulations and any requirements of other agencies with jurisdiction. A "yield plan" done in accordance with these underlying regulations shall be prepared to establish the maximum number of dwelling units that a site can accommodate and therefore the maximum density that can be allowed in a CSD development. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 4. - Minimum lot requirements. 
    The governing ordinance may allow reductions to minimum lot area dimensions, yard requirements and building bulk limitations in the underlying district(s) provided they do not fall below the following minimum requirements or exceed the maximum height limit. 
1.  Minimum lot area (single-family detached): 5,500 square feet. 
2.  Minimum lot area (single-family attached): 4,000 square feet (per unit). 
3.  Minimum lot width (single-family detached): 50 feet. 
4.  Minimum lot width (duplex attached): 40 feet (per unit). 
5.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
6.  Building height: 40 feet. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 5. - Yard setback guidelines. 
    Building setbacks shall be set no less than the following in a CSD governing ordinance. 
1.  Front: 25 feet when fronting a dedicated street right-of-way. 
2.  Side: 8 feet, except 0 feet for common-wall construction. 
3.  Rear: 25 feet. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 6. - Transition to smaller lots. 
    When developing adjacent to an established neighborhood, lot sizes and dimensions, and building setbacks, heights and bulk shall be no less than 80 percent of those of the existing neighborhood patterns adjoining the perimeter of the proposed development. These development parameters may transition to smaller lots sizes and setbacks and greater building heights and bulk for lots that are interior to the district. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 7. - Parking and circulation regulations. 
    Parking shall be provided pursuant to the city's existing parking regulations. A reduction in the parking requirements may be allowed if the petitioner demonstrates that such a reduction furthers the overall intent and purpose of this district. Under no circumstances will the parking requirements for any residential use be reduced below those specified for single-family residential uses in the parking regulations. 
    Roadways and rights-of-way shall be built and/or established in accordance with minimum Ballwin standards. If the roadway serves exclusively residential uses, does not presently and cannot in the future provide through passage to other uses or developments, no on-street parking is allowed, no more than 20 dwellings are or will ever be served, the pavement is built to Ballwin's applicable pavement section standards and the fire district approves the pavement configuration, the width of a dedicated right-of-way may be reduced to 40 feet and the width of the roadway pavement may be reduced to no less than 22 feet. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 8. - Neighborhood connections. 
    Whenever possible, CSD developments shall create, provide, incorporate and when possible dedicate public vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent neighborhoods, schools, parks, commercial and employment centers or other destinations and activity nodes. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 9. - Minimum conservation subdivision performance criteria. 
(1)  Sidewalks are required along both sides of streets unless alternative pedestrian paths are provided and approved as a part of the approved subdivision or site development plan. 
(2)  Twenty-five percent of the total area of the site shall be set aside for undisturbed natural features, habitat preservation and land conservation. No more than half (50 percent) of such set-aside space shall consist of the following: 
(a)  Areas restricted from development under the codes or laws of Ballwin or other jurisdictions. 
(b)  Protected flood plains, stormwater retention/detention and water quality mitigation facilities. 
(3)  Properties involved in a petition shall be under the control of the petitioner at the time the CSD petition is submitted. 
(4)  All open space and common areas not preserved in their natural state shall be landscaped and recorded for ownership and maintenance by a lawfully organized association of development property owner's. 
(5)  The preservation, maintenance and ownership in perpetuity of open space, common ground and set aside lands in their natural state shall be accomplished by deed restriction on the instruments recording the development authorized and established via the CSD governing ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 10. - Residential design. 
    All dwellings constructed in a CSD shall comply with the following residential design guidelines: 
(1)  Each residential building shall contain street-facing architectural features which provide human scale to the facade, enhance the "curb appeal", and reinforce local building forms, types and traditions. Architectural features may include, but are not limited to, bay windows, covered porches, balconies, dormers and cupolas. 
(2)  All single-family homes, townhouses, and duplexes shall have a street-oriented entrance and a street facing principal window. Such dwelling units may, as an alternative, face courtyards, gardens or similar landscaped common entrance features. In these circumstances, entries and principal windows shall face those features, but a roadway presence shall also be retained through the use of wrap around front porches, architectural features and treatments and landscaping that define and enhance any and all walls facing a roadway or public space. 
(3)  No garage wall shall be closer to the street than any other house wall. Garage or door openings facing a street shall not exceed 50 percent of the width of the dwelling facade. 
(4)  All new construction shall include durable, high quality exterior building materials. The use of bright colors and highly reflective surfaces shall be limited to accent features only. 
(5)  The quality of the exterior materials, architectural details and their application shall be consistent on all sides of all buildings. 
(6)  Street trees shall be planted every 45 feet along all streets or as required by the subdivision ordinance, whichever is more restrictive. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
ARTICLE XIIE. - NEIGHBORHOOD RESIDENTIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Section 1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the neighborhood residential overlay district (NRD) is to allow the creation of rental and owner-occupied residential neighborhoods of mixed densities and dwelling types. Such neighborhoods are to be transitional between existing low intensity developments and higher intensity land uses within the geographic limits for which the overlay district is recommended. The NRD offers the possibility of relief from the development standards of underlying residential zoning districts and associated development regulations to incentivize the creation of new housing or the redevelopment of existing residential areas. 
    The preferred land development pattern in the NRD is a pedestrian-oriented residential neighborhood that offers a mixture of different dwelling types and provides the high quality amenities that prolong and enhance the living experience. Special effort shall be given to architecture, building configuration, geography, topography and the mixture of residential uses and densities of dwelling types to maximize and preserve the convenience, quality of life and aesthetics in the NRD development and the surrounding neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 2. - Permitted uses. 
    High, medium and low density residential and/or a mixture of these residential land uses may be permitted via an NRD district. The uses permitted by right or by special use exception in an underlying zoning district are allowed in the NRD subject to the governing ordinance passed by the board of aldermen. The land uses allowed in an NRD shall be determined based upon compatibility with other uses permitted in the underlying district(s), the surrounding areas and the NRD and POD regulations, and shall be specifically listed in the governing ordinance. 
    More than one underlying zoning district may be necessary to accommodate the desired uses of NRD, but nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the simultaneous submission of a petition(s) to amend the underlying zoning district in conjunction with an NRD petition. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 3. - Intensity of use. 
    When developing adjacent to an established residential development, the overall density of the new development in units/acre, lot sizes and dimensions, and building setbacks, and bulk shall be no greater than those of the existing neighborhood patterns adjoining the perimeter of the proposed development. The parameters of the new development may allow a transition to higher densities, smaller lot sizes, smaller setbacks and greater building bulk for dwellings that are interior to the district and do not directly abut adjoining development. 
    Residential infill developments in an NRD shall maintain an overall density that does not exceed 200 percent of the average surrounding residential development density at the perimeter of the designated NRD district if the petitioner can demonstrate that such density is consistent with the purpose of NRD district and will not negatively impact surrounding land values or efficient function of the infrastructure in the area. 
    Setback, building bulk, lot dimension standards and other site development requirements shall be established in the governing ordinance and shown on the approved site plan. If not specifically waived or substituted in the governing ordinance, all provisions of the underlying zoning and development regulations shall apply in the NRD. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 4. - Height regulations. 
    The maximum building height in an NRD shall be stipulated in the governing ordinance. No structure near the perimeter of an NRD shall exceed 125 percent of the average height of the buildings in the surrounding adjacent residential developments or subdivisions. Higher building heights up to a maximum of 60 feet may be allowed by the NRD governing ordinance for interior building sites if the petitioner can demonstrate that such additional height is consistent with the purpose of NRD district and the approved development plan and will not negatively impact surrounding land values or efficient function of the infrastructure in the area. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 5. - Parking requirements. 
    Parking shall be provided pursuant to Ballwin's parking regulations for the type of development, however, tandem (front to back) parking in driveways and similar parking arrangements shall be allowed to meet minimum parking requirements for individual units in the NRD. Parking reductions may be allowed by the governing ordinance if the petitioner can demonstrate that parking is sufficient for the proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 6. - Pedestrian access. 
    A pedestrian circulation system that provides pedestrian access throughout an NRD development shall be an integral part of the overall design. The pedestrian circulation system shall provide safe and convenient access throughout developments, to and from off-street parking areas and shall connect with abutting sidewalk networks, subdivisions, rights-of-way, commercial developments and transit facilities so as to facilitate access throughout the city and to alternative means of transportation. 
(1)  Sidewalks shall conform to Ballwin standards and shall be at least five feet in width at all locations. 
(2)  The use of distinctive paving materials and colors, grade separations, pavement marking, signs, striping, bollards, median refuge areas, traffic calming features, landscaping, lighting, or other means to clearly delineate pedestrian areas for day and night use and ADA purposes shall be used to minimize potential hazards in areas where pedestrian and vehicular traffic meet. 
(3)  All sidewalks and pedestrian ways shall feature landscaping, benches, fountains, artwork, shade structures, pavement enhancements and other such placemaking features. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 7. - Neighborhood connections. 
    NRD developments shall provide, build or incorporate public access, both vehicular and pedestrian whenever such access is possible to adjacent neighborhoods, schools, parks, commercial and employment centers, roadways or other destinations and activity nodes. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 8. - Residential design standards. 
    All residential development and redevelopment in an NRD shall comply with the following residential development guidelines: 
(1)  Single-family development design: New single-family residential developments shall be designed at densities and building scales that blend in character with surrounding or adjoining single family developments in accordance with the provisions of section 3 of this article. These adjustments to the underlying zoning and development regulations will be established in the approved final development or subdivision plans and described in the governing ordinance. All single-family dwellings shall comply with the following residential design guidelines: 
a.  Each residential building shall contain street-facing architectural features which provide the appropriate surrounding neighborhood scale to the facade, enhance the curb appeal, and reinforce local building traditions. Architectural features may include, but are not limited to, bay windows, covered porches, balconies, dormers and cupolas. 
b.  All single-family homes, townhouses, and duplexes shall have a street-oriented entrance and street-facing principal window(s). In the case of dwelling units facing courtyards or gardens, entries and principal windows shall face those features as well. A roadway presence shall also be created through the use of front porches and similar architectural treatments and landscaping. 
c.  No garage wall shall be closer to the street than any other house wall. Garage or door openings facing a street shall not exceed 50 percent of the width of the house facade. 
d.  All new construction shall include durable, high quality exterior building materials. The use of bright colors and highly reflective surfaces shall be limited to accent features only. 
e.  The quality of the exterior materials, architectural details and their application shall be consistent and of an equivalent intensity on all sides of the building. 
f.  Street trees shall be planted every 45 feet along all streets or as required by the City's subdivision ordinance, whichever is more restrictive. 
(2)  Multiple-family architectural design: New multiple-family residential developments shall respect the building bulk, height, form and architectural character of the adjacent residential neighborhood. Site and architectural design shall address views from and to the site, building orientation, proximity to adjacent uses, location of driveways, noise, lighting and landscape. The buildings shall maintain a single-family residential character through design principles of scale, harmony, rhythm and balance as follows: 
a.  Building facades shall be articulated by using color, architectural feature arrangement and change in materials to emphasize the design elements on all building facades. 
b.  The planes and architectural treatment of exterior walls shall be varied in height, depth, color, texture, and orientation to break up roof lines, define private outdoor areas and admit light and air to unit interiors. 
c.  Facades in excess of 50 feet wide or 20 feet tall shall be designed with sufficient building articulation, design features, color and texture variation and landscaping to avoid an overpowering appearance or monotony when used on adjoining structures or units. 
d.  Windows, architectural features and projecting wall surfaces shall be used to break up larger wall surfaces and establish visual interest. 
e.  Primary facades and building entries shall be oriented toward the street or an entry courtyard and shall be designed to have continuity with the scale, massing and character of adjacent structures within and exterior to the development and incorporate architectural features such as gables, porches, texture, color and windows to complement the surrounding buildings while breaking up the structure's facades. 
f.  The same level of architectural design and quality of materials shall be applied to all facades of all buildings. Side and rear elevations, garages, carports, and all accessory structures shall maintain the same level of design, aesthetic quality, and architectural compatibility as the main structure(s). 
g.  Developments containing multiple buildings shall share a common architectural theme that is consistent in relation to the design, use of materials, massing, scale, screening and roof pitch, texture, color, fenestration and related architectural detailing. 
h.  New development shall maintain a consistent overall height of structure(s). 
i.  All building entries shall be defined with an architectural treatment, easily accessible, safe, and clearly marked with building address and apartment numbers. 
j.  Building materials shall be durable and low maintenance with at least 25 percent of the primary facade and ten percent of all other facades consisting of brick, stone or other similar materials as allowed by the building ordinance for commercial structures. 
k.  Bare or uncoated concrete foundations shall not be exposed by more than 12 inches between the ground and the bottom of the siding material. 
l.  All outdoor refuse, recycling and yard waste container storage areas, mechanical equipment, utility meters and related items shall be screened from adjoining properties and rights-of-way with planting materials or structural screens. Structural screens shall be architecturally compatible with the major building components. All screening shall be of least 80 percent opaque to a height of six feet above grade. 
(3)  Parking lot landscape requirements: Perimeter landscape buffers and curbed planting islands shall be required in all parking lots of five or more spaces and shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  All parking lots shall be screened from streets, public open spaces, and adjacent properties by complying with one of the following landscaping options, additionally, a two-foot car overhang area shall be provided in any planting area adjacent to parking stalls not intended for parallel parking. 
i.  The outside perimeter of all parking areas and drive aisles shall include a landscaped area 12 feet in width offering a mixture of deciduous trees of a caliper of two inches or more or evergreen trees at least six feet in height planted on 50-foot centers and three shrubs per tree in no smaller than five-gallon containers. When a parking lot abuts a public right-of-way the trees shall be planted no less than 30 feet on center; or 
ii.  A five-foot wide perimeter-landscaped area with metal ornamental fencing or a masonry wall supplemented with clusters of three shrub plantings of five-gallon size container on 10-foot spacings, or supplemented by a continuous hedge of two-gallon size shrubs interspersed with a deciduous two-inch caliper street (acceptable for street tree) tree planted every 50 feet. 
b.  Parking lot landscaping shall include a minimum of one two-inch caliper deciduous or six-foot tall evergreen tree for every 20 parking spaces, or portion thereof. 
c.  All planting areas within or adjacent to a parking lot or vehicular use area shall be irrigated. 
d.  Unless part of a rain garden or similar runoff collection system, all landscaped areas shall be delineated by a vertical concrete curb no more than six inches tall. 
e.  New trees shall meet the city's minimum planting requirements. 
4.  Open space and/or common ground areas shall be dedicated in perpetuity by deed or plat dedication in all NRD developments for the benefit, use, and enjoyment of the residential owners/tenants. Such areas may be established and held in common and shall be the sole maintenance responsibility of said owners. 
The percentage of a site dedicated to open space/common ground shall be in accordance with the following minimum standards. 
Minimum Open Space Requirements Density (dwelling units per acre) Open Space required (% of buildable area) 0-5 d.u. per acre 12% Over 5-10 d.u. per acre 20%  
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
ARTICLE XIIF. - NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Section 1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the neighborhood commercial district (NCD) is to enhance the continuity of economic success of designated commercial nodes that are outside of the Manchester Rd corridor by encouraging and promoting well-planned, neighborhood-oriented, market-sensitive commercial and mixed-use development scenarios. All development shall be compatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood and adjoining land uses and consistent with the general goals and recommendations of the city's comprehensive community plan. 
    The NCD regulations and procedures are intended to encourage revitalization and infill development that improves the visual character of these areas while simultaneously maximizing the utilization of these commercial nodes. Development in the NCD shall complement the adjoining land uses and promote the following objectives: 
(1)  The scale of buildings, intensity and congestion of the district shall reflect, blend or coordinate with neighboring residential areas. 
(2)  Encourage commercial land uses that attract users from surrounding neighborhoods and reinforce the local and family oriented focus of these locations. 
(3)  Emphasize small, low-impact, local oriented development that respects human scale and the proximity of such locations to residential land uses. 
(4)  Strengthen the ability of neighborhood-serving businesses to compete in a changing economic environment. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 2. - Permitted uses. 
    The uses permitted by right or by special use exception in the underlying zoning district, and multiple family land uses in a mixed configuration with said permitted uses, may be allowed in an NCD subject to the site development plan and governing ordinance passed by the board of aldermen after the review of the planning and zoning commission. The preferred land use in the NCD is moderate density retail, office and commercial services that primarily serve the nearby residential neighborhoods and/or a combination of commercial and residential uses in a mixed configuration. The land uses permitted in an NCD shall be determined based upon compatibility with the uses permitted in the underlying district, the surrounding neighborhoods, and the NCD and POD regulations and shall be specifically listed in the governing ordinance. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the simultaneous submission of a petition(s) to amend the underlying zoning district in conjunction with an NCD petition. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 3. - Intensity of use. 
    The intensity of any NCD development shall be governed by the regulations of the underlying zoning district(s). The NCD governing ordinance may allow a complete or a partial relief from the regulations of the underlying zoning district and the associated site development regulations and establish alternate regulations subject to the developer demonstrating that such relief achieves the purposes of this ordinance and incorporates the development and design standards contained herein. Alternate regulations shall be enforceable upon aldermanic approval of the final site development plan, passage of the NCD governing ordinance and the petitioner proceeding with the development including transfer of ownership. If not specifically waived or substituted in the governing ordinance, all provisions of the underlying zoning and development regulations shall apply in the NCD. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 4. - Height regulations. 
    The height of all new development shall be governed by the regulations of the underlying zoning district(s). This requirement may be modified by the NCD governing ordinance if the petitioner can demonstrate that the heights of the proposed buildings are in accordance and necessary to achieve the purpose of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 5. - Parking and loading regulations. 
    The NCD imposes no minimum parking or loading requirements and the requirements of the underlying zoning ordinance may be modified by the NCD governing ordinance. It is the petitioner's responsibility to demonstrate the parking needs of the proposed development and to provide parking accordingly as part of the rezoning and site plan review process. Parking facilities not provided in an on-road configuration shall be concentrated in central areas that are landscaped and buffered to minimize views from major rights-of-way and adjoining properties. All parking facilities shall accommodate the following standards: 
(1)  On-street parking shall be encouraged where site design and traffic patterns permit. 
(2)  In no case will the minimum dimensional requirement for parking spaces or ADA requirements be waived or amended. 
(3)  Parking facilities shall be concentrated in areas that are landscaped and buffered to minimize visibility from major rights-of-way, residential areas and adjoining properties. 
(4)  Perimeter landscape buffers and curbed planting islands shall be required in all parking lots of five or more spaces. 
(5)  All parking lots shall be screened from public streets and sidewalks, public open spaces, and adjacent properties by complying with one of the following landscaping options, and a two-foot car overhang area shall be provided in any planting area adjacent to parking stalls not intended for parallel parking. 
a.  The outside perimeter of all parking areas and drive aisles shall include a landscaped area 12 feet in width offering a mixture of deciduous trees of a caliper of 2 inches or more or evergreen trees at least six feet in height planted on 50-foot centers and three shrubs per tree in no smaller than five-gallon containers. When a parking lot abuts a public right-of-way, the trees shall be planted no less than 30 feet on center; or 
b.  A five-foot wide perimeter-landscaped area with metal ornamental fencing or a masonry wall supplemented with clusters of three shrub plantings of five-gallon size container on 30-foot spacings, or a continuous hedge of two-gallon size shrubs interspersed with 2-inch caliper deciduous trees (acceptable as a street tree) planted every 50 feet. 
(6)  Parking lot landscaping shall include a minimum of one tree (two-inch deciduous or six-inch evergreen) for every ten parking spaces, or portion thereof. 
(7)  All planting areas within or adjacent to a parking lot or vehicular use area shall be irrigated. 
(8)  Unless part of a rain garden or similar runoff collection system, all landscaped areas shall be delineated by a vertical concrete curb no more than six inches tall. 
(9)  All newly planted trees shall meet the city's minimum species and planting requirements for street trees. 
(10)  Surface lots may abut, parallel or otherwise adjoin; without an intervening occupied structure or site improvement not including the landscaped screening strip required in subsection (6) herein; a dedicated right-of-way for no more than 50 percent of the parcel frontage. 
(11)  Surface parking areas shall be interrupted with landscaped areas. No more than 20 continuous parking spaces shall be allowed in a row without a landscaped separation. In larger developments, surface parking shall be planned in sub-areas accommodating no more than 100 vehicles with landscaped separations. Parking separation areas shall be no less than 15 feet in width and landscaped according to subsection (5)a. herein. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 6. - Setbacks. 
    All buildings located on a parcel fronting a public or private dedicated street right-of-way shall be oriented towards such right-of-way and are subject to the following standards: 
(1)  All new buildings shall maintain no more than a ten-foot setback from the right-of-way line. While the intent is to mass the buildings on the property lines, up to 20 percent of a building's facade may be notched, recessed or extended to accentuate entrances, dining areas, windows or the outdoor display of merchandise when permitted. 
(2)  Infill development may be set back a distance equal to the average setback of the adjacent uses from the adjoining right-of-way, but in no case shall the buildings be more than 30 feet from the right-of-way line. 
(3)  All buildings shall contain an identifiable entrance and a path of entry from the street or adjoining sidewalk. 
(4)  Where buildings are set back from the street, a strong pedestrian connection shall be provided to the street sidewalk to promote connectivity to the existing or planned pedestrian network. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 7. - Pedestrian access. 
    Pedestrian access shall be an integral part of the overall design of each neighborhood commercial development. Pedestrian access shall provide safe and convenient access throughout, to and from off-street parking areas and connect as appropriate with abutting properties, surrounding neighborhoods, rights-of-way, developments and transit facilities. 
(1)  Sidewalks at least five feet in width shall be provided along all sides of a parking lot that abuts a public or private street and major internal driveways. A continuous internal pedestrian sidewalk of at least five feet in width shall be provided from public sidewalks adjoining the site to the principal customer entrance(s) and/or internal pedestrian circulation system. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be provided along the full length of all building facades featuring customer entrances and along any facade abutting a parking area or a public roadway and shall be at least 12 feet wide. The utilization of the sidewalk for tables and seating for restaurants or leisure purposes, entertainment, sidewalk sales and the limited display of merchandise on a temporary basis is encouraged provided that it does not block the utilization of the sidewalk as a pedestrian way or otherwise create a nuisance. Such sidewalks shall be located in close proximity to the building facade to enhance the relationship to the structure. 
(3)  The use of special paving, grade separations, pavement marking, signs, striping, bollards, median refuge areas, traffic calming features, landscaping, lighting, or other means to enhance and clearly delineate pedestrian areas for both day and night use shall be used to minimize potential hazards in areas where pedestrian and vehicular traffic meet. 
(4)  All sidewalks shall feature landscaping areas, benches, fountains, artwork, shade structures, room for tables and chairs, pavement enhancements and other pedestrian amenities and placemaking features. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 8. - Use limitations. 
(1)  No permanent outdoor storage, display or sales of items such as, but not limited to, merchandise, equipment, fixtures, vehicles and materials is allowed except as provided by the governing ordinance. Temporary display and/or sale to the public during store operating hours shall be permitted on the premises provided that the display does not block sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, roadways, etc., does not interfere with vehicular and pedestrian circulation, is only conducted on the sidewalk adjoining the unit occupied by the business conducting the sale, the merchandise and fixtures are not retained on the sidewalk outside of business hours and such activity does not create a public nuisance. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the outdoor sale, display or storage of merchandise that may be otherwise allowed by the underlying zoning or an approved SUE. 
(2)  All uses allowed by right or by special use exception in the underlying district may be allowed by right in the NCD provided it is approved pursuant to the POD process, the use is specifically listed in the governing ordinance and any applicable site limitations or requirements are met. 
(3)  Any development containing drive-through facilities shall be subject to the following conditions and restrictions: 
(a)  Sufficient space to allow queuing for a minimum of 15 vehicles (22-foot spaces) shall be provided from the order pick up location to ensure that public right-of-way or driveway areas will not be blocked. An escape lane shall be provided for each order box and drive-through window. 
(b)  No order box or pick up window shall be located within 75 feet of any residentially zoned or occupied property; provided however, that the 75-foot distance may be decreased by 25 percent if the residentially zoned or occupied property is classified as any non-residential category on the future land use map of the 2007 Comprehensive Community Plan. 
(c)  A solid screening fence or wall is required between any property used for a drive-through facility and any adjoining residentially zoned or occupied property. Such screening shall provide a 100 percent visual screen to a height of six feet. Associated landscape areas shall be a minimum of 25-foot wide and shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements of the parking lot landscape requirements (subsection (3)) of section 8 the NRD regulations. 
(d)  Each applicant requesting a drive-through facility shall be required to furnish the city with an assessment of traffic impacts, unless the study is waived by the city planner. The study shall be conducted by a traffic engineer or individual certified by training or experience to conduct such studies with the cost for the study to be paid by the developer. 
(4)  Any development containing a vehicle washing facility shall be subject to the following conditions and restrictions: 
(a)  Car washing facilities shall be a minimum of 100 feet from the nearest residential zoning district or use. 
(b)  A noise assessment study completed and sealed by an acoustical engineer or other professional certified by experience or training to conduct such a study shall be completed. Such study shall certify that the proposed facility will meet all applicable city and county sound level standards. 
(c)  Hours of operation shall be 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. or as authorized by approval of the governing ordinance. 
(d)  Car wash facilities shall be shown to have no negative impact on the level of service (LOS) of the any adjoining roadway segment or intersection within 500 feet of the building housing the carwash, as determined in a study prepared by a traffic engineer. 
(e)  Sufficient space to allow queuing for a minimum of 15 vehicles (22-foot spaces) shall be provided from the vehicular entrance of the car wash building to ensure that public right-of-way or driveway areas will not be blocked. An escape lane shall also be provided. 
(f)  The type, number, and location of all entrances, exits, and circulation patterns on any site containing a car wash shall be clearly delineated on the site development plan. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 9. - Architectural and site design standards. 
    No building shall be erected or more than 50 percent of an existing building altered that does not address the following development guidelines: 
(1)  Exterior walls shall consist of one or more of the following: 
a.  Brick stone and other natural and manmade masonry or cementatious materials, including for example but not by limitation, brick, stone, glass, EIFS, stucco, tilt up panels, etc. 
b.  Brass, stainless steel, aluminum and other decorative metal panel systems that offer a function and durability that is equivalent to the materials listed above. 
c.  Wood, metal, plastic and other manmade and natural all-weather materials as decorative elements. 
(2)  Blank street-level walls are not permitted on any street frontage in the NCD. Architectural design shall be utilized to create visual interest through the use of texture variations, complementary colors, shadow lines, contrasting shapes, applied features and related architectural devices. 
(3)  At least 50 percent of the ground-level wall area of any new or reconstructed building facing a public street shall be devoted to interest creating features, such as building entrances, awnings, display windows or windows affording a level of transparency and architectural variety. 
(4)  All windows and doors must include framing architectural elements. 
(5)  Building entrances facing a street shall be recessed into the face of the building to a depth that permits the entry door to open and close without projecting into the public right-of-way. Entryways must have a strong design consistent with the architecture of the rest of the building. Elements of strong entryway design include canopies, awnings, porticos, raised cornice parapets over the door, peaked roof forms, arches, large windows, or architectural details such as tile work and moldings that are integrated into the building structure and design. 
(6)  Building rooftops shall have the following features: 
a.  Parapets, screens, false facades or other architectural treatments that conceal flat roofs and roof top equipment and fixtures. 
b.  Overhanging eaves, recessed entrances or similar structures defining the pedestrian areas of the facade and at least partially protecting entrances and walkways from the weather. 
(7)  The overall size, shape and proportion of elements of a building as a whole, the building's relationship to other structures, the lot's area, open space and site improvements shall be consistent or compatible with like measures and features of existing buildings, lots and developments in the surrounding area. 
(8)  Architectural materials and treatments to the building(s) and the use of screening devices shall be consistent and compatible throughout the site on all facades of all buildings visible from off site and public areas on site. 
(9)  Landscaping shall be used to complement and enhance a building's design, color and material. All landscaping areas shall be irrigated to promote the longevity and a healthy appearance of the planted materials and utilize native or acclimatized species that thrive in these types of environments in which they are planted. 
(10)  Appropriate screening and landscape buffering shall be utilized wherever a commercial development abuts a residential, recreational or institutional zone or use. Issues of screening from both ground level and upper levels of adjoining parcels and structures must be taken into consideration in the planning and design of landscaped areas and structural screens. 
(11)  Roof and ground mounted equipment, including ventilators, HVAC equipment, antennae, generators, trash and grease receptacles, etc. shall be screened from view (100 percent opacity) or isolated so as not to be visible from adjoining public-rights-of way, parcels and structures. The appearance of structural screening shall be architecturally coordinated with the building to maintain a unified appearance. 
(12)  Loading docks, trash enclosures, approved or authorized outdoor storage and sale, and similar facilities and functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building and site, shall generally be located near the service entrances of buildings and shall be 100 percent screened with vegetation or structures in a manner that is architecturally compatible with the development. Trash storage and disposal facilities that can be seen from adjoining rights-of-way or residentially zoned or used properties and structures shall be screened 100 percent from view. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Section 10. - Urban design elements. 
    The following urban design guidelines shall be considered when reviewing a proposed MRD and the associated request for relief from the underlying zoning district and development requirements: 
(1)  Edges (natural such as waterways and ridgelines and man-made such as roadways, fences and property lines) signaling and defining the transitions between adjoining land uses, landmarks and public art shall be used to help define a sense of place and scale for commercial projects, functions and uses within and between developments. 
(2)  The streetscape shall be enhanced with lighting, landscaping, and pedestrian amenities such as benches, surface texture/color variations, small spaces, business and information kiosks, art, etc. 
(3)  Utilize landmark features, such as large scale public art, gateways or other significant architectural or landscaping at highly visible locations such as courtyards and development entrances. 
(4)  Cluster and stack office, commercial and residential uses in mixed use buildings as an alternative to one story and strip-type development. 
(5)  Utilize outdoor dining and the temporary outdoor display and sale of merchandise during store hours on a day to day basis where the merchandise and display equipment are returned to the store during nonoperation hours. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 1-12-09) 
ARTICLE XIII. - NONCONFORMING USES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-28, § 1, adopted July 28, 2008, repealed the former Art. XIII, §§ 1-5, and enacted a new Art. XIII as set out herein. The former Art. XIII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1468, §§ I-III, 9-10-79. 

Section 1. - Continuation. 
    The lawful use of a lot, property, premises, tract of ground, building or other structure existing at the time of the effective date of this ordinance or any subsequent amendment, addition or change thereto may be continued as a legal nonconforming use although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 08-28, § 1, 7-28-08) 
Section 2. - Effect of boundary change. 
    Whenever the use of a lot, property, premises, tract of ground, building or other structure becomes nonconforming through a change in the zoning ordinance or district boundaries that is not brought about as the result of a change requested by the property owner, a legal nonconforming use may be continued. 
(Ord. No. 08-28, § 1, 7-28-08) 
Section 3. - Discontinuation. 
    In the event that a legal nonconforming use is discontinued or its normal operation stopped, for a period of one year, the use of the lot, property, premises, tract of ground, building or other structure shall thereafter conform to the uses permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 08-28, § 1, 7-28-08) 
Section 4. - Alteration. 
    No lot, property, premises, tract of ground, building or other structure devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance in the district in which such lot, property, premises, tract of ground, building or other structure is located, except when required to do so by law or order, shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered, unless such use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such building or land is located. Repairs, maintenance, improvements, conversion and structural alterations of nonconforming buildings and structures housing conforming uses may be carried out, provided that such work does not increase the volume, bulk, height or area of the building or structure or in any way increase the degree of nonconformity or create a new nonconformity. Moreover, additions and alterations may be made to nonconforming buildings and structures housing conforming uses if the additions and alterations comply with all requirements of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 08-28, § 1, 7-28-08) 
Section 5. - Expansion. 
    No legal nonconforming use shall be expanded, enlarged or extended to occupy additional buildings, structures, building or ground space or other area unless such use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such building or land is located. This section shall not be interpreted to prohibit the natural expansion of activity associated with a legal nonconforming use within the area legally occupied by such use. 
(Ord. No. 08-28, § 1, 7-28-08) 
Section 6. - Effect of extensive damage. 
    When a building or structure, the use of which does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance, is damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or the public enemy, to the extent of more than 60 percent of its assessed value, it shall not be restored except in conformity with the district regulations of the district in which the building is situated. When the building, the use of which does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance, is damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or the public enemy, to the extent of less than 60 percent of its assessed value, it may be restored if the board of adjustment finds some compelling necessity requiring the continuance of the nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 08-28, § 1, 7-28-08) 
Section 7. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall be utilized when considering uses pursuant to this section. 
    Conforming use. Any activity for which a lot, property, premises, tract of ground, building or other structure is utilized, or occupied by human activity on a frequent, regular and recurring basis in conformance to the use standards of the zoning ordinance or other applicable regulations. 
    Legal nonconforming use. Any activity for which a lot, property, premises, tract of ground, building or other structure is utilized, or occupied by human activity on a frequent, regular and recurring basis that was lawfully allowed at the time it was established, has been lawfully continued but does not now conform to the use standards of the zoning ordinance or other applicable regulations. 
    Nonconforming use. Any activity for which a lot, property, premises, tract of ground, building or other structure is utilized, or occupied by human activity on a frequent, regular and recurring basis but does not conform to the use standards of the zoning ordinance or other applicable regulations. The term nonconforming use shall also include buildings and structures which by virtue of size, type of construction, location on the land or proximity to other structures or required building setback lines do not conform to the use standards of the zoning ordinance or other applicable regulations 
    Use. The term use means any activity for which a lot, property, premises, tract of ground, building or other structure is utilized, or occupied by human activity on a frequent, regular and recurring basis. By way of example and not of limitation a use shall be a shoe store, grocery store, physician's office, single-family residence, park, restaurant, motor vehicle repair, etc. Site improvements, buildings, structures and facilities that are vacant and/or not being utilized or occupied on a frequent, regular and recurring basis shall not in and of themselves constitute a use. 
(Ord. No. 08-28, § 1, 7-28-08) 
ARTICLE XIV. - SPECIAL USE EXCEPTION REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-26, § 1, adopted July 28, 2008, repealed the former Art. XIV, §§ 1-9, and enacted a new Art. XIV as set out herein. The former Art. XIV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 651, 5-13-68; Ord. No. 654, 5-27-68; Ord. No. 663, 8-12-68; Ord. No. 732, 11-10-69; Ord. No. 965, 6-26-72; Ord. No. 1055, § 1, 7-23-73; Ord. No. 1098, § 1, 2-25-74; Ord. No. 1119, § I, 5-13-74; Ord. No. 1160, §§ 3, 4, 12-23-74; Ord. No. 1279, § 1, 9-27-76; Ord. No. 1316, § 1(1)-(3), (5), (7), (8), 4-11-77; Ord. No. 1342, § 1, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 1414, § 2, 11-13-78; Ord. No. 1428, § II, 1-22-79; Ord. No. 1445, § I, 6-11-79; Ord. No. 1538, § 1, 3-23-81; Ord. No. 1643, § 1, 7-25-83; Ord. No. 1662, § I, 12-12-83; Ord. No. 1733, § IV, 2-11-85; Ord. No. 1742, § III, 4-22-85; Ord. No. 1784, § I, 11-25-85; Ord. No. 1795, § I, 2-2-86; Ord. No. 1798, § I(A-G), 3-24-86; Ord. No. 1833, § I, 7-14-86; Ord. No. 1834, § I, 7-14-86; Ord. No. 1836, §§ I, II, 7-28-86; Ord. No. 1837, § I, 8-11-86; Ord. No. 1838, § I, 8-11-86; Ord. No. 1878, § I, 2-23-87; Ord. No. 2003, § 1, 4-24-89; Ord. No. 2130, § 1, 10-22-90; Ord. No. 2177, § 1, 6-24-91; Ord. No. 2238, § 1, 2-24-92; Ord. No. 2256, 7-27-92; Ord. No. 2295, § 1, 3-8-93; Ord. No. 2303, § I, 3-22-93; Ord. No. 2308, § I, 3-22-93; Ord. No. 2365, § 1, 3-14-94; Ord. No. 2408, § 2, 9-26-94; Ord. No. 2666, § 1, 2-23-98; Ord. No. 99-43, §§ 1-3, 9-27-99; Ord. No. 03-01, § 1, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 04-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-26-04. 

Section 1. - [Generally.] 
    In addition to the buildings, structures, or uses permitted by this ordinance in each of the zoning districts, the board of aldermen may authorize the following additional uses by special use exception in the various districts specified for each particular type of use under the conditions set out in section 2 and section 3 of this article XIV; and provided that such building, structure or use is to be on a lot or tract of land of the area specified as a minimum when so specified; however, in accordance with the provisions of section 2 of this article XIV, approval may be conditioned upon a larger lot or tract of land being used: 
(1)  Any public building erected or used by any department of, county, state or federal government or any political subdivision of the state in the C-1 district. 
(2)  Sales of new motor driven vehicles, recreational vehicles and trailers and utility trailers subject to all of the following restrictions and regulations: 
a.  Dealerships must be franchised by the manufacturer of the new products sold. 
b.  Dealerships may sell only new and used motor vehicles and related parts and accessories. 
c.  Dealerships may include facilities for the indoor servicing of vehicles including a body and paint shop. 
d.  An indoor wash facility that is not available to the public shall be considered a customary accessory use to a dealership. 
e.  The rental and leasing of motor vehicles and recreational trailers shall be considered a customary accessory use for a dealership. 
f.  The sale or rental of recreational trailers shall only be allowed in conjunction with the sale of new motor vehicles. 
g.  The outdoor storage of inventory and serviced vehicles provided that such vehicles are parked on a paved surface shall be considered a customary accessory use for a dealership. 
h.  The total paved land area dedicated to all types of outdoor vehicle storage shall not exceed 85% of the total land area of the site exclusive of required green spaces, detention facilities and pollution mitigation areas. Facilities existing in violation of this provision at the time of the adoption of this ordinance may continue to operate with their current percentage of land utilized for vehicle storage, but such nonconforming site must be brought into compliance with this requirement upon the addition of any new land to a site. 
i.  No satellite facility or other noncontiguous land may be added to or made a part of an automobile dealership. 
(3)  Automobile and motor vehicle service and/or repair facility including body work and painting facilities in the C-1 commercial district, provided that no work activities shall be done outside the building, and no motor vehicle shall be stored unless enclosed within a building or parked and stored outdoors only subject to the following restrictions and regulations: 
a.  All motor vehicles shall be parked on a paved parking lot that has been paint striped to show designated parking areas; 
b.  No motor vehicle may be parked outdoors unless it has a current license issued by a state government; 
c.  No motor vehicle may be parked outdoors for more than 45 consecutive days or more than 50 days during any 12-month period; 
d.  The aggregate number of motor vehicles parked outdoors for more than 24 hours shall not exceed the greater of six motor vehicles per enclosed service bay or 12 motor vehicles per acre of the premises of the shop; and 
e)  Such other restrictions and regulations as the board of aldermen may require due to unique physical or cultural characteristics, proximity to uses and facilities that may be negatively impacted by this use, access limitations, traffic impact or other special issues which make the site atypical of the city or neighborhood. 
(4)  Carwash establishment, except coin-operated self-service establishment, provided it is enclosed in a separate building, attended by employees during operating hours, and provides on site queuing room for a minimum of 15 vehicles in the C-1 commercial district. 
(5)  Banks, savings and loan associations, short term loan establishments and other financial businesses that are regulated by the Missouri Division of Finance subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Such facilities shall provide and utilize digital video and audio surveillance equipment that observes all interior portions of the unit that are accessible or visible to the general public, all private offices and all exterior perimeters of the building or site including parking lots, alleys, service areas, all exterior windows and doors and similar spaces. Such equipment shall operate 24 hours a day seven days a week and shall be connected to a recording device(s) that permanently retain the recorded data for at least 30 days before the data is erased or recorded over. Such recording devices must be able to have the data downloaded to another device for long term permanent storage as needed. 
b.  Such facilities shall be designed to have their public lobby areas fully visible from the adjoining parking lots. No interior or exterior improvements, window tinting and treatment, draperies, blinds, signage, landscaping or other devices shall be utilized to block such visibility. 
c.  Such facilities shall provide a vault or safe to protect cash or other liquid assets. Such vault or safe shall have a UL rating of TRTL-15 or better. Such safe or vault shall be installed in such a manner that the area near the safe/vault shall be visible from the parking lot and the surveillance system. 
d.  Such facilities shall be equipped with an interior illumination system that fully illuminates the area around the vault or safe during all times of darkness. 
e.  Such facilities shall be equipped with an alarm system that monitors all exterior doors and windows, cash drawers and the vault/safe. The system shall include "hold up" alarm/panic buttons at all teller and manager positions that promptly notify the police department when activated. Such an alarm system must be installed and operated in accordance with the established standards and requirements of the City of Ballwin for such equipment. Such systems shall be tested monthly and a record of such tests maintained on the premises for review. 
(6)  Cemeteries, memorial gardens columbariums, mausoleums and similar facilities for the burial or other internment or entombment of human remains in the C-1 district. 
(7)  College or university in the C-1 district. 
(8)  Athletic fields or community building owned and operated by a governmental or a not for profit entity in the R-1A, R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4 districts. 
(9)  Motor vehicle fuel filling stations in the C-1 commercial district; provided however that no tank or receptacle used for storage of gasoline or motor vehicle fuel shall be permitted unless it is located below the surface of the ground or grade on a proper foundation. Filling station pumps, pump islands and canopies may be within a required front yard, provided they are not less than 20 feet from any street lines except for land lying along and adjacent to Manchester Road where they cannot be less than 40 feet from any street line, and each pump and pump island shall be surrounded by a curb or other appropriate barrier. No tank or receptacle used for storage of gasoline or motor vehicle fuel and no filling station pumps, pump islands or canopies shall be located within 50 feet of the boundaries with any residential use or any residential dwelling district. 
(10)  Motels, hotels and similar operations offering sleeping facilities on a single night rental basis provided that such use: 
a.  Is located in the C-1 district; 
b.  Provides sleeping facilities for no more than four people per room; 
c.  Provides 1,250 square feet of lot area for each unit; 
d.  Provides at least 30 feet of open space between buildings; 
e.  Provides individual units, each of which shall contain at least 200 square feet of floor area, and provide heating/cooling, lavatory, toilet and tub or shower with hot and cold water; and 
f.  That such a special use exception may include any additional regulations and/or site development and operational requirements deemed necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the use. 
(11)  Nurseries and greenhouses including the outdoor storage, sales and display only of plants and landscaping materials in the C-1 District provided that any structures shall be no less than 100 feet from all adjoining properties with a residential use or zoning classification. 
(12)  Nursery, pre-kindergarten, day care schools and play schools not operated on the same premises as a residential use or in conjunction with a residential use serving five or more children during any 14-hour period of any day of the week, except those that are conducted in a church in connection with religious services not exceeding three hours at a time, in the R-1A single-family dwelling district, R-1 single-family dwelling district, R-2 single-family dwelling district, R-3 single-family dwelling district, R-4 planned multiple-dwelling district, R-5 planned infill multiple dwelling district, and PSD planned single-family dwelling development district provided that: 
a.  A minimum of a 25-foot wide landscaping buffer is provided along all sides of the site adjoining all residential or recreationally zoned land or use; 
b.  Such landscaping buffer shall be planted with sufficient native planting materials to provide a 75 percent visual screen to a height of six feet above the ground level; 
c.  Shall be limited to a single ingress/egress point which shall be located no less than 100 feet from the centerline of any intersection; 
d.  All parking and drop-off facilities shall be located in side and rear yard areas; 
e.  The building footprint shall not exceed four times the average footprint of all residential structures within a 500-foot radius of the proposed site exclusive of rights-of-way; 
f.  Shall not be located on a parcel of ground of less than one acre in area; 
g.  Shall have all exterior equipment such as HVAC facilities and generators installed such that it is fully screened from surrounding properties; 
h.  Shall provide a traffic study completed by an engineer qualified by experience and/or education to conduct such studies. Such study shall analyze all aspects of the proposed development's impact and function from a traffic perspective and shall demonstrate that the additional traffic impact of the proposed use will not negatively impact the level of service on nearby roadway segments and intersection movements by more than one second of delay per vehicle; and 
i.  Shall provide parking at a rate of not less than one space per 225 square feet of gross building floor area. 
(13)  Nursery, pre-kindergarten, day care schools and play schools operated as an accessory and subordinate use to the primary residential use of the property and serving five or more children in total during any 14-hour period of any day of the week in the R-1A single-family dwelling district, R-1 single-family dwelling district, R-2 single-family dwelling district, R-3 single-family dwelling district, R-4 planned multiple-dwelling district, R-5 planned infill multiple dwelling district, and PSD planned single-family dwelling development district provided that: 
a.  A maximum of ten children are enrolled and present on the premises during any 14-hour period of any day of the week; 
b.  Such use shall be limited to a single ingress/egress point which shall be located no less than 100 feet from the centerline of any intersection; 
c.  Such use shall not be located on a parcel of ground of less than 10,000 square feet; and 
d.  Such use shall provide simultaneous off-street parking for at least three vehicles not including the vehicles of the owner. 
e.  Such use shall only be permitted in the residence of the petitioner and no individual not a resident of the dwelling for which the use is petitioned shall be employed at said use. 
(14)  Parking within any front yard for all allowed uses in the C-1, C-3, PA and S-1 districts and for all nonresidential uses in the R-1A, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and PSD districts. 
(15)  Public utility uses, facilities or stations other than an office or salesroom not in a dedicated utility easement in any district. 
(16)  Reserved. 
(17)  Batting cages, bowling alleys, tennis, racquetball and handball facilities, miniature golf, skating rinks and similar recreational and entertainment uses in the C-1 districts provided that any outdoor recreational or entertainment facility or use shall be no less than 100 feet from an adjoining residential use or zoning district and that a 50-foot wide landscaped buffer providing a 75 percent visual screening to a height of six feet is established within this setback and no luminary is installed on the site the lens or lamp of which is directly visible from any place on any nearby residential property. 
(18)  Shop for the sale at retail of antiques including consignment items but not including a pawn shop or similar use in the C-1 commercial district. 
(19)  Storage, display and/or sale of residential lawn and gardening supplies, materials, fixtures, equipment and similar residential lawn and garden items not kept within a completely enclosed building in the C-1 commercial district, but not including building and construction materials or supplies, fixtures or equipment having a design, quantity or nature for commercial or business purposes. 
(20)  Shop where food is served for consumption on the premises on which prepared or to be consumed at a place other than on the premises on which prepared, including the use of a drive-up window for pickup purposes. If the use described herein is to be placed on a site that has been previously approved pursuant to the special use exception site development plan approval process and no changes to the exterior footprint of the building or the approved site development plan are proposed, this special use exception requirement does not apply and the special use exception does not have to be obtained. For the purposes of this ordinance, consumption on the premises on which prepared shall mean and include consumption in an exterior garden or sidewalk type dining area, provided, however that such exterior dining area is accessible to the building in which the food is prepared, is controlled by the business preparing the food and does not interfere with the intended use of the area occupied by such dining. 
(21)  Establishments for the distilling, brewing, preparation and sale of beverages containing alcohol of any kind by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold in the R-4 and C-1 districts. 
(22)  Rental and associated open storage of motor driven vehicles and utility trailers in the C-1 commercial district provided that parking spaces used for such storage are in excess of the minimum parking required for the site as provided in appendix A, article XV of the Ballwin Code of Ordinances. 
(23)  Theaters presenting performances by casts of live performers in the C-1 district; provided, however, that: 
a.  Such use may be in conjunction with the operation of a restaurant; and 
b.  There be provided for such use one parking space for each four seats or 60 square feet of gross floor area, whichever requirement is the greater; and 
c.  A traffic study prepared by a professional engineer qualified by experience and/or education to conduct such studies is submitted. Such study shall analyze all aspects of the proposed use's impact and function from a traffic perspective and shall demonstrate that the additional traffic impact of the proposed use will not negatively impact the level of service on nearby roadway segments and intersection movements by more than one second of delay per vehicle. 
(24)  Indoor motion picture theaters on tracts of land containing five acres or more in the C-1 commercial district provided that a traffic study prepared by a professional engineer qualified by experience and/or education to conduct such studies is submitted. Such study shall analyze all aspects of the proposed use's impact and function from a traffic perspective and shall demonstrate that the additional traffic impact of the proposed use will not negatively impact the level of service on nearby roadway segments and intersection movements by more than one second of delay per vehicle. 
(25)  Private retirement community, and/or nursing home offering living facilities and associated services for independent living, assisted living and /or skilled nursing arranged in single and/or multiple family building configurations, in the R-1, R-2, R-3, PSD and C-1 zoning districts provided that: 
a.  A minimum of a 50-foot wide landscaping buffer is provided along all sides of the site adjoining all residential or recreationally zoned land or use; 
b.  Such landscaping buffer shall be planted with sufficient native planting materials to provide a 75 percent visual screen to a height of six feet above the ground level; 
c.  Lot for assisted living facilities shall not be less that one acre in size nor more than five acres in size; 
d.  It shall be limited to a single ingress/egress point per roadway frontage of the site provided that no curb cut shall be located less than 100 feet from the centerline of any intersection; 
e.  All parking, and drop-off facilities shall be located in side and rear yard areas; 
f.  It shall have all exterior equipment such as but not limited to HVAC facilities and generators installed such that it is fully screened from surrounding properties; and 
g.  It shall provide parking at a rate of not less than .3 spaces per resident room plus 1.5 spaces per independent living unit. 
h.  The design and bulk of the building is compatible with the scale and character of the surrounding neighborhood and complies with the applicable recommendations of the comprehensive plan for infill developments. 
(26)  Drive-through facilities in the C-1, C-3 and S-1 districts. 
(27)  Temporary mobile diagnostic or medical treatment equipment for a period in excess of three days per calendar year in the C-1 and C-3 districts, provided that: 
a.  Such facility is not used for the treatment of persons having contagious or infectious diseases; 
b.  Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided upon the lot or tract adequate to accommodate employees and visitors; 
c.  Except in emergencies declared by the Mayor of the City of Ballwin, no mobile diagnostic or medical treatment equipment shall be allowed on the permitted location more than three days per week or more than 15 days per calendar month; 
d.  Proper and adequate facilities are provided for the disposal of waste, trash or garbage generated at the facility; and 
e.  Each special use exception shall be for a definite period, not to exceed one year, unless extended by approval of the board of aldermen at a meeting of the board of aldermen on such conditions as determined to be in the public interest. 
(28)  Residential and outpatient alcohol, drug and substance treatment centers certified by the State of Missouri are allowed in C-1 commercial district, provided: 
a.  The operator of the facility has a current certification from the Division of Alcohol and Drug Abuse of the Department of Mental Health for the State of Missouri for the operation of the facility; 
b.  That no other alcohol and drug treatment center is located within 2,600 feet of the building housing the facility; 
c.  That the building housing the facility is not located within 300 feet of the property line of any school, church or building regularly used as a place of religious worship or education; and 
d.  That the building housing the facility is not located within 50 feet of any district zoned residential dwelling district. 
(29)  Single-family residences in which eight or fewer unrelated mentally or physically handicapped persons reside in any district. 
(30)  Indoor entertainment facilities offering performances or amusement in the C-1 commercial district, provided that the other provisions of this section relating to such uses under this ordinance are met. 
(31)  Trailers, not to exceed 24 feet in length, in the C-1 zoning districts which would not otherwise comply with the restrictions in chapters 15 and 28 of the Code of Ordinances provided that said trailer shall be owned and utilized by the holder of a Ballwin business license, operating its business on the same property where the trailer shall be stored. Such trailer shall be parked at all times behind the building line of the structure located on the property, but may be moved or removed and replaced without forfeiture of this special use exception. 
(32)  Indoor shooting ranges in the C-1 zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, § 1, 7-28-08; Ord. No. 11-19, § 1, 5-23-11; Ord. No. 13-04, § 1, 1-28-13; Ord. No. 13-25, § 1, 6-17-13) 
Section 2. - [Conditions.] 
    Granting of a special use exception for any of the uses set forth in section 1 hereof shall, in addition to the findings required by section 4(3) hereof, take into account the matters hereinafter set forth when applicable, and any one or more of such matters may be made a condition of the granting of the special use exception: 
(1)  That the minimum yard requirements of the district in which the use is to be located are observed. 
(2)  That provision is made for appropriate site illumination which will not disturb adjacent property or affect traffic on adjacent rights-of-way. Such lighting shall be of a nature that it does not shine directly toward any right-of-way and the lenses and lamps of any fixture cannot be viewed directly from any nearby residential use or district. Wall mounted luminaries shall be designed and mounted to cast illumination downward and not outward toward adjacent properties or uses. 
(3)  That there is appropriate provision for landscaping and greenery and its maintenance, both for purposes of screening and blending with the character of the surrounding uses and neighborhoods. Plantings may be required to be as high as eight feet when for the purpose of screening between adjacent properties and uses. Unless required to be otherwise, these landscaped areas shall be a minimum of 25 feet wide where they adjoin a residential use or district and may be required to be wider or taller or required along property lines adjoining nonresidential uses if it is determined that this is necessary to protect the character, use and/or privacy of adjoining properties. 
(4)  That the site or necessary portions thereof are adequately fenced for safety, screening or to prevent unauthorized persons from having access, which fencing may be required to be a height of six feet. 
(5)  That there is adequate off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of Article XV Off-street Parking and Loading Requirements of the Ballwin Zoning Ordinance. 
(6)  That appropriate provision is made for the paving of all parking and drive areas in accordance with the provisions of Article XV Off-street Parking and Loading Requirement of the Ballwin Zoning Ordinance. 
(7)  That appropriate provision is made for sanitary sewers and stormwater runoff. 
(8)  That adequate provision is made for off-street loading and unloading docks, spaces or other facilities. 
(9)  That adequate provision is made for ingress and egress to abutting rights-of-way. 
(10)  That there is adequate area for the intended use, which area may be greater than the minimum otherwise specified in this ordinance and which shall be sufficient to protect all surrounding properties, taking into account all aspects of the intended use. 
(11)  In off-street parking for public use or for employees, no sales, dead storage, repair work nor dismantling of automobiles shall be permitted. 
(12)  That adequate provision has been made for the placement of containers for the disposition of refuse, rubbish, garbage, grease or other materials and for architecturally compatible screening of such facilities. 
(13)  In addition to all other requirements of this Code as may be applicable, the following apply to those businesses in the C-1 commercial district that provide entertainment. 
(a)  Parking for customers and employees must be provided at a rate of two times that required for restaurants with respect to that area of operation where the entertainment or amusement is being provided, or 1.5 times that required for restaurants based upon the allowed occupancy of the entire facility as established by the fire marshal, whichever requirement is greater. Such additional parking requirement in excess of such minimum requirement must be located on the same physical site or within the same development in which the entertainment or amusement special use exception is approved. Other sites or developments may not be used for this additional parking. If the site or development is not under the ownership and/or control of the petitioner, then the written approval of the owner of the property within the same development authorizing the utilization of the excess parking capacity for this purpose must be provided. The time period of such authorization shall be commensurate with the time period of the special use exception granted under this section. 
(b)  Any building within 100 feet of a structure housing a residential use located within a residential zoning district that is proposed for use pursuant to an entertainment or amusement special use exception shall be designed and built and/or retrofitted with appropriate acoustical insulation to prevent sound emanating from the entertainment or amusement from being heard beyond the perimeter of the site. Such sound insulation shall be described as part of the special use exception petition and a written statement from an engineer familiar with such issues shall be provided stating that the proposed insulation will provide the required sound attenuation. Upon submittal of final architectural plans, a statement bearing the engineers professional seal shall be provided stating that the sound insulation will attenuate the sound in accordance with this ordinance. 
(c)  The sale [of] any intoxicating liquor in conjunction with a special use exception under this section, except malt liquor, in the original package, shall be deemed "sale by the drink" and when so made, the container in every case shall be emptied and the contents thereof served as other intoxicating liquors sold by the drink are served. The sale of intoxicating liquor in the original package for off-premises consumption shall not be allowed, and violation of this provision shall be grounds for revocation of the special use exception. 
(d)  A petitioner may be required to provide security personnel during the time that performances or other entertainment is provided for which a special used exception has been granted under this section to patrol the premises and surrounding public areas to prevent illegal parking, traffic congestion, littering, noise and/or disorderly conduct as defined in this Code. 
(e)  Grounds for revocation for a special use exception under this section shall include illegal parking, traffic congestion, littering, noise and inappropriate behavior caused or reasonably believed to be caused by operation of the business. 
(f)  A special use exception is not required under this section for: 
a.  The operation of televisions, radios or similar devices providing telecommunications broadcasts, or the operation of jukeboxes or similar music devices provided that there is no disc jockey or similar operator; 
b.  Schools, churches, fraternal and/or philanthropic organizations and similar organizations that provide events on less than 12 days per year. 
c.  Businesses which have offered entertainment to customers on a regular basis as an allowed use, provided such entertainment and/or use was offered or obtained prior to the enactment of this section. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, § 1, 7-28-08) 
Section 3. - Application/petition procedure. 
(1)  The zoning commission meets on the first Monday of each month. Applications shall be submitted no later than the close of business on the Friday preceding the Monday six weeks before the regularly scheduled meeting of the zoning commission. 
(2)  Applications for new special use exceptions, or for extensions or alterations to existing uses previously authorized, shall be made to the City of Ballwin on petition forms provided by the city. 
(3)  Applications shall include 25 copies each of the petition form, a development plan folded and on paper not to exceed 24" × 36" and appropriate accompanying materials. These documents shall show all information necessary to clearly describe the nature, extent and intensity of the proposed special use, and shall address the concerns outlined in the Ballwin Petitioning Handbook and article XIV of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Ballwin. 
(4)  Applications shall be accompanied by a legal description of the property and a copy of the current deed for the property showing the current owner. If the petition is not from the owner, the application shall also be accompanied by documentation of a long term legal interest in the property by the petitioner or the written statement of the current owner, or authorized agent, indicating an intent to transfer ownership or other legal interest to the petitioner and allowing the petitioner to enter into a special use exception for the property in question. 
(5)  All drawings and information involving stormwater runoff changes, grading, new paving, construction, landscaping or other site improvements submitted in conjunction with a petition shall be certified by the attestation and affixing of the seal of a Missouri registered engineer or architect, as to the drawings being an accurate representation of the current physical and topographic characteristics of the site. In the case of simple petitions involving little or no change to the site or structures, this provision may be waived by the city planner. 
(6)  A petition fee as outlined herein shall accompany all applications. In no event will any fee required by this section be refunded to an applicant regardless of the determination made with the respect to the application: 
(a)  The fee for the review of original special use exception petitions (with site plan review) shall be $1,500.00 per petition. 
(b)  The fee for the processing of original special use exception petitions (without site plan review) shall be $750.00. 
(c)  The fee for the review and processing petitions for rezoning requiring site plan review shall be $1,250.00 per petition. 
(d)  The fee for the review and processing petitions for rezoning not requiring site plan review shall be $500.00 per petition. 
(e)  The fee for the review and processing petitions for approval of a final development plan requiring site plan review shall be $1,250.00. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, § 1, 7-28-08) 
Section 4. - Review procedure. 
    The application and accompanying materials shall be reviewed for compliance with the provisions of this article and the zoning ordinance of the city. If the petition is properly submitted and in compliance, the city planner shall so certify in writing to the zoning commission, the board of aldermen and the petitioner within 30 days of submission. The petition shall then be placed on the agenda of the zoning commission. 
(1)  If the petition is found not to be properly submitted, or not in compliance with the minimum provisions of this article, the city planner shall notify the petitioner within 30 days of the date of submission and shall provide a listing of the deficiencies of the petition. 
(2)  If the city planner fails to certify to the zoning commission that the petition has been properly submitted, or fails to notify the petitioner that the petition is not properly submitted within the specified 30-day period, the petition shall be deemed to have been properly submitted and shall be placed upon the next available agenda of the zoning commission for consideration. 
(3)  The zoning commission shall consider the petition for special use exception within 60 days of certification from the city planner that all required petitioning documents and necessary information have been submitted. In default of conducting such consideration within the time provided, the zoning commission shall be deemed to have found all factors of the application satisfactory. 
(4)  The zoning commission shall review the submitted documents and information, and shall report in writing to the board of aldermen as to the effect of such special use on traffic hazards and congestion, the character of the neighborhood, the general welfare of the community, the capacity of public utilities, the impact on public safety and health, consistency with good planning practice and the issues set forth in this article. 
(5)  A special use exception shall only be granted by ordinance approved by a majority of the members of the board of aldermen. 
(6)  Upon receipt of the report of the city planning and zoning commission, the board of aldermen may hold a public hearing in relation to the matter, shall give notice of the time and place by causing a notice thereof to be published at least one time in a newspaper printed, published or of general circulation in the City of Ballwin. The publication of said notice shall be at least 15 days prior to the day of the hearing. 
(7)  After such hearing, the board of aldermen shall determine whether such exception: 
a.  Will substantially increase traffic hazards or congestion. 
b.  Will adversely affect the character of the neighborhood. 
c.  Will adversely affect the general welfare of the community. 
d.  Will overtax public utilities. 
e.  Will adversely affect public safety and health. 
f.  Is consistent with good planning practice. 
g.  Can be operated in a manner that is not detrimental to the permitted developments and uses in the district. 
h.  Can be developed and operated in a manner that is visually compatible with the permitted uses in the surrounding area. 
(8)  If the findings of the board of aldermen be negative as to all subjects referred to in [subsection (4)] (1) through (5) above, and be affirmative as to all subjects referred to in (6) through (8) above, and all applicable matters in section 2 have been adequately provided for, then the application shall be granted. If the findings of the board of aldermen be affirmative as to any of the subjects referred to in (1) through (5) above, or be negative as to any of the subjects referred to in (6) through (8) above, or if any of the applicable matters set forth in section 2 are not adequately provided for, then the application shall be denied. 
(9)  Any applicant who shall accept and begin its use pursuant to a special use exception granted pursuant to this ordinance shall be deemed to have accepted all of the conditions made a part thereof, and in the event that said applicant shall then or in the future fail to comply with any of the conditions made a part of the special use exception, the board of aldermen, after hearing and upon notice having been given, may revoke such special use exception. 
(10)  In the event that a special use exception grantee fails to produce proof of ownership, a valid lease or other long term legal interest in the property associated with the special use exception within 90 days of its effective date, said petitioner shall be deemed to have abandoned the special use exception and it shall terminate. 
(11)  In the event that a special use exception grantee fails to proceed with the allowed use or construction and/or development, within a period of one year following the effective date of said special use exception, and no extension of time is granted by the board of aldermen, said grantee shall be deemed to have abandoned the special use exception and it shall terminate. 
In the event building permits are issued during the one year period following the effective date of the special use exception, but no significant construction activities and/or progress toward completion of the project and commencement of the special use begins on the site within six months of the issuance of the building permit, and no extension of time is granted by action of the board of aldermen, the grantee shall be deemed to have abandoned the special use exception and it shall terminate upon the expiration of the six-month period following the issuance of the building permit. 
Unless expressly authorized at the time of the granting of the special use exception, or upon the granting of a time extension by the board of aldermen, all construction and site developments associated with a special use exception must be completed within 18 months of the effective date of the special use exception, or it shall be deemed abandoned and shall thereupon terminate. 
(12)  A special use exception grantee shall accept the provisions of the special use exception in writing within 30 days of the date of its passage by the board of aldermen or it shall be deemed abandoned and shall terminate. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, § 1, 7-28-08) 
Section 5. - Application/petition for multiple special use exceptions. 
    If the nature of a business or activity is such that more than one of the special uses listed in section 1 hereof are involved, the petition shall specify that use which will be the primary use but must also indicate all secondary special uses which will be conducted upon the premises. The zoning commission and the board of aldermen shall consider all the listed special use exceptions as a single petition. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the petitioner from withdrawing one or more special use exception(s) from a petition and thereby allowing a determination based upon the special use exception(s) remaining in the petition. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, § 1, 7-28-08) 
Section 6. - Conditions. 
(1)  In approving special use exceptions, the board of aldermen shall have the authority to impose or require such conditions as it determines are necessary to satisfy the criteria established in this article. 
(2)  In each instance in which approval of use or development of property is made subject to conditions by the board of aldermen in the approval of a special use exception, a copy of the approved ordinance and all records, plans, information and documentation shall be kept in a permanent special use exception file within Ballwin City Hall. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, § 1, 7-28-08) 
Section 7. - Transfers. 
    Special use exception approvals are granted to the named permittee only and may be transferred only with the approval of the board of aldermen. Transfers may be accomplished by submitting a fully executed and notarized special use exception transfer petition form and a $250.00 petition transfer fee to the city planner no later than the close of business of the Tuesday preceding a regular meeting of the board of aldermen. The transfer may be approved by a majority vote of the board. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, § 1, 7-28-08) 
Section 8. - [Period of validity.] 
    Except as provided in subsection (11) of section 4 hereof, special use exceptions shall be valid for an unlimited period unless a lesser period shall be provided for a particular special use exception. Upon the expiration of the time limit specified for a particular special use exception, the property owner may request that the special use exception be reviewed by the board of aldermen which may extend it for an unlimited period, or for an additional period of time. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, § 1, 7-28-08; Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 4-23-18) 
Section 9. - [Denial.] 
    Upon denial by the board of aldermen of an application for a special use exception, the applicant (and the owner of the property, if other than the applicant) shall be notified of the denial; and neither the planning and zoning commission nor the board of aldermen shall consider any other application for a special use exception concerning the same property, or any part thereof, unless: 
(1)  Twelve months have elapsed from the date of the most recent denial; or 
(2)  Three-fourths of the members of the full board of aldermen vote to consider the most recent application. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, § 1, 7-28-08) 
ARTICLE XV. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Parking, stopping and standing, § 15-256 et seq. 

Section 1. - [Generally.] 
(1)  In all districts there shall be provided at the time any building or structure is erected or structurally altered (except as provided in subsection 4 of this section), off-street parking spaces in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Dwellings, single-family, one parking space for each dwelling unit. 
(2)  Dwellings, two-family and multiple, 11/2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit. 
(3)  Fraternity or sorority house, one parking space for every six beds. 
(4)  Private club or lodge, one parking space for every ten members. 
(5)  Church or temple, one parking space for each four seats in the main auditorium used for services. 
(6)  School, except high school and college, one parking space for each ten seats in the auditorium or main assembly room, or one space for each classroom, whichever is greater. 
(7)  College and high schools, one parking space for each eight seats in the main auditorium or five spaces for each classroom, whichever is greater. 
(8)  Community center, library, museum or art gallery, ten parking spaces plus one additional space for each 300 square feet of floor area in excess of 2,000 square feet. 
(9)  Hospital, one parking space for each four beds. 
(10)  Sanatorium, convalescent home, home for the aged or similar institution, one parking space for each six beds. 
(11)  Theater, auditorium (except school), sports arena or stadium, one parking space for each four seats or bench seating spaces. 
(12)  Hotel and motel, five parking spaces plus one parking space for each sleeping unit, room, or suite. These spaces shall be in addition to the parking spaces that shall be provided for any portion of the hotel that is used for office, business or commercial purposes including the lobby, but not including corridors giving access to sleeping rooms. 
(13)  Business or professional office, studio, bank, medical or dental clinic, one space per 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
(14)  Bowling alley, five parking spaces for each alley. 
(15)  Mortuary or funeral home, one parking space for each 100 square feet of floor space in slumber rooms, parlors or individual funeral service rooms. 
(16)  Restaurant, cafe or similar recreation or amusement establishment, one parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area, or one parking space per four seats in the restaurant, whichever parking space requirement is greater. A parking study may be required by the city planner for special use exceptions for all uses applying under this paragraph (16). 
(17)  Retail store or personal service establishment, except as otherwise specified herein, one parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area. 
(18)  Industrial and service buildings, wholesale establishments, machinery or equipment sales and service, clothing or shoe repair or service shop, one parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area. 
(19)  Furniture store which displays new furniture for homes or offices, one parking space for each 500 square feet of floor area. 
(2)  In computing the number of such parking spaces required, the following rules shall govern: 
(1)  [Reserved.] 
(2)  Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the nearest whole number. 
(3)  The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature. 
(4)  Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date of this ordinance is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase of ten percent or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance is enlarged to the extent of 25 percent or more in floor area or in the area used, said building or use shall then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein. 
(5)  In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. 
(3)  All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same premises with the building or use served, except that where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two or more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located not to exceed 300 feet from an institutional building served and not to exceed 500 feet from any other nonresidential building served. 
(1)  Not more than 50 percent of the parking spaces required for: 
(a)  Theaters, bowling alleys or cafes, and up to 100 percent of the parking spaces required for a church or school auditorium may be provided and used jointly by 
(b)  Banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service establishments and similar uses not normally open, used or operated during the same hours as those listed in (a); provided, however that written agreement thereto is properly executed and filed as specified below. 
(2)  In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement thereby assuring their retention for such purposes shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form and executed by the city attorney, and shall be filed with the application for a building permit. 
(4)  The above off-street parking requirements shall not apply to any C-2 regional shopping district nor in any C-3 planned limited commercial district. 
(Ord. No. 1734, § II, 2-11-85; Ord. No. 2423, § 2, 1-23-95; Ord. No. 2583, § 1, 3-24-97; Ord. No. 03-58, § 1, 10-27-03) 
Section 2. - [Waiver of rear yard requirements.] 
    Except where a commercial district abuts a public activity district, the rear yard requirements may be waived in commercial districts, provided that said rear yard space is substituted and added to the front yard requirements to provide additional area for off-street parking spaces and no other use. 
(Ord. No. 1168, § 1, 1-13-75) 
Section 3. - [Improvements.] 
    Before the maintenance, operation or improvement of a parking lot, the owner or operator thereof shall submit plans and specifications showing details of the improvements and a statement regarding the proposed methods of maintenance and operation. No permit shall be issued therefor unless the parking lot conforms to the following standards of improvements and maintenance: 
(1)  [Surface.] Such lot shall be surfaced either with not less than four inches of asphalt pavement on six inches of crushed rock or seven inches of concrete on four inches of crushed rock for all commercial parking lots. Driveways within or adjacent to parking lots which will be used by delivery, sanitation, service vehicles etc. should have a minimum of eight inches of asphalt or concrete on an eight-inch crushed stone base. 
(2)  [Stormwater.] Adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of stormwater, and the city engineer shall ensure that such water shall not flow onto adjoining property or adjacent sidewalks in a quantity or manner that would be detrimental thereto, or inconvenient to persons using the sidewalk. 
(3)  [Walls.] A structurally sound wall or other abutment approved by the city engineer to ensure safety shall be installed around each side of the parking lot wherever said lot adjoins a public street, sidewalk or alley. An adequate retaining wall wherever necessary to prevent the washing of soil to and from adjoining property and a wall or screen of such height and character as are [is] necessary for adequate screening of the parking lot from adjacent property shall also be provided to meet requirements of the city engineer. 
(4)  [Entrances, exits.] The location and width of entrances and exits to and from the lot shall be as determined by the city engineer, but there shall not be more than one entrance and exit along any one street, unless same is deemed necessary by the board of aldermen for the alleviation of traffic congestion and interference of traffic movement along such street. 
(5)  [Surface markings.] The location of each parking space and the location and direction of movement along the driveways providing access thereto shall be indicated by painting upon the surface, by raised directional signs, or by markers or other similar measures placed in the surfacing. 
(6)  [Floodlights.] Wherever the parking lots are to be used during darkness, a system of floodlighting shall be installed to provide an adequate standard of illumination over the entire parking lot. All floodlights shall be shielded so that minimum glare will extend to adjacent property and shall meet requirements of the city engineer. 
(7)  [Sign.] A sign the size and character of which shall be approved by the city engineer shall be installed showing the ownership of the lot and the permitted use thereof. If the lot is so operated that a charge is made for the use of the parking facilities, the rates for parking shall be legibly shown upon the sign. 
(8)  [Planting.] The planting of trees, shrubs, or grass shall be required by the city engineer except where he deems that such planting will not be in the best interests of the City of Ballwin. 
(9)  [Attendant's shelter.] A temporary shelter for the use of a parking lot attendant may be maintained on the lot, provided the location, construction and design of same shall be first approved by the city engineer. 
(10)  [Condition.] The parking lot shall be maintained in a manner to keep it as free as practicable from dust, paper and other loose particles; and snow and ice shall be promptly removed by the operator. All adjacent sidewalks shall be kept free from dirt, ice, sleet and snow and in a safe condition for use by pedestrians. All signs, markers or any other methods used to indicate direction of traffic movement and location of parking spaces shall be maintained in a neat and legible condition. Likewise, any walls, trees and shrubbery, as well as surfacing of the parking lot, shall be maintained in good condition throughout its use for parking purposes and the city engineer and the building commissioner shall each have the authority to prohibit the use of the area for parking purposes unless and until proper maintenance, repair or rehabilitation is completed. 
(11)  Operation. Any person operating a parking lot shall, as may be required by the board of aldermen, either: 
(a)  File with the City of Ballwin a bond in such form as may be prescribed by the city attorney and in such amount as required by the board of aldermen, which shall be surety for any judgment for damages rendered against the operator of the parking lot, resulting to person or property, when incurred while using the parking lot; or 
(b)  Carry public liability insurance in such amount as may be required by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 2423, § 3, 1-23-95) 
Section 4. - [Time for compliance.] 
    All parking lots being maintained at the time of the adoption of this ordinance shall be brought into compliance with the standards established in section 3 of this article within six months of the passage of this ordinance. The city engineer and the building commissioner shall each have the authority to prohibit the use of such parking lots after said six-month period until compliance with said standards is effected. 
Section 5. - [Loading space.] 
    Every building or part thereof erected or occupied for retail business, service, manufacturing, storage or warehousing, hotel, mortuary, or any other use similarly involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise, shall provide and maintain, on the same premises one loading space for each 10,000 square feet or fraction thereof of floor area in the building. 
Section 6. - Handicapped parking. 
(A)  Building entrance. At least one primary entrance at each grade floor level of a building or structure shall be accessible from the parking lot or the nearest street by means of a walk uninterrupted by steps or abrupt changes in grade and shall have [a] width of not less than five feet and a gradient of not more than one foot in 20 feet. 
(B)  Parking lots and building approaches. A parking lot servicing an entrance as described above shall have a number of level permanent parking spaces as set forth in the following table identified by abovegrade signs as reserved for physically handicapped persons. 
Accessible Parking Spaces 
Total parking 
  in lot: Required number of accessible spaces:  Up to  25 1  26 to  50 2  51 to  75 3  76 to 100 4 101 to 150 5 151 to 200 6 201 to 300 7 301 to 400 8 Total parking 
  in lot: Required number of accessible spaces: 401 to 500 9 501 to 1000 2 percent of total Over 1000 20 Plus, for each 100 over 1000 1  
(C)  Parking spaces. Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be located as close as possible to elevators, ramps, walkways, and entrances. Parking spaces should be located so that the physically handicapped persons are not compelled to wheel or walk behind parked cars to reach entrances, ramps, walkways and elevators. Such parking spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide. 
(D)  Curbs. Where a curb exists between a parking lot surface and a sidewalk surface, an inclined curb approach or a curb cut with a gradient of not more than one foot in 12 feet and a width of not less than four feet shall be provided for wheelchair access. 
(E)  Applicability. The above provisions shall apply to all levels and areas used by the general public, employees, persons visiting or on the premises for any reason and shall apply to all uses except buildings arranged for the use of one- or two-family dwelling units, mobile homes used as single-family dwellings, structures and buildings of a temporary character, accessory buildings and structures used as private garages, sheds, fences and similar purposes. For purposes of this ordinance, separate buildings of a complex are considered as individual structures. 
(F)  Permit required. Vehicles parking in handicapped parking spaces shall bear a permit sticker as visual evidence of handicap. Such permit stickers shall be issued either by the city administrator or his designee or from another recognized governmental agency. Permit stickers shall be issued to handicapped persons for good cause shown, which good cause shall include notification by a licensed physician of the nature and extent of physical impairment of the person seeking the issuance of a permit sticker. Stickers shall be renewable annually on January 1 of each year. 
(G)  Enforcement. Vehicles parked in handicapped spaces in the City of Ballwin and not bearing the above-mentioned handicapped sticker shall be subject to the same penalty for violation as that imposed for violation of section 15-283 of Chapter 15 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Ballwin, St. Louis County, Missouri. 
(Ord. No. 1544, § 1, 5-11-81; Ord. No. 1848, § I, 10-13-86) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 1544, adopted May 11, 1981, provides that "previously constructed buildings and parking lots constructed prior to the effective date of this ordinance are not required to conform to the requirements of Section 6(A) and 6(D) until such time as changes to the building or parking lots, for which building permits are required, are made." 
ARTICLE XVI. - ADDITIONAL HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS 

Section 1. - [Generally.] 
    The district regulations hereinafter set forth in this article qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing elsewhere in this ordinance. 
Section 2. - [Public buildings.] 
    Public, semipublic or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding 60 feet, and churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise provided in the district in which the building is built. 
Section 3. - [Single-family dwellings.] 
    Single-family dwellings may be increased in height by not more than ten feet when the side and rear yards are increased over the yard requirements of the district in which they are located by not less than ten feet, but they shall not contain more than three stories. 
Section 4. - Satellite earth stations, towers, etc. 
(A)  Satellite earth stations having a diameter greater than 24 inches may be allowed in the rear yards in any district, provided that they meet the following criteria. 
(1)  Only one such satellite earth station per single-family dwelling unit, multiple-family development, or commercial operation may be installed, except for franchise holders licensed by the City of Ballwin in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Ballwin. 
(2)  Such stations may not exceed a maximum height of 14 feet in any district. 
(3)  Such stations may only be installed on the ground in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 districts, and in the PSD and C-1 districts in conjunction with residential development. These stations may be installed on rooftops in the PSD, C-1, C-2, C-3 and S-1 districts, provided that they are visually screened and such screen to be approved by the city planner in accordance with criteria established by the board of aldermen by resolution from surrounding rights-of-way and residential land uses. 
(4)  With the exception of the height limitation imposed herein, all ground-mounted satellite earth stations shall conform to the requirements for accessory structures as outlined in section 17 of article XVI of the zoning ordinance. 
(5)  Satellite earth stations shall be painted a color which blends with its [their] surroundings and may bear no form of advertising or identification on the antenna or framework other than small manufacturers identification plates. 
(6)  Satellite earth stations having a diameter less than 24 inches are exempted from the provisions of this section. 
(B)  Church spires, belfries, monuments, tanks, water and fire towers, stage towers or scenery lofts, cooling towers, ornamental towers and spires, chimneys, elevator bulkheads, stacks, conveyors and flagpoles may be erected to such height above the maximum height limitation of the applicable zoning district as may be authorized by the board of aldermen of the City of Ballwin, Missouri, by a special permit of [or] general ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1739, § I, 3-18-85; Ord. No. 1880, § 1, 2-23-87; Ord. No. 2591, § 1, 4-14-97) 
Section 5. - [Exclusion of open area from computation of floor area ratio.] 
    The open area and parking spaces provided on that portion of a lot or integrated development situated in a dwelling district and used for parking under the provisions of a special permit granted pursuant to article XIV of this zoning code shall not be included in computing the floor area ratio of the lot or development unless the special permit specifically authorizes inclusion of such open area and parking spaces in such computation. 
Section 6. - [Double frontage lots.] 
    Where lots have a double frontage, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
Section 7. - [Porch.] 
    An open, uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into a required front yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet. 
Section 8. - [Canopies.] 
    Fixed canopies and marquees may project into a required front yard in the C-1, C-2, C-3 and S-1 districts. 
Section 9. - Fences and structures in dwelling districts. 
A.  No fence or structure shall be erected, constructed or maintained between the right-of-way line and the building line in one or two front yards of a corner lot or a lot which has a double frontage in a dwelling district, except by permit granted by the city. No fence or structure shall be erected, constructed or maintained within a front yard in a dwelling district except in the situation just described. 
B.  Permission of the city for constructing a fence or structure in the area between the right-of-way and the building line in one of two front yards of a corner lot or a lot which has a double frontage shall be obtained by submitting a site plan for approval. The site plan shall show the location of the fence; the height of the fence; the proposed landscaping on the right-of-way side of the fence; an illustration of the type of fence to be erected; and the approximate grade (elevations) of both sides in the area of the fence. The site plan or other application shall contain an agreement by the property owner that the fence shall be maintained; permit annual inspection by the city; and the property owner shall agree to make any repairs found necessary after such inspection, on penalty of revocation of such permit. No fee shall be required. The permit shall be transferable by written notice submitted to the city administrator. 
C.  Front yard fences approved by the city under the provisions of this section shall be erected in a manner which is uniform and harmonious with similar existing fences in the neighborhood as follows: 
1.  All fences shall generally be erected on private property. Fences may only be placed in public right-of-way subject to special conditions approved by the board of aldermen. 
2.  All fences shall have a gate providing access to the right-of-way for maintenance purposes. 
3.  All fences shall be erected with the finished side facing the roadway unless adjoining previously existing fences that are built with the unfinished side out. Only in this situation, with the approval of the city, may the fence be erected with the unfinished side facing the roadway. 
4.  Fences shall blend with existing nearby front yard fences in orientation, color, style, height, materials of construction and location. 
(Ord. No. 1169, § 2, 1-13-75; Ord. No. 1663, § II, 12-12-83; Ord. No. 2239, § 1, 2-24-92; Ord. No. 2432, § 1, 3-27-95) 
Section 10. - [Height limitations at intersections.] 
    No fence, structure or planting higher than 21/2 feet above the street grades shall be maintained within 15 feet of any street intersection. 
Section 11. - [Filling station pumps.] 
    Filling station pumps and pump islands may be within a required front yard, provided they are not less than 20 feet from any street line except for land lying along and adjacent to Manchester Road where they cannot be less than 40 feet from any street lines, and each pump and pump island shall be surrounded by a curb or other appropriate barrier. No tank or receptacle used for storage of gasoline or motor fuel and no filling station pumps or pump islands shall be located within 50 feet of the boundary of any dwelling district. 
(Ord. No. 1798, § V, 3-24-86) 
Section 12. - [Parking in front yard prohibited.] 
    No off-street parking facilities may be located within any required front yard except as provided by special permit granted under provisions of article XIV. 
Section 13. - [Corner lots.] 
    On a corner lot the width of the yard along the side street shall not be less than any required front yard on such street; provided, however, that the buildable width of such lot shall not be reduced to less than 30 feet in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 single-family dwelling districts nor to less than 25 feet in any other district. No accessory building shall project beyond the front yard line on either street. 
Section 14. - [Porte-cochere projecting into side yard.] 
    A porte-cochere or canopy may project into a required side yard, provided every part of such porte-cochere or canopy is unenclosed; provided further, however, that a porte-cochere or canopy existing and standing in a required side yard prior to July 11, 1966, may be enclosed; provided further, however, that every part of a porte-cochere or canopy, whether enclosed or unenclosed, shall be not less than five feet from any side lot line. 
(Ord. No. 1009, 1-8-73) 
Section 15. - [Parking in side yard.] 
    No required side yard in any dwelling district shall be used for off-street parking except as provided in a special permit granted under provisions of article XIV. 
Section 16. - [Lot abutting on alley.] 
    Where a lot abuts upon an alley, one-half of the alley width may be considered as part of the required rear yard. 
Section 17. - [Accessory structures.] 
    Accessory structures, except fences and retaining walls which may be built anywhere on a site shall be placed and erected in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  In a rear yard no closer than five feet to the rear lot line, except in the case of the C-1 and C-3 districts when such rear yard abuts a residence district in which case the standard rear yard setback provision of the applicable zoning district applies. 
(2)  In accordance with the minimum side yard setback requirement of the zoning district in which the accessory structure is to be erected. 
(3)  All fully roofed structures and any structure or enclosure that may be used to store hazardous or combustible materials, fuels, fuel-powered vehicles and/or equipment shall be located no closer than ten feet to the main structure. For purposes of example and not by way of limitation, roofed structures includes gazebos, sheds, barns, carports, porte-cocheres, garages, storage containers, but shall not include unroofed structures or partially covered structures such as arbors, pergolas, or lattices. 
(4)  Be built of a material and in a style that is architecturally compatible with the main building on the premises. In addition to the above regulations, accessory structures shall be placed and erected in accordance with the following regulations: 
A.  No more that 20 feet in overall height. 
B.  Not greater in gross floor area than the smaller of 11/2 times the ground floor area of the main building on the premises, or 25 percent of the minimum rear yard required by the applicable zoning district classification of the parcel of land where it is being built. 
(Ord. No. 01-41, § 4, 6-11-01; Ord. No. 01-55, § 1, 8-29-01; Ord. No. 03-57, § 2, 10-27-03) 
Section 18. - [Main building to be constructed first.] 
    No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been actually commenced, and no accessory building shall be used for dwelling purposes unless the main building on the lot is also being used. 
Section 19. - [Yards to be open.] 
    Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky unobstructed, except: 
(1)  As may be otherwise provided in this ordinance; 
(2)  For open or latticed-enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, unenclosed porches, marquees and balconies opening upon fire towers projecting into a yard not more than five feet; 
(3)  For the ordinary projections of chimneys, flues, sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features projecting into a yard more than 18 inches when placed so as not to obstruct light and ventilation and when permitted by the building commissioner; 
(4)  For fences, as may be otherwise permitted and regulated by existing or future ordinances of the City of Ballwin; 
(5)  For signs as may be otherwise permitted and regulated by existing or future ordinances of the City of Ballwin, in front yards. 
(Ord. No. 583, 1-23-67) 
Section 20. - [Multiple main buildings.] 
    More than one main building may be erected on a lot in the case of commercial or industrial buildings in the C-1 and S-1 districts and of group dwellings in a multiple dwelling district, provided that all yards otherwise required on the lot for a single building are observed, and provided further, that all dwelling structures are arranged around a court opening on a street, which court shall have a minimum width of 30 feet where not more than 50 percent surrounded by buildings and of 40 feet where more than 50 percent surrounded by buildings plus ten feet for each additional story above the first. The distance between such dwelling structures shall be not less than the sum of the side yards required in the district and the distance between any group dwelling and a side lot line shall be not less than the required rear yard in the district. 
Section 21. - [Area of tract for community building, etc.] 
    Whenever the use of a tract of land is permitted, either under the general regulations or by a special use permit, for the purpose of a community building, library, school, kindergarten, nursery school or church, such use shall be situated on a tract of land having an area not less than as set out below: 
(1)  Community buildings shall be situated on tracts of land at least two acres in area. 
(2)  Libraries shall be situated on tracts of land at least two acres in area. 
(3)  Nursery schools shall be situated on tracts of land at least one-half acre in area. 
(4)  Kindergartens (separate) shall be situated on tracts of land at least one acre in area. 
(5)  Primary schools shall be situated on tracts of land at least three acres in area. 
(6)  Junior high schools shall be situated on tracts of land at least ten acres in area. 
(7)  Senior high schools shall be situated on tracts of land at least 20 acres in area. 
(8)  Universities, colleges or junior colleges shall be situated on tracts of land at least 20 acres in area. 
(9)  Churches shall be situated on tracts of land at least one acre in area. 
Section 22. - [Sale of merchandise to be in fully enclosed building.] 
    Except as may be otherwise specifically provided herein and in article IX, section 2(1)(32), no tract of land, lot or premises shall be used for the sale, display or storage of any merchandise, material, article or thing unless such merchandise, material, article or thing is kept within a building which is completely enclosed. 
(Ord. No. 14-30, § 1, 10-27-14) 
Section 23. - [Amusement devices.] 
(1)  One amusement device is permitted as an accessory use for the following listed uses for each 300 square feet of gross floor area of the building in which the amusement devices will be located; provided that the maximum number of amusement devices which may be had and maintained by any one of the uses listed below shall be limited to three in number and no more than three pool/billiard tables shall be allowed at any location or business: 
(a)  Parks, playgrounds and community buildings in the C-1 zoning district. 
(b)  Private clubs and lodges in the C-1 district. 
(c)  Retail establishments with a gross floor area of 30,000 square feet or greater; provided, however, that such amusement devices are located in an open area near the main entrance of such retail establishment. 
(d)  Batting cages, bowling alleys, skating rinks and other uses allowed in the C-1 district special use exception pursuant to Article XIV, Section 1(17). 
(2)  One amusement device is permitted as an accessory use for the following listed uses for each 300 square feet of gross floor area of the building in which the amusement devices will be located: 
(a)  Restaurants where food is served for consumption in the building in which prepared in the C-1 zoning districts. 
(b)  Establishments for the sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold in the C-1 zoning district. 
(c)  Public recreational buildings and facilities in the public activity zoning district. 
(3)  All revenue derived from the utilization of amusement devices at any location in Ballwin shall be subject to all sales taxes that may be applicable under state and local regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1251, § 3, 5-10-76; Ord. No. 1341, § 1, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 1576, § I, 1-11-82; Ord. No. 1846, § I, 10-13-86; Ord. No. 2302, § I, 3-22-93; Ord. No. 08-14, § 1, 5-12-08; Ord. No. 12-25, § 6, 5-14-12) 
Section 24. - [Jukeboxes.] 
    A jukebox is permitted as an accessory use to the following described uses in the districts indicated: 
(a)  Parks, playgrounds and community buildings in the C-1 and public activity districts. 
(b)  Lodge halls or clubs in the C-1 district. 
(c)  Ice skating rinks or arenas in the C-1 district. 
(d)  Bowling alleys in the C-2 district. 
(e)  Private clubs in the C-3 district. 
(f)  Private clubs and lodges where allowed by special permit. 
(g)  Restaurants where food is served for consumption in the building in which prepared in the C-1, C-2, C-3 and R-4 districts. 
(h)  Establishments for the sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold in the C-1, C-2, C-3, and R-4 districts. 
(Ord. No. 1251, § 4, 5-10-76; Ord. No. 1847, § I, 10-13-86; Ord. No. 12-25, § 6, 5-14-12) 
Section 25. - Special events. 
    Purpose: The purpose of these regulations is to permit special events on public and private property provided that the property rights, health and safety, and general wellbeing of nearby residents, businesses, property owners, or the community are not negatively impacted. A special event permit is a privilege not a right. Such permits will only be issued if all departments of the city are satisfied the event is planned in a manner to minimize disruption to the community and presents no danger to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(a)  Permission: Written permission shall be submitted from the owners of all private properties on which the special event shall be held. Such written permission shall be provided to the city in conjunction with the submission of the permit application. In the case of commercial property, permission may be granted by an authorized leasing agent of the property. 
(b)  Public safety: The city shall not issue a permit requested under any provision of section 25 of article XVI where investigation determines that the public health, safety and welfare will be adversely affected by such event as proposed. 
(c)  Authorized: Notwithstanding the provisions of section 22 of article XVI, special events may be conducted on private property in any zoning district of the City of Ballwin. 
(1)  Permit required: Special events that will be fully contained on the premises where conducted including the accommodation of parking for the event and in compliance with all signage regulations of the city will not require a permit, but any utilization of adjoining properties or rights-of-way for the event or associated parking will require a permit. 
(2)  Permits issued to: Special event permits will only be issued to a property owner or a business licensed at the address of the special event. Third party organizations or individuals such as not-for-profit organizations, concessioners, food vendors, etc. cannot obtain a special event permit for property not owned or licensed for their use. To be involved in a special event, such people or organizations must coordinate with the property owner or a licensed business at the location of the special event. 
(3)  Requirements for a permit: The provisions of this ordinance are intended to augment and be in addition to the provisions of the general licensing ordinance of this city [chapter 14 of the Code]. Where this ordinance poses a greater restriction upon persons, premises, businesses or practices than is imposed by the general licensing ordinance of the city, this ordinance shall control. 
(4)  Special provisions: The provisions of this ordinance, and the subsequent issuance of a permit in accordance with said ordinance, does not create, extend, entitle or guarantee to the applicant or event any special privileges, variances, or exemptions from following all existing state, county, and local laws. 
(5)  Duration and frequency: In no event shall more than four special event permits be issued to a permittee at any one location in any one calendar year. A permit issued hereunder shall extend for a period of not more than four days, measured in continuous 24-hour periods, Sundays and legal holidays included. 
(d)  Restricted location: When a person or entity applying for a special event permit operates more than one place of business or controls more than one noncontiguous property, the permit issued shall apply only to the location specified in the application; and no other location shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating or participating in any way with the special event; nor shall the location conducting the special event advertise or represent that any other location is cooperating with or participating in any way in the special event. 
(e)  Application requirements: 
(1)  A person or entity desiring to conduct an event regulated by section 25 of article XVI shall provide the city, by written application, the following information: 
(i)  The address and description of the location of the special event. 
(ii)  The special event permit application must be accompanied by a site plan, which shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures, all activity areas, portable toilets, support facilities, paths for emergency vehicles, parking areas, etc. A route map must be provided for off-site events involving parades, runs, walks, etc. 
(iii)  The name, address and all contact information for the permit applicant including documentation of legal interest in the property where the special event will be held. 
(iv)  The name, address and all contact information for the owner of the property where the special event will be held. 
(v)  The name, address and all contact information for the sponsor or the beneficiary of the special event if different from the applicant. 
(vi)  The dates and times the special event is to be conducted. 
(vii)  Any applicant subject to the business license requirements of chapter 14 and/or the liquor license requirements of chapter 3 must provide proof of valid licenses upon application. No special event permit shall be issued without valid business and liquor licenses issued by the City to include the entire event period. 
(viii)  If tents will be erected in conjunction with a special event, the size and location of each tent must be shown on the site plan. The applicant shall provide proof with the application that each tent meets all minimum fire code and flame retardant regulations of the applicable building codes. 
(ix)  Specials events, at which a minimum of 100 people are expected to be present at peak hour(s), and where sewered toilets are not readily available to accommodate anticipated attendance, are required to provide portable toilets and hand washing facilities. If portable toilets are required, the applicant must obtain a permit from the St. Louis County Department of Health. 
(x)  If a fireworks display is proposed as a part of a special event, a permit from the fire district having jurisdiction is required in addition to the special event permit issue by Ballwin. Additionally, the permittee must provide proof that it possesses liability insurance in the amount of no less than one million dollars. If such insurance is provided by a pyrotechnics subcontractor, the insurance must list the permittee as a coinsured. 
(xi)  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to comply with all permit and inspection requirements of any other regulating authority with jurisdiction over the event. 
(f)  Permit issuance: A permit shall be issued under the following terms: 
(1)  Special event permits shall be issued by the city clerk. 
(2)  Any permit hereunder provided shall not be assignable or transferable without the written authorization of the city clerk. 
(3)  The police department and the building inspector may be asked to review and comment on special event permit applications. 
(4)  Special event permits may be issued with additional requirements attached as conditions of the permit's approval and issuance. Such additional restrictions must be met at all times. 
(5)  The applicant shall keep the special event permit and any letter of conditions on the premises during the event; however, these documents need not be posted. 
(g)  Penalty: Failure to comply with the requirements of this ordinance shall be subject to the penalty provisions of section 1-6 of the Ballwin Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1606, § I, 11-8-82; Ord. No. 2039, § 1, 10-23-89; Ord. No. 2485, § 1, 11-27-95; Ord. No. 2670, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 11-33, § 1, 8-15-11; Ord. No. 11-53, § 1, 11-14-11; Ord. No. 14-32, § 2, 10-27-14; Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 2-22-16) 
Section 26. - Churches. 
    Churches or temples shall be situated on tracts of land at least one acre in area, and shall comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  Parking lot areas shall be set back 20 feet from any residential property line. 
(b)  The 20-foot buffer with respect to residential property lines for parking lot areas shall be landscaped with berms and similar green screening landscaping in order to provide a minimum 80-percent visual screening from an adjacent residential property. 
(c)  Churches located in a residential zone may not exceed a height of 45 feet. 
(d)  A traffic study showing the impact of the proposed church on the neighborhood shall be made. This study must address the percentage increases in local traffic as well as the capacity of the existing roadway system to accommodate the additional traffic. 
(e)  No person shall erect any church or any addition thereto in any residential district, having exterior walls constructed of any material other than brick or stone masonry. 
(f)  A stormwater runoff study shall be made showing the impact of the proposed church and its paved parking and driveway areas on the surrounding neighborhood. This study must show what steps will be taken in order to adequately protect surrounding properties from any increased stormwater runoff. 
(g)  All churches located in a residential district must comply with the following minimum yard setbacks: 
(1)  Front yards-40 feet. 
(2)  Rear yards-35 feet. 
(3)  Side yards-30 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1734, § I, 2-11-85) 
Section 27. - Distance of nursing homes from other structures specified. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any structure in the city for the operation of a nursing home, home for the aged, home for the senile or any establishment where people are boarded for hire or otherwise, unless such structure is located and situated more than 600 feet distant from any other structure used for living quarters or business or entertainment purposes. 
(b)  A building permit will not be issued for the construction of any structure which will be in violation of this section. 
(c)  The board of aldermen is authorized through its officers and agents to proceed in a civil action to restrain any use in violation of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 6-4) 
[Section 28. - Reserved.] 
Section 29. - Outdoor storage of materials and equipment in single-family residential zoning districts. 
    No lawn, landscape or turf maintenance equipment may be stored or parked outside of a fully enclosed structure in a single-family residential district except that up to two pieces of such equipment, when used for maintenance of the premises upon which it is stored, may be stored outside of a fully enclosed building if it is stored behind the building line, and is not visible from adjoining rights-of-way. Such outdoor storage shall be allowed in the rear yard of double frontage lots where the second frontage is along the rear of the lot as determined by the orientation of the main building and the trailer is parked behind the building setback line along the rear frontage. 
(Ord. No. 01-41, § 5, 6-11-01; Ord. No. 01-55, § 2, 8-29-01) 
Section 30. - Residential business accessory use. 
    [A] residential business accessory use, including any business, commercial activity, or service for a financial consideration, may be allowed in single-family dwelling districts of the city, provided it complies with the following criteria: 
1.  That the structures and property are used principally for a dwelling and as the primary residence of the person or persons conducting the residential business accessory use. 
2.  The residential business must be an accessory use of the dwelling with not more than ten percent of the gross floor area, including basements, attics, and fully attached enclosed garages, used or devoted to the residential business accessory use. This includes all areas used for office, manufacturing or assembly, receiving and shipping, sales display, and storage of raw or finished materials or merchandise. 
3.  Only one residential business accessory use may be located or operated from a dwelling unit or its premises. No residential business accessory use shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
4.  Only the principal dwelling unit may be used for purposes of the residential business accessory use and no portions of carports, detached garages, sheds, trailers, vehicles or other accessory structure of any kind shall be used for residential business accessory use. No assembling, construction, manufacturing or processing, storage of materials or other operations shall be conducted except within fully enclosed permanent structures allowed in the dwelling district. 
5.  Only one residential business accessory use is allowed at any dwelling unit and no exterior entrances can be reserved for the exclusive use of the residential business accessory use. No display or sign related to the residential business accessory use can be visible from the exterior of the structures located on the premises of the dwelling unit. 
6.  No electric, pneumatic, gas and or other type of power equipment, not ordinarily found in a dwelling unit for home use, can be used in the residential business accessory use. Nor can such powered equipment ordinarily found in a dwelling unit for home use be used in a residential business accessory use in excess of the number ordinarily used in a dwelling unit for home use. Any equipment interfering with television or radio reception in adjacent dwelling units must not be used until it is equipped with appropriate filtering devices to stop such interference. 
7.  No onstreet parking of customers or employees of a residential business accessory use is allowed. Parking lots of any kind are not allowed. Paved driveways having lengths, widths and locations harmonious with dwelling units in the surrounding area may be used for customer and employee parking. 
8.  No alterations or changes to any structure shall be permitted that will change the residential nature or appearance of the dwelling structure or accessory structures. 
9.  Deliveries or pickups by commercial carrier shall not exceed one per week. Delivery or pickup from delivery services, such as United Parcel Service, Federal Express, United States Postal Service, etc., shall not exceed one per day. Delivery or pickup vehicles shall not restrict or interfere with traffic or parking on rights-of-way adjacent to the dwelling unit where the residential business accessory use is conducted. 
10.  The residential business accessory use shall not have more than one motor vehicle for delivery or pickup purposes licensed to, stored, operated from or located at the dwelling unit. All motor vehicles or trailers designed to carry passengers, freight or merchandise which by its [their] design, color, sign or distinctive character shows [show] that it is [they are] associated with a business shall be included as part of the residential business accessory use. No storage or parking of equipment, commercial motor vehicles, trailers or device associated or used for the residential business accessory use is allowed at the dwelling unit except within fully enclosed structures. No motor vehicle, trailer or device in excess of 22 feet in length and/or having a gross weight, whether loaded or unloaded, in excess of 20,000 pounds and normally designed to carry passengers, freight, or merchandise is permitted in connection with any residential business accessory use. 
11.  No pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic generated by a residential business accessory use in excess of that which is normal for a single-family residence shall be permitted. 
12.  No hazardous material as defined by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or State of Missouri department of natural resources shall be used, stored or disposed of at any dwelling unit used by a residential business accessory uses. 
13.  Trash, refuse or garbage container[s] in excess of 100 gallons are not permitted for residential business accessory uses. 
14.  Outdoor display or sale of merchandise of a residential business accessory use shall not be permitted; and auction, basement, estate, garage, yard or other similar type sales shall not be allowed in excess of twice per calendar year and cannot exceed three consecutive days. 
15.  Short Term Residential Rentals 
A.  Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall have the prescribed meaning: 
Permanent Resident. A property owner or lessee who maintains a dwelling as a primary residence as documented by at least two of the following: 
a.  Motor vehicle registration; 
b.  Driver's license; 
c.  Voter registration; 
d.  Bank statement; or 
e.  Utility bill. 
Such documentation shall not be retained by the City. 
Short Term Residential Rental. The leasing of a dwelling, or portion thereof, to overnights guests. 
B.  Requirements and restrictions. In addition to all other pertinent and applicable federal, state, and local regulations, including but not limited to business license, tax, occupancy, fire, building, zoning, and property maintenance regulations, the following special conditions shall apply to short term residential rentals: 
1.  Short term residential rentals may only be offered by a permanent resident within the permanent resident's principal residential structure, not within a detached building or structure. 
2.  The permanent resident shall reside on the property at least 180 days within a one-year period. 
3.  Prior to offering short term residential rentals, the permanent resident must obtain an inspection and a permit from the city for short term residential rentals, and must renew the permit every two years from the date of issuance. Permits for short term residential rentals will be issued in accordance with the procedures and requirements for issuance of occupancy permits. Prior to issuance of a permit for short term residential rentals, the owner must provide, in writing, the name and telephone number of the permanent resident and the name and telephone number of a local contact person that will be available 24 hours per day, seven days per week, for the purposes of responding within 45 minutes to complaints regarding the operation of the short term residential rental or the conduct of overnight guests. A permit fee of $100.00 shall be paid to offset the cost of the inspection. 
4.  Maximum occupancy, including overnight guests, shall be as set forth in this Code. 
5.  All vehicles of the permanent resident, overnight guests, and guests of overnight guests must be parked on the property or on the portion of the street directly contiguous to the property of the licensee. 
6.  The owner shall maintain records of all short term residential rentals for a period of two years, available for inspection, which includes the following information: dates the dwelling was leased for short term residential rental; date(s) of stay, name and contact information. 
7.  Short term rentals shall be subject to compliance with all applicable property maintenance, nuisance, zoning and building code regulations. 
C.  Penalties for violation. 
1.  Any act in violation of the requirements set forth in this section is declared to be unlawful and shall be subject to Section 1.6 General Penalty. 
2.  If a property owner or permanent resident is convicted of or pleads guilty to two citations for violations of this section which occur within 180 days of each other, the business license and permit allowing short term residential rentals on the property shall be subject to revocation pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 14-62. 
Revocation and the licensee shall not be eligible for a business license or permit to conduct short term residential rentals for a period of one year. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 7-23-90; Ord. No. 18-05, § 1, 4-23-18) 
ARTICLE XVII. - COMMUNITY UNIT PLAN 

Section 1. - [Authorized.] 
    The owner or owners of any tract of land comprising an area of not less than ten acres may submit to the board of aldermen of the City of Ballwin a plan for the use and development of all of the tract of land for residential purposes or for the repair and alteration of any existing housing development on an area comprising ten acres or more. 
Section 2. - [Study by zoning commission.] 
    The development or alteration plan shall be referred to the zoning commission for study and report and for public hearing. If the commission approves the plans, they, together with the recommendation of the commission, shall then be submitted to the board of aldermen for consideration and approval. The recommendations of the commission shall be accompanied by a report stating the reasons for approval of the application and specific evidence and facts showing that the proposed community unit plan meets the following conditions: 
(a)  That property adjacent to the area included in the plan will not be adversely affected. 
(b)  That the plan is consistent with the intent and purpose of this ordinance to promote public health, safety, morals and general welfare. 
(c)  That the buildings shall be used only for single-family dwellings or two-family dwellings and the usual accessory uses such as garages, storage space and community activities, including churches. 
(d)  That the average lot area per family contained in the site, exclusive of 15 percent of the gross area for streets, will be not less than the lot area per family required in the district in which the development is located. 
Cross reference- Zoning commission, § 6-66 et seq. 
Section 3. - [Permits issued after approval by aldermen.] 
    If the board of aldermen approves the plans, building permits and certificates of occupancy may be issued even though the use of land and the location of the buildings to be erected in the area and the yards and open spaces contemplated by the plan do not conform in all respects to the district regulations of the district in which it is located; but no building permit nor certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building or structure that does not conform to the plan approved by the board of aldermen. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - OCCUPANCY PERMITS 

Section 1. - [Required.] 
    No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose whatsoever until a certificate is issued by the building commissioner, stating that the building and use comply with the provisions of this ordinance and the building and health ordinances of the City of Ballwin. No change of use shall be made in any building or part thereof now or hereafter erected or structurally altered without a permit being issued therefor by the building commissioner. No permit shall be issued to make a change unless the changes are in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Cross reference- Buildings and structures, ch. 7; health and sanitation, ch. 12; housing, ch. 13. 
Section 2. - [Continuation of nonconforming use.] 
    Nothing in this article shall prevent the continuance of a nonconforming use as hereinbefore authorized unless a discontinuance is necessary for the safety of life or property. 
Section 3. - [Application for certificates.] 
    Certificates for occupancy and compliance shall be applied for coincidentally with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten days after the lawful erection or alteration of the building is completed. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the building commissioner and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected. 
Section 4. - [Certificates required-Erection and occupancy.] 
    No permit for excavation for or the erection or alteration of any building shall be issued before the application has been made for certificates of occupancy and compliance, and no building or premises shall be occupied until the certificate and permit is [are] issued. 
Section 5. - [Same-Nonconforming uses.] 
    A certificate of occupancy shall be required of all nonconforming uses. Application for certificate of occupancy for nonconforming uses shall be filed within 12 months from the effective date of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE XX. - PLATS 

Section 1. - [Required.] 
    Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a plat in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size, shape and location of the building to be erected, the number of families or household units to be accommodated, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of this ordinance. A record of applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the building commissioner. 
Cross reference- Buildings and structures, ch. 7. 
Section 2. - [Survey required.] 
    All dimensions shown on these plats relating to the location and size of the lot to be built upon shall be based on an actual survey and the lot shall be staked out on the ground before construction is started. 
ARTICLE XXI. - BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS 

Section 1. - Rules where uncertainty may arise. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the map accompanying and made a part of this ordinance, the following rules apply: 
(1)  The district boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise shown, and where the districts designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this ordinance are bounded approximately by street or alley lines, the street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary of the district. 
(2)  Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and where the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the district boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines, and where the districts designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this ordinance are bounded approximately by lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the districts unless the boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map. 
(3)  In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the map accompanying and made a part of this ordinance shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map. 
ARTICLE XXII. - INTERPRETATION, PURPOSE AND CONFLICT 

Section 1. - [Generally.] 
    In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and [the] general welfare. It is not intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued, and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this ordinance, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises, and likewise, not to conflict with this ordinance; nor is it intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, except that if this ordinance imposes a greater restriction, this ordinance shall control. 
Section 2. - [Effect of amendments.] 
    Wherever a section or part of this ordinance is adopted as part of another section of this ordinance by specific reference, the adopting section shall be interpreted with regard for any additions, modifications, changes or amendments to the adopted section, part or portion which were enacted subsequent to the time of adoption. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - AMENDMENTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning commission, § 6-66 et seq. 

Section 1. - [Procedure.] 
(1)  The board of aldermen may from time to time, on its own motion or on petition, amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal by ordinance the boundaries of districts or regulations or restrictions herein established. 
(2)  Any proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal shall first be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendation no later than the close of business at the Ballwin Government Center on the Friday preceding the Monday six weeks before the regularly scheduled meeting of the planning and zoning commission. If the commission makes no recommendation and report to the board of aldermen within 60 days of the public hearing on the proposal, the planning and zoning commission shall be considered to have recommended the approval of the proposed amendment, supplement, modification, change or repeal. 
(3)  Upon the filing of the recommendations and report by the zoning commission with respect to any proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal, the board of aldermen may proceed to hold a public hearing in relation thereto, giving at least 15 days' notice of the time and place of such hearing, which notice shall first be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the City of Ballwin [and] posted on the bulletin board in the city hall and on the property for which a change of zoning district may be sought. 
(Ord. No. 678, 11-13-68; Ord. No. 1467, § I, 9-10-79; Ord. No. 99-42, §§ 1, 2, 9-27-99) 
Section 2. - Appeal of zoning commission decision. 
    In case of an adverse report by the zoning commission, or if a protest against such proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal shall be presented in writing to the city clerk, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of 30 percent or more either of the areas of the land (exclusive of streets and alleys) included within the proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal, or within an area to be determined by lines drawn parallel to and 185 feet distant from the boundaries of the district proposed to be changed, such amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of two-thirds of all the members of the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 2060, § 1, 2-12-90) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSMo 89.060. 
Section 3. - [Fee required.] 
    Before any action shall be taken as provided in this article, the party or parties petitioning for a change in the zoning ordinance shall pay a fee of $500.00. Under no circumstances or condition shall the fee or any portion be refunded for failure of said change to be adopted by the baord of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 2238, § 3, 2-24-92; Ord. No. 2667, § 1, 2-23-98) 
ARTICLE XXIV. - ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION AND PENALTY 

Section 1. - [Enforcement.] 
    It shall be the duty of the building commissioner to enforce this ordinance. Appeal from the decision of the building commissioner may be made to the board of adjustment as provided in article XIX. 
Section 2. - [Violation; penalty.] 
    The owner or agent of a building or premises in or upon which a violation or any provisions of this ordinance has been committed or shall exist, or the lessee or tenant or an entire building or entire premises in or upon which violation has been committed or shall exist, or the agent, architect, building contractor or any other person who commits, [or] takes part or assists in, any violation or who maintains any building or premises in or upon which such violation shall exist, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 and not more than $100.00 for each and every day that such violation continues; but if the offense be willful, on conviction thereof the punishment shall be a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $250.00 for each and every day that such violation shall continue, or by imprisonment for ten days for each and every day such violation shall continue, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. Any such person, having been served with an order to remove any such violation, failing to comply with said order within ten days after such notice or continuing to violate any provision of the regulations made under authority of this ordinance in the respect named in such order, shall also be subject to a civil penalty of $250.00. 
ARTICLE XXV. - VALIDITY 

Section 1. - [Severability.] 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE XXVI. - CONFLICTING ORDINANCE[S] REPEALED 

Section 1. - [Generally.] 
    Any ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith [with this appendix] are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE XXVII. - [EFFECTIVE DATE] 

Section 1. - [Ordinance effective on passage.] 
    This ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its passage and approval as provided by law. 
Passed this 11th day of July, 1966. 
Approved this 11th day of July, 1966. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1973 CODE 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1973 Code, as updated through May 14, 1990, which are included herein. Sections of the 1973 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1973 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-3 1-1-1-3 1-4 1-11 1-5 1-5 1-6 1-10 1-6.1 1-9 1-7 1-8 1-8, 1-9 1-6, 1-7 1-10, 1-11 1-12, 1-13 2-1-2-3 2-1-2-3 2-4 1-2 2-4 2-19 2-31 2-21 2-32 2-31 2-51 2-32 1-2 2-33-2-40 2-52-2-59 2-52-2-57 2-76-2-81 2-64-2-66 2-171-2-173 2-101-2-106 2-181-2-186 2-114-2-117 16-91-16-94 2-225 2-125 2-227 2-126 2-250, 2-251 2-176, 2-177 2-260 1-2 2-141 2-261-2-263 2-142-2-144 2-265-2-277 2-145-2-157 2-410 1-2 2-411 2-291 2-415 2-292 2-420-2-423 2-293-2-296 2-425 2-297 2-427 2-298 3-1-3-5 3-1-3-5 3-17 1-2 3-18 3-6 3-27-3-33 3-40-3-46 3-35-3-37 3-47-3-49 3-38 1-2 3-50 3-39-3-43 3-51-3-55 3-44 1-2 3-56 3-46 3-57 3-51, 3-52 3-71 3-53-3-60 3-72-3-79 3-67 1-2 3-68-3-72 3-196-3-200 3-84 1-2 3-85-3-88 3-101-3-104 3-91 3-105 3-93 3-106 3-95, 3-96 3-107, 3-108 3-100, 3-101 3-109, 3-110 4-1 4-1 5-1 1-2 5-2, 5-3 5-1, 5-2 5-3.5 5-3 5-4-5-6 5-4-5-6 5-8-5-11 5-7-5-10 5-13 1-2 5-11 5-24-5-38 5-31-5-45 5-51-5-54 5-61-5-64 5-55 1-2 5-12 5-77-5-80 5-81-5-84 6-1, 6-2 7-1, 7-2 6-4 27 6-5 7-44 6-6-6-8 13-83-13-85 6-16 7-21 6-18-6-21 7-22-7-25 6-33, 6-34 7-61, 7-62 6-46-6-51 7-81-7-86 6-59-6-69 7-101-7-111 6-81 1-2 6-82-6-91 7-126-7-135 6-105 1-2 6-106-6-110 7-151-7-155 6-117-6-123 7-171-7-177 6-131-6-138 7-196-7-203 6-151 1-2 6-152-6-158 7-221-7-227 6-171 7-246 6-172 1-2 6-173-6-183 7-247-7-257 6-184 7-259 6-185 7-258 6-200 7-41 7-1-7-14 8-1-8-14 8-2 7-43 81/2-1 9-1 10-1 1-2 10-2, 10-3 23-1, 23-2 10-6 23-4 10-18-10-26 23-21-23-29 10-38-10-47 23-46-23-55 10-49-10-53 23-56-23-60 101/2-1 1-2 101/2-2 11-16 101/2-3 11-1 101/2-4, 101/2-5 11-17, 11-18 101/2-6 11-19 101/2-7 11-2 11-5 12-1 12-1-12-4 13-1-13-4 12-5 1-2 12-17-12-23 6-111-6-117 12-35-12-48 13-21-13-34 12-60-12-90 13-51-13-81 12-92 13-82 12-101 13-101 12-102 1-2 12-103-12-108 13-102-13-107 13-1-13-3 14-1-14-3 13-4 1-2 13-5-13-8 14-4-14-7 13-13 1-2 13-14 14-26 13-15 1-4 13-16-13-18 14-27-14-29 13-25-13-31 14-46-14-52 13-33-13-41 14-54-14-62 13-49-13-54 14-76-14-81 13-66 1-2 13-67 14-101 13-68 1-4 13-69, 13-70 14-102, 14-103 13-71 14-150 13-78-13-81 14-121-14-124 13-83-13-88 14-125-14-130 13-90 14-131 13-98-13-101 14-146-14-149 13-113 1-2 13-114-13-120 14-166-14-172 13-151 14-8 13-184-13-192 14-206-14-214 13-199 1-2 14-231 13-200-13-203 14-232-14-235 13-210-13-214 14-251-14-255 13-220 14-293 13-221-13-225 14-271-14-275 13-230 14-294 13-300 14-291 13-310 14-292 14-1 15-1 14-2 1-2 14-3-14-6 15-2-15-5 14-7(a)-14-7(d) 15-6-15-9 14-8-14-13 15-10-15-15 14-15 1-2 15-263 14-25-14-28 15-31-15-34 14-36 15-51 14-38, 14-39 15-52, 15-53 14-78 15-91 14-79 15-264 14-80 15-93 14-81, 14-82 15-71, 15-72 14-83, 14-84 15-74, 15-75 14-85, 14-86 15-77, 15-78 14-96 15-111 14-97 1-2 15-112 14-97.1-14-97.3 15-113-15-115 14-98-14-102 15-116-15-120 14-103 15-257 14-105-14-107 15-258-15-260 14-108-14-117 15-121-15-130 14-118 15-261 14-119-14-123 15-131-15-135 14-126 1-2 15-137 14-127 15-138 14-131-14-137 15-156-15-162 14-139 15-163 14-144, 14-145 15-181, 15-182 14-145.5 15-183 14-146-14-150 15-184-15-188 14-151 15-262 14-152 15-189 14-153 15-492 14-156 1-2 14-157-14-160 15-206-15-209 14-167-14-177 15-226-15-236 14-188-14-203 15-265-15-280 14-204 1-2 15-281 14-205 1-2 15-282 14-207 15-283 14-211 1-2 14-212-14-214 15-301-15-303 14-216 15-305 14-227-14-229 15-321-15-323 14-241-14-245 15-341-15-345 14-246 15-256 14-247-14-251 15-346-15-350 14-263, 14-264 15-366, 15-367 14-276-14-284 15-386-15-394 14-296 1-2 14-297-14-310 15-411-15-424 14-322-14-335 15-441-15-454 14-336 15-284 14-337-14-339 15-455-15-457 14-351-14-366 15-476-15-491 14-371, 14-372 15-493, 15-494 15-1-15-4 16-1-16-4 15-15-15-22 16-21-16-28 15-23 16-30 15-24 16-29 15-25 16-31 15-50-15-54 16-51-16-55 15-70-15-74 16-71-16-75 16-1-16-4 17-1-17-4 16-5-16-8 17-6-17-9 16-9 1-2 17-10 16-10 17-11 16-23 17-31 16-24 17-33 16-25, 16-26 17-35, 17-36 16-37-16-42 17-51-17-56 16-43 1-2 17-57 16-44-16-46 17-58-17-60 16-47 1-2 17-61 16-48 1-2 17-62 16-49(a) 1-2 16-49(b) 17-83 16-50 17-81 16-53 17-82 16-58-16-61 17-101-17-104 16-62 1-2 17-105 16-63 17-107 16-64 1-2 17-109 16-65-16-66 17-110, 17-111 16-75 17-131 16-77 17-132 16-89-16-94 17-156-17-161 17-1-17-3 18-1-18-3 17-3.1 18-4 17-4-17-7 18-5-18-8 17-55 1-2 17-57 18-26 17-59-17-61 18-27-18-29 17-63-17-69 18-30-18-36 17-72 18-37 17-74 18-38 17-76 18-39 17-78 18-40 17-81 18-41 17-100, 17-101 18-61, 18-62 17-102 1-2 
18-63 17-103, 17-104 18-64, 18-65 18-1 7-42 19-1 20-28 19-17 20-26 19-42-19-44 20-46-20-48 19-50-19-135 20-65.1-20-65.86 19-146-19-154 20-65.87-20-65.95 19-165-19-174 20-66-20-75 19-185 1-2 20-91 19-187 20-92 20-1 21-1 20-3 1-2 20-4-20-9 21-2-21-7 21-1 1-2 22-1 21-2-21-5 22-2-22-5 21-18-21-22 22-21-22-25 21-33-21-55 22-41-22-63 21-62-21-67 22-101-22-106 22-1-22-4 24-1-24-4 22-15-22-20 24-46-24-51 22-21 24-21 22-22 24-52 22-23-22-27 24-22-24-26 22-28 24-53 23-1 1-2 23-17-23-19 25-26-25-28 23-20 25-29.5 23-21-23-25 25-30-25-34 23-46-23-48 25-71-25-73 23-49 25-75 23-50 25-74 23-56-23-60 25-91-25-95 23-62-23-67 25-97-25-102 23-70-23-74 25-121-25-125 23-76 25-126 24-16 1-2 24-17-24-23 26-26-26-32 24-29, 24-30 26-51, 26-52 24-46 1-2 24-52-24-61 26-91-26-100 24-66-24-98 26-116-26-148 24-105-24-121 26-166-26-182 25-1-25-3 27-1-27-3 26-1 1-2 26-2-26-7 28-1-28-6 27-1 1-2 27-2-27-8 29-1-29-7 29-4 30-1 30-1 19-1 30-17-30-26 6-66-6-75 app. A, art. I, § 3 1-2 app. A, art. XII, § 11 1-2 app. A, art. XIV, § 1 1-2 app. A, art. XV, § 1 1-2 app. A, art. XVI, § 25       1-2 app. A, art. XIX, § 1 1-2 app. A, art. XIX, § 1-app. A, art. XIX, § 6 6-91-6-96 app. B, art. II, § 1 1-2  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1973 Code, as updated through May 14, 1990, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1973 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede May 14, 1990, but which were never included in the 1973 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since May 14, 1990, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section  Section 
this Code 498 10-25-65 19 1-4 557  7-11-66 App. A, Art. I, § 1-Art. XXVII, § 1 567 10-24-66 15-480 573 11-14-66 1, 2 15-480 583  1-23-67 App. A, Art. XVI, § 19 597  5-25-67 App. A, Art. IV, § 4 623 11-19-67 App. A, Art. V, § 4 App. A, Art. VI, § 4 App. A, Art. VIII, § 4 651  5-13-68 App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 652  5-13-68 App. A, Art. III, § 1 654  5-27-68 App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 663  8-12-68 App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 667  9- 8-68 App. A, Art. IX, § 2 678 11-13-68 App. A, Art. XXIII, § 1 681 11-16-68 App. A, Art. IX, § 2 732 11-10-69 App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 766  6-22-70 1-4 15-480 767  6-22-70 1-4 15-480 852 10-25-71 1, 2 15-480 917  1-10-72 1, 2 15-480 935  3-13-72 1, 2 15-480 952  6- 5-72 1, 2 15-480 963  6-26-72 App. A, Art. II, § 1 App. A, Art. VIII, § 1 964  6-26-72 App. A, Art. IX, § 2 App. A, Art. X, § 2 App. A, Art. XI, § 2 965  6-26-72 App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 966  6-26-72 App. A, Art. IX, § 2 969  7-10-72 App. A, Art. VII, § 1-App. A, Art. VII, § 14 981  8-14-72 App. A, Art. VII, § 11 989  9-11-72 1, 2 15-480 1009  1- 8-73 App. A, Art. XVI, § 14 1042  5-14-73 3 1-14 7-42 19-1 1055  7-23-73 1 App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 1075 10- 8-73 1 App. A, Art. IX, § 2 1076 10-29-73 1 App. A, Art. X, § 2 1077 10-29-73 2 15-480 1098  2-25-74 1 App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 1119  5-13-74 I App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 1124  6-10-74 2 15-480 1127  6-24-74 2 15-480 1153  9-23-74 2 15-480 1157 11-25-74 2 15-480 1159 12- 9-74 2 15-480 1160 12-23-74 1 App. A, Art. IX, § 2 2 App. A, Art. X, § 2 3, 4 App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 1167  1-13-75 1 App. A, Art. II, § 1 2 App. A, Art. VIIIA, § 1-App. A, Art. VIIIA, § 4 1168  1-13-75 1 App. A, Art. XV, § 2 1169  1-13-75 2 App. A, Art. XVI, § 9 1170  1-27-75 1, 2 15-480 1182  4-28-75 1-3 15-480 1183  4-28-75 1 15-480 1185  4-28-75 1 App. A, Art. IX, § 4 1214  8-25-75 1 15-480 1251  5-10-76 3, 4 App. A, Art. XVI, § 23, App. A, Art. XVI, § 24 1279  9-27-76 1 App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 1284  9-27-76 1 App. A, Art. II, § 3 1311  3-14-77 1 15-480 1314  3-28-77 1 15-480 1316  4-11-77 1(1)-1(3) App. A, Art. XIV, § 1-App. A, Art. XIV, § 3 1(5)-1(8) App. A, Art. XIV, § 5-App. A, Art. XIV, § 8 1334  7-11-77 2 15-480 1336  7-11-77 1 15-480 1341  8- 8-77 1 App. A, Art. XVI, § 23 1342  8- 8-77 1 App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 1354 10-10-77 2 15-480 1414 11-13-78 2 App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 1428  1-22-79 I App. A, Art. X, § 2 II App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 1438  3-26-79 I App. A, Art. IX, § 2 1439  4- 9-79 I App. A, Art. II, § 1 II App. A, Art. III, § 1-App. A, Art. III, § 4 1445  6-11-79 I App. A, Art. XIV, § 8 1467  9-10-79 I App. A, Art. XXIII, § 1 1468  9-10-79 I-III App. A, Art. XIII, § 1-App. A, Art. XIII, § 3 1538  3-23-81 1 App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 1544  5-11-81 1 App. A, Art. XV, § 6 1576  1-11-82 I App. A, Art. XVI, § 23 1597  8-23-82 I App. A, Art. VII, § 5-App. A, Art. VII, § 9 1606 11- 8-82 I App. A, Art. XVI, § 25 1609 11- 8-82 1-4 App. A, Art. XIIA, § 1-App. A, Art. XIIA, § 4 6-13 App. A, Art. XIIA, § 6-App. A, Art. XIIA, § 13 1622  3-28-83 I 15-480 1632  6-13-83 I App. A, Art. IX, § 4 1643  7-25-83 1 App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 1661 11-14-83 I App. A, Art. II, § 1 App. A, Art. XIIA, § 10-App. A, Art. XIIA, § 13 1662 12-12-83 I App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 1663 12-12-83 II App. A, Art. XVI, § 9 1677  3-26-84 I App. A, Art. IX, § 2 1691  2-13-84 I App. A, Art. IX, § 2 1733  2-11-85 II App. A, Art. IX, § 2 III App. A, Art. XIIA, § 3 IV App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 1734  2-11-85 I App. A, Art. XVI, § 26 II App. A, Art. XV, § 1 1739  3-18-85 I App. A, Art. XVI, § 4 1742  4-22-85 I App. A, Art. IX, § 2 II App. A, Art. XIIA, § 3 III App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 1767  9- 9-85 I, II App. A, Art. X, § 2 1771  9-23-85 I 15-480 1775 10-14-85 I 15-480 1784 11-25-85 I App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 1795  2- 2-86 I App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 1797  2-24-86 I, II App. A, Art. XIIA, § 6 III(A), III(B) App. A, Art. XIIA, § 3 1798  3-24-86 I(A-G) App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 II(A-I) App. A, Art. IX, § 2 III, IV App. A, Art. XI, § 2 V App. A, Art. XVI, § 11 1806  4-14-86 I, II App. A, Art. II, § 2 1816  6- 9-86 I 15-480 1833  7-14-86 I App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 II App. A, Art. IX, § 2 III App. A, Art. X, § 2 IV App. A, Art. XI, § 2 V App. A, Art. XIIA, § 3 1834  7-14-86 I App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 1836  7-28-86 I, II App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 1837  8-11-86 I App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 II App. A, Art. XIIA, § 3 1838  8-11-86 I App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 II App. A, Art. XII, § 2 1846 10-13-86 I App. A, Art. XVI, § 23 1847 10-13-86 I App. A, Art. XVI, § 24 1848 10-13-86 I App. A, Art. XV, § 6 1853 10-27-86 I 15-480 1854 10-27-86 I 15-480 1867  1-12-87 I 15-480 1878  2-23-87 I App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 1880  2-23-87 1 App. A, Art. XVI, § 4 1885  4-13-87 art. 1, § 1, 10-26, 10-27 art. 1, § 2 art. 3, § 1- 10-1-10-6 art. 3, § 6 art. 4, § 1- 10-46-10-49 art. 4, § 4 art. 5, § 1- 10-66-10-69 art. 5, § 4 art. 6, art. 7 10-7, 10-8 1896  6- 8-87 I 15-480 1922 11-23-87 I 15-480 1947  4-11-88 I 15-480 1952  5-23-88 I 15-480 1957  6-13-88 I 15-480 1974 10-24-88 1 15-480 1998  2-13-89 1 15-480 2003  4-24-89 1 App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 2018  7-10-89 1 15-480 2029  8-28-89 1 15-480 2039 10-23-89 1 App. A, Art. XVI, § 25 2054  1- 8-90 1 15-480 2056  1-22-90 1(23-58) 1-22-90 2060  2-12-90 1 App. A, Art. XXIII, § 2 2080  4-23-90 1 15-480 2095  6-25-90 1 5-3 2096  6-25-90 1 15-480 2097  7- 7-90 1 17-33 2102  7-23-90 1 App. A, Art. XIIA, § 5 2103  7-23-90 1 App. A, Art. XVI, § 30 2107  7-23-90 1 2-34 2108  7-23-90 1-4 16-23-16-26 2109  7-23-90 1 15-480 2116  8-13-90 1 6-26-6-29 2117  8-13-90 1 2-33 2120  8-27-90 1 15-476 2121  8-27-90 1 15-492 2122  8-27-90 1 15-488 2123  8-27-90 1 15-482 2124  8-27-90 1 15-480 2130 10-22-90 1 App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 2136 11-12-90 1 15-480 2137 11-12-90 1 15-488 2138 11-12-90 1 22-42 2143 12-10-90 1 15-480 2144 12-10-90 1 15-487 2145 12-10-90 1 15-480 2146 12-10-90 1 15-488 2148  1-14-91 I-IX 2-5 2149  1-28-91 1(A)-1(C) 6-46-6-48 2150  2-11-91 1(22-6) 24-5 2153  3-11-91 1(16-105) 17-181 1(16-110) 17-182 1(16-115) 17-183 1(16-120) 17-184 1(16-125) 17-185 1(16-130) 17-186 2158  4- 8-91 1 15-480 2164  5-13-91 1 23-24 2165  5-13-91 1 23-29 2167  6-10-91 1 App. A, Art. VI, § 4 2170  6-10-91 1 2-33 2172  6-10-91 1 2-4 2177  6-24-91 1 App. A, Art. XIV, § 1 2184  6-24-91 1 15-480 2185  6-24-91 1 18-86-18-89 2188  7- 8-91 1 15-480 2193  8-12-91 1-5 2-51-2-55 2194  8-12-91 1 15-480 2195  8-12-91 1 15-487 2201  8-26-91 App. A, Art. XIIA 2202  8-26-91 1 2-6 2209  9-23-91 1 15-283 2210  9-23-91 1 24-26 2211  9-23-91 1 15-280 2212 10-14-91 1 22-47 2 22-59 3-6 22-60 2218 11-25-91 1 15-483 2223 12- 9-91 1 15-480 2224 12- 9-91 1 14-55 2 14-126 2225 12- 9-91 1 14-78-14-80 2226 12- 9-91 1 14-146, 14-147 2227 12- 9-91 1 14-168 2228 12- 9-91 1 16-3 2229 12- 9-91 1 3-199 2231  1-13-92 I-IX 2-5 2233  1-27-92 art. I 15-262 2238  2-24-92 1 App. A, Art. XIV, 
§ 3(1) 2 6-93 3 App. A, Art. XXIII, 
§ 3 2239  2-24-92 1 App. A, Art. XVI, § 9 2240  2-24-92 1 18-9 2243  3-23-92 1 17-131 2247  4-27-92 15-480 2249  5-11-92 1 15-114 2253  6-22-92 art. I 20-111-20-115 2254  6-22-92 1 15-16 2256  7-27-92 App. A, Art. XIV, 
§ 1(23) 2258  7-27-92 I 5-1(a) 2259  7-27-92 I 18-61 2265  8-24-92 I 15-324-15-327 II 15-484 2270  9-28-92 I 18-61 2272 10-12-92 I 6-151-6-154 2274 10-12-92 I 14-231(note) 2281 11-23-92 I 2-148(b)(16)-(16II) 2282 11-23-92 1 18-9(b)-(d) 2289  1-25-93 1 15-140 2290  1-25-93 1 17-62(a) 2291  1-25-93 1 15-480 2292  1-25-93 1 15-266(a)j.-l. 2293  2- 8-93 1 25-121(a) 2295  3- 8-93 1 App. A, Art. XIV, 
§ 1(16) 2298  3- 8-93 1 2-33 2300  3- 8-93 1 15-483 2302  3-22-93 I App. A, Art. XVI, 
§ 23(j) 2303  3-22-93 I App. A, Art. XIV, 
§ 3-§ 9 2308  4-26-93 1, 2 13-77.1 2311  5-24-93 1 App. A, Art. XII, 
§ 2(14) 2313  5-24-93 1 App. A, Art. IX, 
§ 2(41), (49) 2314  5-24-93 1 3-52(10) 2320  6-28-93 1 App. A, Art. IX, 
§ 2(36) 2322  6-28-93 1 15-486 2323  7-12-93 1 18-42 2328  7-26-93 1 15-476 2 15-489 3 15-492 2329  7-26-93 1, 2 18-41 3 18-42(3) 2333  8-23-93 1 18-5 2336  9-13-93 1       Rpld 15-188       Added 15-188 2347 10-25-93 1 6-200, 6-201 6-205, 6-206 2357  1-10-94 I 18-9 2361  2-14-94 1 7-87 2365  3-14-94 1 XIV, § 3(1) 2366  3-14-94 1 25-26 2370  3-14-94 1 2-34 2372  3-28-94 I 2-297 2375  4-11-94 I       Rpld 24-6 II       Added 24-6 2376  4-25-94 1 15-480 2377  4-25-94 1 2-33 2378  5- 9-94 1-14 14-341-14-354 2379  5- 9-94 1 20-116 2391  7-11-94 I 29-1(b) 2392  7-11-94 I 7-89 2393  7-11-94 I 25-74(g) 2394  7-25-94 1 15-486 2395  7-25-94 1 2-35 2396  7-25-94 I       Rpld 14-3-14-7       Added 14-3-14-7 2397  8- 8-94 1 16-25(2) 2 16-26(1) 2398  8- 8-94 1 15-485 2399  8- 8-94 1 15-486 2402  8-22-94 1 15-480 2408  9-26-94 1 App. A, Art. I, § 3 2       Added App. A, Art. XIV, § 1(32) 2410  9-26-94 1 18-9(d) 2411 10-10-94 1 3-56(a), (c) 2413 10-24-94 1       Dltd 15-138 1       Added 15-138 2414 11-14-94 1       Added 3-58 2417 12-12-94 1 1-2 2418 12-12-94 1 1-2 2       Added 17-63 2420  1- 9-95 1       Added 14-82 2423  1-23-95 1 1-2 2 App. A, Art. XV, § 1(16) 3 App. A, Art. XV, § 3(1) 2427  2-13-95 1       Dltd 3-44(b) 2428  2-13-95 1 17-62 2431  2-27-95 1 7-1(a) 2432  3-27-95 1 App. A, Art. XVI, § 9 2433  3-27-95 1 App. A, Art. VII, § 6(1) 2434  3-27-95 1 18-9(b) 2437  4-10-95 1       Added 13-86, 13-87 2 1-2 2441  4-24-95 1 15-480 2444  5-22-95 1       Dltd 14-166-14-172 2       Added 14-166 2445  6-12-95 1 15-480 2449  6-26-95 1 15-480 2450  6-26-95 1 15-480 2453  7-24-95 art. 1, § A 10-1 art. I 10-2 art. 1, §§ B-G 10-3-10-8 art. 1, § I, J 10-9, 10-10 art. 5 10-11 art. 7 10-12 art. 2, §§ A-D 10-26-10-29 art. 3, §§A-G 10-46-10-52 art. 4, §§ A-E 10-71-10-75 art. 8, §§ A-D 10-91-10-94 2460  8-14-95 1 2-4(b) 2461  8-14-95 1-5 2-51-2-55 2465  8-28-95 1 3-44 2468  8-28-95 1 6-67 2 6-91 2472  9-11-95 1 2-297(2) 2473  9-11-95 1 2-33 2474 10- 9-95 1 1-2 2 24-1       Added 24-7 2478 11-13-95 1-14       Added 7.5-26-7.5-39 7.5-40 2479 11-13-95 1 18-9(b) 2 18-61(c) 2480 11-13-95 1 15-480 2 15-482 3 15-483 4 15-487 5 15-488 6 15-491 7       Added 15-191       Added 15-495 2481 11-13-95 1       Added 24-71-24-74 2485 11-27-95 1 App. A, Art. XVI, § 25(b)(4), (5) 2488 11-27-95 1 2-34 2493 12-11-95 1 25-74(g) 2500  2-12-96 1 15-487 2501  2-12-96 1 14-206 14-231 14-251 14-271 2504  3-11-96 1, 2       Added 18-10 2505  3-11-96 1 23-57 2506  3-11-97 1       Added 7-45 2509  3-25-96 1 18-9(b) 2510  3-25-96 1 15-482 2 15-487 2511  3-25-96 1       Added 7-300-7-313 2516  4-22-96 1 15-16(a) 2517  4-22-96 1 15-480 2518  4-22-96 1 15-482 2521  6-10-96 1 2-2 2529  6-24-96 1 14-6 2530  7- 8-96 1 1-2 2 14-82 2531  7-22-96 1       Dltd 7-312 G.       Rnbd 7-312 H.       as 7-312 G. 2532  7-22-96 1 15-480 2536  8-12-96 1 6-38(9) 2       Added 6-49 3 1-2 2539  8-26-96 1 7-41 2540  8-26-96 1 7-41 2541  8-26-96 1 7-41 2542  8-26-96 1 7.5-27 7.5-28(b) 7.5-28(d)(1), (2) 7.5-28(g) 7.5-29(a)(2)a., b. 7.5-29(f)(2)b. 7.5-29(f)(3)a. 7.5-30(a) 7.5-30(e)(5) 7.5-30(i) 7.5-32(c)(3)e.       Added 7.5-33(c)(1)g. 7.5-33(c)(2) 7.5-33(g)(1), (2) 7.5-33(i) 7.5-35(a), (b) 7.5-36(f)(3) 7.5-39(g) 7.5-39(h)(3) 7.5-39(i) 2544  9- 9-96 1 1-2 2553 10-28-96 1       Added 16-3(a) 2560 12-16-96 1 2-34 2561 12-16-96 1       Added 16-3(d)       Rltd 16-3(d)       as 16-3(e) 2564  1-13-97 1 18-9(a), (b) 2       Added 18-10(4), (5)       Rnbd 18-10(4)       as 18-10(6) 3 18-61(b), (c) 2565  1-13-97 1 15-482 2 15-483 2567  1-27-97 1 17-4 2570  2-10-97 1       Added 18-9(e) 2571  2-10-97 1 2-296(a) 2575  2-24-97 1 25-74(g)(1) 2 25-74(g)(6) 2578  2-24-97 1       Added 18-11 2580  3-10-97 1 15-480 2583  3-24-97 1       Added App. A, Art. XV, § 1(1)(19) 2584  3-24-97 1 24-4 2 24-6 3 25-91 2585  3-24-97 1       Added 14-9 2590  4-14-97 1(I-VII)       Added 7.6-1-7.6-7 2591  4-14-97 1 App. A, Art. XVI, § 4(A)       Added App. A, Art. XVI, § 4(A)(6) App. A, Art. XVI, § 4(B) 2595  4-28-97 1 1-2 2596  4-28-97 1 15-480 2599  5-12-97 1 15-480 2612  6-23-97 1 7-128 2617  7-28-97 1       Added 6-207 2619  7-28-97 1 15-482 2624  8-11-97 1 16-3(d) 2625  8-11-97 1 16-5 2626  8-11-97 1 15-483 2627  8-11-97 1 15-483 2634  9- 8-97 1 6-67 2637  9-22-97 1 25-124(a)(2) 2638 10-13-97 1 15-137(b), (c) 2639 10-13-97 1 15-480 2646 10-27-97 1 15-483 2 15-482 2647 11-10-97 1 7-43, 7-44 9-1 30-1 2648 11-10-97 1       Dltd 15-137(b), (c)       Added 15-137(b)-(d) 2649 11-10-97 1       Added 7.6-8 2650 11-10-97 1 2-35 2651 11-10-97 1 1-2 2 29-1 3 29-5 4 29-7 2652 11-25-97 1 18-9(c) 2 18-10(4), (6) 3 18-10 4       Added 18-12 2653 11-25-97 1 2-35 2656 12- 8-97 1 7-85 2657 12- 8-97 1 6-93(d) 2658 12- 8-97 1 25-34 2661  1-26-98 1 7-89 2 7-105 3 7-132 4 1-2 2664  2- 9-98 1 14-166 2666  2-23-98 1 App. A, Art. XIV, § 3(6) 2667  2-23-98 1 App. A, Art. XXIII, § 3 2668  2-23-98 1       Added App. A, Art. VII, § 2(6) 2669  2-23-98 1       Added App. A, Art. XIIA, § 1(3) 2670  3- 9-98 1 App. A, Art. XVI, § 25 2671  3- 9-98 1 18-9(d) 2674  3-23-98 1       Added App. A, Art. VA, §§ 1-4 2676  4-13-98 1 15-482 2677  4-13-98 1 16-3(d),(e) 2682  5-11-98 1 24-22 2       Added 24-54-24-56 2683  6- 8-98 1       Added 15-17 2684  6- 8-98 1 24-3 2691  7-27-98 1 15-480 2700  9-28-98 1 17-105(a)(3), 17-105(b) 2704 10-26-98 1       Rpld App. A, Art. VIII, §§ 1-4       Added App. A, Art. VIII, §§ 0.1, 1-7, §§ 9-15 2710 11-23-98 1 7-258(a) 2 13-24(b) 2714 12-14-98 1       Added 2-126(c) 99-02  1-25-99 1 2-34(a) 99-03  1-25-99 1 14-6 99-10  2-22-99 1       Added 18-13 99-11  2-22-99 1 15-482 99-12  2-22-99 1 15-480 99-15  3- 8-99 1 15-478 99-16  3- 8-99 2       Rpld 7-42-7-44       Added 7-42       Amd 9-1 99-18  3-22-99 1       Added 21-8 99-19  4-12-99 1-4, 6, 7       Added 27-4 99-23  5-24-99 1 15-188 2       Added 15-496 3 15-489 99-24  5-24-99 1 15-480 99-25  5-24-99 1 15-274 99-26  5-24-99 1 1-2 2       Added 22-64 99-29  6-28-99 1 15-479 99-31  7-26-99 1 2-2 99-32  7-26-99 1       Rpld 2-4(b) 99-33  7-26-99 1       Added 6-210-6-218 99-37  8-23-99 1       Rpld 6-66-6-75       Added 6-66-6-79 99-38  8-23-99 1 25-26 99-40  9-13-99       Rpld 10-1-10-12, 10-26-10-29, 10-46-10-52, 10-71-10-75, 10-91-10-94       Added 10-1-10-3, 10-21-10-27, 10-41-10-44, 10-61-10-65, 10-81-10-86, 10-101, 10-121, 10-141 99-41  9-27-99 1-4 App. A, Art. IX, § 4(1)(iii), (iv) § 5       Added §§ 6, 7 99-42  9-27-99 1, 2 App. A, Art. XXIII, § 1(2), (3) 99-43  9-27-99 1-3 App. A, Art. XIV, § 2, § 3(1), § 4(5) 99-44  9-27-99 1 15-480 99-47  9-27-99 1 25-32 99-50 10-11-99 1-4 15-477, 15-480, 15-487, 15-488 99-55 10-25-99 1, 2 18-9(e), (f) 99-59 11-22-99 1       Rpld 15-411-15-424       Added 15-411-15-419 00-4  1-24-00 1       Rpld 13-73 00-5  2-14-00 1 2-4(a)(4) 00-6  2-14-00 1 14-206 00-10  2-28-00 1       Rpld 6-200, 6-201, 6-205-6-207 00-15  3-13-00 1 25-33(c) 00-19  3-27-00 1 25-27 00-20  4-10-00 1 App. A, Art. IX, § 4(3) 00-21  4-10-00 1, 2 18-61(b), (c), (d) 00-27  6-12-00 1 15-188 2 15-489 00-31  6-26-00 1 2-34(a) 00-32  6-26-00 1 15-482 00-35  7-12-00 1 App. A, Art. XIIA, § 3(1), § 10(1) 00-40  7-24-00 1-5 2-51-2-55 00-43  8-28-00 1, 2 7-42 00-45  9-11-00 1 2-101 00-46  9-11-00 1       Added 14-501-14-505 00-49  9-25-00 1 1-2 2 15-281(d) 00-51  9-25-00 1 15-482 00-52 10- 9-00 1, 2 14-501-14-505 00-54 10-23-00 1, 2 21-8(i), (j) 00-55 10-23-00 1 18-10(4) 2 18-10(7) 00-58 11-13-00 1 15-482 00-61 11-27-00 1 15-482 00-62 11-27-00 1       Added 2-7 01-08  1-22-01 1       Added 7-86(a)(3) 01-09  1-22-01 1 1-2 01-12  2-26-01 1 6-46-6-49 01-13  2-26-01 1       Added 20-136-20-139 01-18  3-12-01 1 15-483 01-19  3-12-01 2 7-42 01-32  4- 9-01 1       Rpld 7.5-26-7.5-40       Added 7.5-1-7.5-10, 7.5-31-7.5-53, 7.5-71-7.5-81, 7.5-101-7.5-116, 7.5-131-7.5-136 01-41  6-11-01 1 1-2 2       Added 28-7 3 15-281 4       Rpld App. A, Art. XVI, § 17       Added App. A, Art. XVI, § 17 5       Added App. A, Art. XVI, § 29 01-42  6-11-01 1 13-24 01-43  6-11-01 1 17-33 01-47  7-23-01 1       Added 6-28(9), (10) 01-48  7-23-01 1       Rpld 15-6(a)(1)       Added 15-6(a)(1), (5) 01-49  7-23-01 1       Rpld 15-5(a)       Added 15-5(a) 01-50  7-23-01 1       Rpld 17-31       Added 17-31-17-31.2 01-51  7-23-01 1 18-9 01-52  8-27-01 1-5 2-51-2-55 01-55  8-29-01 1       Rpld App. A, Art. XVI, § 17       Added App. A, Art. XVI, § 17 2 App. A, Art. XVI, § 29 01-57  9-10-01 1 2-2 01-59  9-10-01 1 15-114 01-60  9-10-01 1       Rpld 15-73       Added 15-73 01-62 10- 8-01 1       Added 16-6, 16-7 01-63 10- 8-01 1       Added 15-5(c) 01-64 10-22-01 1       Added 2-222; 2-272, 2-273 01-72 11-26-01 1 15-480 01-76 12-10-01 1 15-480 2 15-479 01-77 12-10-01 1 15-482 02-02  1-14-02 1 18-10(1) 02-04  1-14-02 1 15-480 02-07  1-28-02 1 15-480 2 15-487 02-08  1-28-02 1 15-482 02-09  1-28-02 1 15-484 02-13  2-11-02 1 1-2 2 17-63 3       Added 17-64 4 17-10 02-14  2-25-02 1 15-487 02-16  3-11-02 3       Rpld 7-41 1, 2       Added 7-41 02-17  3-11-02 3       Rpld 7-41 1, 2       Added 7-44 02-18  3-11-02 3       Rpld 7-41 1, 2       Added 7-43 02-23  4-22-02 1 15-493 02-25  5-21-02 1 15-480 02-26  5-21-02 1       Added 26-1 02-32  6-24-02 1 25-74(d)(1)e 02-33  6-24-02 1 18-10(1) 02-38  7-23-02 1 15-480 02-39  7-23-02 1 15-480 02-42  8-26-02 1 15-487 02-43  8-26-02 1 14-3-14-6 02-46  9-9-02 1 15-480 02-47  9- 9-02 1 6-210-6-215; 6-217, 6-218 02-52 10-28-02 1 2-33 02-60 12- 9-02 1, 2 24-49, 24-50 03-01  1-13-03 1       Added App. A, Art. XIV, § 1(33) 2       Added App. A, Art. XIV, § 2(13) 3 3-78 03-02  1-13-03 1 2-297(1) 2 14-292 3 20-112(a) 03-03  1-27-03 1 15-482 03-05  1-27-03 1       Rpld 7-87 2       Added 24-57 03-06  1-27-03 1 16-3(b) 03-07  1-27-03 1 1-6(a) 2 5-45(b) 10-101 11-2 13-107 14-29(c) 14-150(c) 14-210 15-16(b) 15-118 15-418(b) 17-63(b)(3) 29-7 03-11  2-10-03 1 7-223 2 22-24(a)(1) 3 22-60(2)j, 22-60(2)n 4 7-86 5 7-43, 7-44 03-12  2-10-03 1 16-52 03-13  2-10-03 1 15-486 03-14  2-24-03 1 18-10(1) 2       Added 18-10(8) 3       Added 18-14 4 18-9(e)(1), (2) 03-17  2-24-03 1 13-22(b) 2 13-24 03-23  4-28-03 2 24-50 03-26  5-12-03 1 24-4(a) 03-27  5-12-03 1       Added 18-10(9) 03-30  6- 9-03 1       Added 13-52(c) 03-32  6-23-03 1 17-105(a)(3), (b) 03-33  6-23-03 2 24-50 03-42  8-25-03 1 15-482 03-43  8-25-03 1 15-478 03-44  8-25-03 1 15-482 03-48  9- 8-03 1 2-297 03-52  9-22-03 1 15-482 03-54  9-22-03 1 3-52(10) 03-55 10-13-03 1       Added 2-311-2-314 03-57 10-27-03 1 1-2 2 App. A, Art. XVI, § 17(3) 03-58 10-27-03 1 App. A, Art. XV, § 1(13) 03-60 10-27-03 1 App. A, Art. VII, § 9 03-61 10-27-03 1 1-2 2       Added App. A, Art. III, § 1(10) 03-64 11-10-03 2 7-42 03-65 11-24-03 1 18-14(1) 03-66 11-24-03 1 14-78(b) 03-67 11-24-03 1 14-78(a) 04-03  1-26-04 1 App. A, Art. XIV, § 3(6) 2 App. A, Art. XIV, § 7 3 25-34 04-07  1-26-04 1 1-2 2       Rpld 11-1, 11-2, 11-16-11-20 Exh. 1       Added 11-1-11-7 04-09  2-23-04 1       Added 11-26-11-33 04-15  4-26-04 1 2-314 04-24  6-14-04 1 1-2 04-25  6-14-04 1 15-127 04-26  6-14-04 1 15-185 04-27  6-28-04 1 2-105 04-28  6-28-04 1 18-42 04-32  8-23-04 1 15-478 04-35  9-13-04 1 2-294 04-36  9-13-04 1 2-297(1), (2) 04-37  9-13-04 1 1-2 04-45 11- 8-04 1 18-61 04-47 11-22-04 1 16-29 04-53 12-13-04 1 24-49 05-01  1-10-05 1.A.-K. 1-2 1, 2       Added 17-65 05-03  1-10-05 1 6-210-6-215 6-217, 6-218 05-04  1-10-05 1 6-46-6-49 05-05  1-10-05 1 5-3 2       Added 23-61 05-07  1-24-05 1       Added 22-65 05-08  2-14-05 1       Added 18-15 05-09  2-28-05 1       Added 7-314 2       Added 23-62 05-15  3-14-05 1 21-8(j) 05-18  3-14-05 1       Added 11-3(h) 05-20  4-11-05 1 18-10(1) 2 18-14(a), (b) 05-21  4-25-05 1 29-1(d) 05-22  4-25-05 1 15-91(a) 05-23  5- 9-05 1 1-2 05-24  5- 9-05 1 15-487 05-25  5-23-05 1 1-2 05-26  5-23-05 1       Added 3-52(11) 2       Dltd 3-54 05-27  5-23-05 1       Added 6-200-6-204 05-29  6-13-05 1 15-483 05-30  6-13-05 1       Dltd 17-64       Added 17-64 2 18-41 3       Dltd 18-42 05-35  8- 8-05 1 25-124(a)(2) 05-36  8- 8-05 1 18-9(d) 05-37  8- 8-05 1       Added 5-13, 5-14 05-38  8-22-05 1 1-2 2 15-257 05-39  9-12-05 1       Added 24-8 05-42  9-26-05 1 1-2 2 17-33(6) 05-45 10-24-05 1       Dltd App. A, Art. VII, § 9       Added App. A, Art. VII, § 9 05-47 10-24-05 1 6-215 2 6-217 06-05  1-23-06 1 17-106(b) 17-108(c) 17-111(f) 06-06  1-23-06 1 Ch. 14, Art. VI(tit.) 2       Added 14-295 06-08  1-23-06 1       Added 14-601-14-623 06-10  2-13-06 2 7-42 06-11  2-13-06 1 25-35 06-12  2-13-06 1 18-61 2 18-14(a) 3 18-9 06-14  2-27-06 1 16-3 06-17  3-13-06 2 7-42 06-19  3-27-06 1 18-28 06-24  4-10-06 1 6-91 06-25  4-24-06 1 16-23 2 16-25 06-26  5- 8-06 1 14-206, 14-206.1 14-208-14-210       Added 14-215 06-27  5- 8-06 1, 2       Added 7-46 06-28  5- 8-06 1, 2 7-41 06-29  5- 8-06 1, 2 7-44 06-30  5- 8-06 1, 2 7-43 06-31  5- 8-06 1, 2       Added 7-47 06-38  6-12-06 1       Added 3-52(12) 06-39  6-26-06 1       Added 7-85(c) 2 7-87 3       Added 13-24(c) 06-40  6-26-06 1 14-291 2 14-293(1) 06-52  8-28-06 1 2-4 2-34, 2-35 2 3-52 3-79 3 14-53 14-61 14-76 06-56 10- 9-06 1       Added 15-6(a)(6) 06-57 10- 9-06 1 15-138 06-58 10- 9-06 1       Added 17-37 06-59 10- 9-06 1       Added 17-12 06-66 11-13-06 1       Added 15-237-15-239 07-01  7-23-07 1-5 2-51-2-55 07-02  1-22-07 1 2-77 07-03  1-22-07 1       Added 17-66 07-04  2-12-07 1 2-101 2 2-105 07-10 10- 9-07 1       Added 1-15 2 7-258 07-12  4-23-07 1 24-49 07-14  5-14-07 1       Added 2-274 07-15  6-11-07 1       Added 2-148(e)(7) 07-17  6-11-07 1 6-71 07-19  7-23-07 2, 3 7.5-71 07-21  7-23-07 1-5 2-51-2-55 07-25  9-24-07 1 14-47 07-28 10- 8-07 1 15-485 07-29 10- 8-07 1, 2       Added 16-8 07-30 10- 8-07 3 6-67(3) 07-34 11-12-07 1 18-9(d) 07-42 12-10-07 1 15-482 08-05  1-28-08 1-10       Added 19-26-19-35 08-07  2-25-08 1 18-10(1), (2) 08-08  3-10-08 1-4       Added 15-497 08-09  4-28-08 1 15-137(b) 08-10  5-12-08 15-497(d) 08-11  5-12-08 1 18-9(a) 08-12  5-12-08 1 18-5 08-14  5-12-08 1 App. A, Art. XVI, § 23 08-22  7-14-08 1 14-206 14-231 14-251 14-271 08-23  7-14-08 1       Added 2-8 2-294(i) 2-297(4) 14-6(b)(1) 14-292 16-8(a)       Added 20-1 20-112 08-26  7-28-08 1 App. A, Art. XIV, §§ 1-9 08-27  7-28-08 1 App. A, Art. IX, §§ 1-7 08-28  7-28-08 1       Rpld App. A, Art. XIII, §§ 1-5       Added App. A, Art. XIV, §§ 1-7 08-29  7-28-08 1 2-173 08-36 11-10-08 1-3 15-489 08-40 12- 8-08 1       Added 24-4(f)(3)-(5) 08-41 12- 8-08 1       Added 17-112 09-01  1-12-09 1 18-14(a) 18-14(c) 2 18-10(1) 18-10(6) 09-02  1-12-09 1 14-272 09-03  1-12-09 1       Added App. A, Art. XIIB, §§ 1-9, App. A, Art. XIIC, §§ 1-10, App. A, Art. XIID, §§ 1-10, App. A, Art. XIIE, §§ 1-8, App. A, Art. XIIF, §§ 1-10 09-04  1-26-09 1 2-296(a) 09-05  2- 9-09 1 15-480 09-07  2-23-09 1 7-42 2       Added 7-48 09-08  3- 9-09 1 2-4(b) 09-09  3- 9-09 1       Added 7-86(c) 09-10  3- 9-09 1 16-23, 16-24 09-13  4-27-09 1       Rpld 18-28       Added 15-456.1 09-14  4-27-09 1 15-209 09-23  7-27-09 1-5 2-51-2-55 09-26  8-24-09 1 1-2 09-31  9-14-09 1 3-55(a) 3-56(a) 3-56(c) 3-57(c) 09-32  9-14-09 1       Rpld 17-37 09-34  9-14-09 1 15-476 09-35  9-28-09 1 3-52(6) 09-38 10-26-09 1 3-3 09-41 11- 9-09 1, 2 15-489 09-49 12-14-09 1 18-9(b) 18-9(d) 2 18-14(a) 10-02  1-11-10 1       Added 15-124(f) 10-04  2- 8-10 1       Added 17-13 10-06  2- 8-10 1 18-9(a) 10-07  2- 8-10 1       Rpld 2-4       Added 2-4.1-2-4.9 10-11  4-26-10 1 15-119 10-13  5-10-10 1       Added 7-61.5 10-15  5-24-10 1       Added 18-9(g) 10-16  5-24-10 1 22-2 22-4 22-24 22-44 22-60 10-17  6-21-10 1 15-480 10-32  9-27-10 1 29-1 10-35 10-25-10 1       Added 25-36 10-38 11-22-10 1 21-8(j) 11-02  1-10-11 1 1-2 2       Added 22-2(d) 3 22-5 4 22-6 5 22-44 6 22-46 11-04  1-24-11 1 15-489 11-07  2-14-11 1 15-489 11-09  2-28-11 1 1-2 2 14-3-14-6B 11-12  3-14-11 1       Rpld 24-4(f)(1) 11-13  4-11-11 1 16-25, 16-26 2       Rpld 16-91-16-94       Added 16-91-16-98 11-19  5-23-11 1 App. A, Art. XIV, § 1(31) 11-21  6-13-11 1 25-72 2 11-34-11-36 11-33  8-15-11 1 App. A, Art. XVI, § 25(b)(4) 11-37  9-12-11 1 11-2-11-4 11-38  9-12-11 1 14-6(b) 11-39  9-12-11 1 18-9(b) 11-40  9-12-11 1       Added 14-256 11-41  9-26-11 1       Added 7-48(d) 11-46  9-26-11 1 25-37 11-48 10-10-11 1 17-61 11-49 10-10-11 1       Added 24-9-24-11 11-50 10-24-11 1 24-12 11-53 11-14-11 1 App. A, Art. XVI, § 25(b)(4) 11-54 11-28-11 1 22-6(11) 11-55 11-28-11 1, 2 7-46 11-56 11-28-11 1, 2 7-41 11-57 11-28-11 1, 2 7-44 11-58 11-28-11 1, 2 7-43 11-59 11-28-11 2 7-48(a) 11-60 11-28-11 1, 2 7-47 11-61 11-28-11 1       Added 7.5-11 12-01  1- 9-12 1 14-3-14-6B 12-02  1- 9-12 1 18-9(e) 12-06  1-23-12 1 1-2 2 14-3-14-6B 12-07  1-23-12 1 6-27 2 6-28(10) 12-11  2-27-12 1       Rpld 15-130 12-16  4- 9-12 1, 2 7-46 12-17  4- 9-12 1, 2 7-41 12-18  4- 9-12 1, 2 7-44 12-19  4- 9-12 1, 2 7-43 12-20  4- 9-12 1 7-48 12-21  4- 9-12 1, 2 7-47 12-22  4-23-12 1 20-91 12-23  4-23-12 1-8 2-31 12-25  5-14-12 1 1-2 2 3-1, 3-2 3-4 3 3-40 3-51, 3-52 3-56 4 3-73, 3-74 3-76-3-78 5       Rpld 3-101-3-110 6 App. A, Art. XVI, §§ 23, 24 12-26  6-18-12 1 7-225 12-36  8-20-12 1       Added 2-4.1(e) 12-37 10- 8-12 1       Added 18-90-18-94 12-40 10-22-12 1       Rpld 29-1-29-7       Added 29-1-29-6 12-43 11-26-12 1 15-483 12-46 12-10-12 1       Added 15-6(a)(7) 13-04  1-28-13 1       Rpld App. A, Art. XIV, § 1(16) 13-07  2-11-13 1 15-477 13-09  3-11-13 1       Added 17-37 13-11  4- 8-13 1 2-51-2-55 13-12  4-22-13 1 1-2 2       Added 15-281(a)(5), (6) 3 28-7(e)(5) 13-16  4-22-13 1 15-493 13-22  5-13-13 1 14-29 2 14-150 14-211 14-235 14-254 14-274 13-23  5-13-13 1 2-7 13-25  6-17-13 1       Added App. A, Art. XIV, § 1(32) 13-31  8-19-13 1 14-4 13-34  8-19-13 1       Added 22-61(11) 13-36  9- 9-13 1 22-6(11) 13-39 10-14-13 1 15-482 13-40 10-28-13 1 18-14(a), (b) 2 18-10(1)-(3) 13-48 12- 9-13 1 2-122 14-01  1-13-14 1 15-16 2 15-5(c) 15-7 15-91(3) 15-112(a) 15-114       Rpld 15-124(a)(1)       Rnbd 15-124(a)(2), (3)       as 15-124(a)(1), (2) 15-125 15-345(5) 15-368 15-478 15-479 15-480 15-482 15-488 15-490 15-492 15-495 15-497(b) 3       Added 17-133, 17-134 4       Added 17-14-17-20 14-02  1-13-14 1 2-34(c) 14-07  3-24-14 1       Rpld 17-32 14-22  7-21-14 1       Added 2-296(e) 14-23  7-21-14 1 29-1(a) 14-24  8-18-14 1 7.6-1-7.6-9 14-27  9- 8-14 1 2-296 14-29 10-13-14 1 29-1(j) 14-30 10-27-14 1 App. A, Art. XVI, § 22 2 1-2 3       Added App. A, Art. IX, § 2(1)(32) 14-32 10-27-14 1 1-2 2 App. A, Art. XVI, § 25 14-39 12- 8-14 1       Rpld 2-311-2-314 2 17-54, 17-55 15-05  1-12-15 1       Rpld 10-1-10-3, 10-21-10-27, 10-41-10-44, 10-61-10-65, 10-81-10-86, 10-101, 10-121, 10-141       Added 10-1-10-3, 10-21-10-27, 10-41-10-44, 10-61-10-65, 10-81-10-86, 10-101, 10-121, 10-141 15-07  1-26-15 1 21-8(a) 15-10  2- 9-15 1 2-51-2-55 15-14  2-23-15 1       Added 17-54(g) 15-16  3- 9-15 1       Added 16-9 15-17  3-23-15 1 7-42 15-20  3-23-15 1       Added 25-124(d) 16-01  1-11-16 1       Added 2-4.2(d) 16-06  2-22-16 1 18-9(a) 16-09  2-22-16 1 App. A, Art. XVI, § 25 2 15-206 16-10  2-22-16 1 14-293(4) 16-13  4-25-16 1 15-480 16-14  5- 9-16 1 15-482 16-18  5- 9-16 1 28-1-28-8       Added 28-8 2 1-2 16-19  6-13-16 1       Rpld 3-50       Added 3-50 16-21  7-25-16 1       Rpld 7.5-72-7.5-81      24-71-24-74 2 24-47 3       Amd 7.5-101-7.5-116       as 24-75-24-84 16-23  8-22-16 1 2-296(a) 17-02  2-13-17 1 15-412 2 15-112-15-117 3       Added 15-117.5 17-03  2-13-17 1       Rpld 17-1-17-20, 17-31-17-37, 17-51-17-66, 17-81-17-83, 17-101-17-112, 17-131-17-134, 17-156-17-161, 17-181-17-186       Added 17-1-17-25, 17-31-17-43, 17-51-17-73, 17-81-17-87, 17-101-17-121, 17-131-17-139, 17-156-17-161, 17-180-17-192, 17-201-17-206 17-04  2-13-17 1 15-478 17-06  2-27-17 1 3-52 17-08  3-27-17 1 2-4.1 2, 3 2-4.2 4 2-4.5 5 2-4.7 17-09  3-27-17 1, 2 21-8 17-11  4-24-17 1 7-105 17-12  4-27-17 1       Added 17-122 17-20  7-10-17 1 17-18 17-23  9-11-17 1 15-480 2 15-482 3 15-483 4 15-485 5 15-486 6 15-487 7 15-488 8 15-495 9 15-476 10 15-479 17-25 10- 9-17 1       Added 25-38 17-26 10- 9-17 1 6-70 2 6-73 3 6-67 18-03  3-26-18 1       Rpld 7-126-7-135       Added 7-126-7-138 18-04  4-23-18 1 App. A, Art. XIV, § 8 18-05  4-23-18 1 App. A, Art. XVI, § 30 2 1-2 18-09  7-23-18 1 3-43  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Revised Statutes of Missouri. 
RSMo Section  
this Code 1.020 et seq. 1-2 1.140 1-5 1.150 1-11 1.180 1-11 ch. 44 1-2 Ch. 8 8-1 44.028 Ch. 8 44.080 Ch. 8 44.090 Ch. 8 8-12 44.115 Ch. 8 49.600 et seq. Ch. 10 67.305 et seq. Ch. 3 67.400-67.450 7-127 67.750 et seq. Ch. 18 67.1830 7.5-71 67.1830 et seq. 24-84 67.1846 7.5-71 67.2675 7.5-71 67.2677 7.5-11 7.5-71 17-17 67.2689 7.5-71 67.2691, 67.2692 7.5-71 67.2695 7.5-71 67.2703 7.5-71 67.2703.2 7.5-71 67.2703.8 7.5-71 67.2707 7.5-71 67.2707.3 7.5-71 67.2709 7.5-71 67.5090 et seq. 7.6-1 67.5090-67.5103 7.6-8 70.210 et seq. Ch. 21 70.600 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 70.600(16) 2-31 70.610 Ch. 2, Art. II 70.730 2-31 71.010 1-1 71.010 et seq. Ch. 2 71.220 1-6 71.285 Ch. 29 71.290 et seq. Ch. 24 71.340 Ch. 24 71.365 Ch. 24 24-4 71.367 Ch. 24 24-4 71.520 et seq. Ch. 21 71.610 et seq. Ch. 14 71.620 14-3 Ch. 14, Art. VI 71.680 23-23 71.680 et seq. Ch. 23 71.780 1-6 77.042 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 4 79.010 2-1 79.010 et seq. Ch. 2 79.030 2-76 2-101 2-121 79.050 2-105 79.060 2-2 2-124 79.070 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 79.080 2-102 79.110 1-1 2-104 2-123 10-1 79.120 2-103, 2-104 79.130 1-1 1-9 79.140 1-9 2-104 79.230 2-182 16-72 16-92 79.230 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 79.250 2-102 79.260 2-78 79.270 2-81 79.320 2-171, 2-172 79.380 Ch. 12 Ch. 21 79.390 Ch. 18 Ch. 21 79.400 Ch. 5 79.400(2) 5-2 79.410 Ch. 24 Ch. 24, Art. II 24-3 79.450 1-1 3-2 79.450(3) Ch. 7 79.470 1-6 ch. 85 et seq. Ch. 20 86.580 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. IV 88.010 et seq. Ch. 21 Ch. 24 88.667 et seq. Ch. 24 88.713 24-4 88.743 24-4 ch. 89 Ch. 19 89.010 et seq. App. A 89.020 App. A, Art. I, § 3 89.060 App. A, Art. XXIII, 
§ 2 89.070 Ch. 6, Art. IV 89.110 6-96, 10-83 89.410 et seq. Ch. 25 90.010 et seq. Ch. 18 91.010 et seq. Ch. 21 92.074 14-208 92.074-92.098 14-208.1 14-209, 14-210 14-215 92.077 14-206, 14-206.1 92.083 14-206.1 92.086 14-206 92.098 14-208 94.190 et seq. Ch. 27 94.230 Ch. 14 14-52 94.270 Ch. 4 Ch. 14 94.500 et seq. 27-1 95.125 Ch. 24 95.405 Ch. 18 ch. 98 Ch. 16 98.500 Ch. 16, Art. II 105.300 et seq. 2-32 115.001 et seq. 2-76 ch. 135 et seq. Ch. 27 ch. 144 14-210 17-84 27-1 144.010, 144.020 14-206, 14-206.1 144.010-144.510 27-2 160.011 17-136 190.100(15)-(18) 17-17 ch. 195 17-61 17-81 17-84 195.005 et seq. 1-2 195.005-195.425 17-61 195.010 17-61 17-73 195.017 17-61 17-84 195.020 17-54 195.202 17-54 195.235 Ch. 17, Art. III, 
Div. 2 195.400 17-84 195.418 17-84 209.150 15-236 210.104 15-138 ch. 211 3-4 211.031 17-23 213.040 Ch. 13, Art. IV 213.045 13-103 213.050 13-104 213.075 13-105 ch. 215 17-136 17-137 215.201 17-136 215.252 17-136 17-137 215.465 17-23 226.500 et seq. Ch. 22 250.010 et seq. Ch. 21 253.545 7.6-4 260.200 et seq. Ch. 23 260.220 Ch. 23 260.350 et seq. Ch. 23 260.500-260.550 1-2 261.010 et seq. Ch. 5 269.010 et seq. Ch. 5 273.010 et seq. Ch. 5 273.040 et seq. Ch. 5 287.010 et seq. 23-24 ch. 293 Ch. 11 ch. 300 Ch. 15 300.010 1-2 300.075 15-31-15-33 300.080 15-34 300.085 15-3 300.090 15-5 300.095 15-2 300.100 15-4 300.105 15-257 300.110 15-366 300.120 15-367 300.130 15-341 300.140 15-342 300.145 15-343 300.150 15-344 300.155 15-345 300.160 15-347 300.165 15-346 300.175 15-348 300.180 15-349 300.195 15-350 300.215 15-156 300.220 15-159 300.225 15-160 300.230 15-161 300.235 15-158 300.245 15-323 300.250 15-321, 15-322 300.255 15-226 300.260 15-227 300.265 15-228 300.270 15-235 300.275 15-229 300.280 15-234 300.285 15-232 300.290 15-230 300.300 15-122 300.305 15-123 300.310 15-209 300.315 15-208 300.320 15-207 300.330 15-127 300.335 15-126 300.340 15-261 300.345 15-131 300.347 15-444, 15-445 300.350 15-15 300.370 15-386 300.375 15-387 300.380 15-390 300.385 15-391 300.390 15-388 300.395 15-389 300.405 15-392 300.410 15-394 300.415 15-279 300.420 et seq. 15-273 300.435 15-264 300.440 15-266 300.450 15-272 300.455 15-267 300.460 15-270 300.555 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. II, 
Div. 2 300.565 15-52 300.570 15-53 ch. 301 Ch. 15 301.010 15-6 15-137, 15-138 301.130(7), (8) 15-14 301.140 15-14 301.143 15-283 301.196 15-412 301.197 15-412 301.218 15-419 301.320 15-77 301.560 15-419 ch. 302 Ch. 15 302.010 15-237 302.010-302.014 15-10 302.015 15-8 15-10 302.016-302.019 15-10 302.020 15-6 15-10 302.021-302.129 15-6 15-10 302.130 15-10 15-14 302.131-302.172 15-10 302.173 15-6 15-10 302.174-301.219 15-10 302.177 17-206 302.181 17-206 302.220 15-10 15-13 302.221-302.259 15-10 302.260 15-10, 15-11 302.302 15-138 15-239 302.7000 15-114 chs. 303, 304 Ch. 15 303.026 15-16 303.160 15-16 304.010 Ch. 15, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 15-111 304.011 15-187 304.014, 304.015 15-119 304.016 15-119 15-124 304.017 15-119 15-121 304.018 15-119 304.019 15-119 15-162 304.020-304.026 15-119 304.050 15-74, 15-75 15-258 304.050(3) 15-259 304.080 15-236 304.120 Ch. 15 304.155 Ch. 15, Art. X 304.155-304.158 15-418 304.156 15-417(e) 304.157 Ch. 15, Art. X 304.281 15-345 304.301 15-345 304.351 15-233 304.570 Ch. 15 304.580 17-17 ch. 306 15-116 ch. 307 Ch. 15 15-116 307.110 15-92 307.165 15-137 307.170 15-72 307.171 15-78 307.173 15-73 307.175 1-2 15-257 307.180 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. XI 307.183 15-456 307.185 15-455 307.350 15-14 311.010 et seq. Ch. 3 Ch. 3, Art. II 3-50 311.020 1-2 3-3 311.030 1-2 311.060(1) 3-43 311.080 3-44 311.097 1-2 3-55 311.100 1-2 311.180-311.199 3-52 311.200 Ch. 3 3-51, 3-52 311.200(2) 1-2 311.215 3-57 311.220 Ch. 3, Art. II, 
Div. 2 3-52 311.220(1) 3-55 311.280 3-200 311.290 3-52 3-71 311.298 3-71 311.300 3-77 311.310 3-2 311.320 3-4 311.330 3-72 311.470 3-6 312.010 1-2 312.010 et seq. Ch. 3 312.020 3-101 312.300 3-104 312.310 3-108 312.390 3-104 312.400 3-2 312.405 3-4 312.420 3-105 312.430 3-103 312.440 3-106 312.460 3-106 319.010 et seq. Ch. 7 Ch. 24 320.110 17-24 322.010 et seq. Ch. 5 Ch. 5, Art. II 322.040 5-40 330.010 14-601 331.010 14-601 334.500 14-601 334.700-334.725 14-601 336.010 14-601 ch. 341 7-41 386.020 17-192 393.275 14-256 393.275(2) 14-231 407.934 17-203 413.005 et seq. Ch. 30 429.101-429.360 7-134 441.500 et seq. Ch. 7 Ch. 7, Art. VI Ch. 13 ch. 444 Ch. 11 455.010-455.090 17-14 455.010 17-16 ch. 476 et seq. Ch. 16 476.016 Ch. 16 ch. 479 Ch. 16 479.120 Ch. 16, Art. V 479.230 16-27 ch. 494 Ch. 16 ch. 536 24-83 536.100-536.140 7-133 536.130 7-133 536.150 7-133 542.261 17-70 544.216 Ch. 20 ch. 556 et seq. Ch. 17 556.061 1-2 556.061(17) 1-2 562.016 17-71 563.031 17-54 564.011 17-1 564.016 17-1 564.441, 564.442 15-114 564.444 15-114 ch. 566 17-136 17-137 17-138 566.010 et seq. Ch. 17, Art. V 566.130 17-131 567.010 et seq. Ch. 17, Art. V 567.080 17-135 568.020 17-136 17-137 17-138 568.045 17-136 17-137 17-138 568.080 17-136 17-137 17-138 568.090 17-136 17-137 17-138 568.100 17-185 571.010 17-70 571.030(12) 17-54 571.030(13) 17-54 571.094 2-311(a) 571.101-571.121 17-54 17-55 571.107 17-54 571.111 17-54 571.111(2) 17-54 ch. 573 Ch. 17, Art. VII 573.010(4)(b)a-c 17-180 573.010(27) 17-180 573.023 17-136 17-137 17-138 573.025 17-136 17-137 17-138 573.035 17-136 17-137 573.037 17-136 17-137 573.040 17-136 17-137 17-138 573.200 17-136 17-137 17-138 573.205 17-136 17-137 17-138 574.075 Ch. 3 575.060 15-416(c)(2) 575.080 15-415 576.010 et seq. Ch. 2 ch. 577 Ch. 17, Art. III 577.001 3-3 577.010 15-113 15-117 577.012 15-114 577.020 15-114 15-116 577.020-577.041 15-114 15-116 577.080 Ch. 15, Art. X 578.005 et seq. Ch. 5 578.012 5-9 Ch. 579 17-24 17-61 17-81 17-84 579.150 17-23 589.400-589.425 17-139 590.030-590.050 17-54 590.140 16-5 590.750 17-54 ch. 600 Ch. 16, Art. IV 610.010-610.025 Ch. 2, Art. V 2-298 610.021 2-294 2-296 610.026 Ch. 2, Art. V 2-297, 2-298 610.027, 610.028 Ch. 2, Art. V 2-298 ch. 700 Ch. 28 700.010 15-73 701.010 et seq. Ch. 7 701.025 et seq. Ch. 21  
