AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Chapter 100
GENERAL PROVISIONS
AO:1

ARTICLE I
General Code Provisions
Section 100.010. Citation of Code — Scope [CC 1970 §1-1]
This Code shall be known and may be cited as the "Code of Ordinances, City
of Clayton, Missouri" or simply as "the Code of Ordinances" or "the Code"
and shall be treated and considered as a new and comprehensive original
ordinance which shall completely supersede all general ordinances passed
by the Board of Aldermen prior to the effective date of this Code, except
such as are by reference thereto expressly saved from repeal or continued
in force and effect for any purpose.
Section 100.020. Definitions and Rules of Construction1 [CC 1970
§1-2]
A. In the construction of this Code of Ordinances and of all ordinances, the
following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless
it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section or ordinance or
unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Board of Aldermen or
unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
BOARD OF ALDERMEN, BOARD — Whenever the term "Board of
Aldermen" or "Board" is used, unless the context requires otherwise,
said terms shall be construed to refer to the Board of Aldermen of the
City of Clayton.
CITY — The words "the City" shall mean the City of Clayton in the State
of Missouri and shall include the appropriate officers and employees
thereof when any action by "the City" is indicated.
CODE 1947 — Citations to the 1947 Code of Ordinances shall be
deemed to include all amendments to the Sections thereof to which
such citations are appended herein.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CODE — The term "Code of Ordinances" or
"Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Clayton, Missouri.
COMPUTATION OF TIME — The time within which an act is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and
if the last day be Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded.
COUNTY — The words "the County" shall mean St. Louis County in the
State of Missouri.
DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY — Whenever a provision appears
requiring the head of a department of the City to do some act or
make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head
of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates
to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless
the terms of the provision or Section designates otherwise. All such
1. State Law References—Definitions of many terms defined in this Section, §§1.020—1.050,
RSMo.
Section
100.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.020
AO:3
delegations of authority shall be certified in writing to the City Manager
at the time made and likewise with recisions thereof.
GENDER — When any subject matter, party or person is described or
referred to by words importing the masculine, females as well as males,
and associations and bodies corporate as well as individuals, shall be
deemed to be included.
JOINT AUTHORITY — Words importing joint authority to three (3) or
more persons shall be construed as authority to a majority of such
persons.
KEEPER, PROPRIETOR — Includes persons, firms, associations,
corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or
through a servant, agent or employee.
NON-TECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL WORDS — Words and phrases
shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of
the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as
may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be
construed and understood according to such meaning.
NUMBER — When any subject matter, party or person is described
or referred to by words importing the singular number, the plural and
separate matters and persons and bodies corporate shall be deemed to
be included.
OATH — Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath and in such cases the words
"swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed".
OFFICERS — Reference to any officer by title, such as "Mayor", "City
Manager", etc., shall be deemed to refer to such officers of the City of
Clayton, Missouri.
OR, AND — Or may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the
sense requires it.
OWNER — The word "owner", applied to a building or land, shall
include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or
tenant by the entirety of the whole or a part of such building or land.
PERSON — Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization and any other group acting as a unit as well as individuals.
It shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or
other representative appointed according to law. Whenever the word
"person" is used in any Section of this Code of Ordinances prescribing
a penalty or fine, it shall include agents and employees thereof; as
to partnerships or associations, the word shall include the partners,
members, agents and employees thereof and as to corporations, the
word shall include the officers, members, agents and employees thereof
who are responsible for any violation of such Section, as well as the
principal.
Section
100.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
100.020
AO:4
Section 100.030. Interpretation of Code [CC 1970 §1-3]
In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall
be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes money, goods, chattels, things in
action and evidences of debt.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING — The words "preceding" and "following"
shall mean next before and next after, respectively.
PREMISES — Whenever the word "premises" is used, it shall mean
place or places.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY — The terms "real property" or "premises" or "real
estate" or "lands" shall be deemed to be co-extensive with lands,
tenements and hereditaments.
RESIDENCE — The place adopted by a person as his/her place of
habitation and to which, whenever he/she is absent, he/she has the
intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at
another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his/her
residence.
SIDEWALK — The portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
SIGNATURE — Where the written signature of any person is required,
the proper handwriting of such person or his/her mark shall be
intended.
STATE — The words "the State" shall mean the State of Missouri.
STREET — Includes any public way, highway, street, avenue, boulevard,
parkway, alley or other public thoroughfare and each of such words
shall include every other of them.
TENANT, OCCUPANT — The word "tenant" or "occupant", applied to a
building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a
part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
TENSE — Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING AND WRITING WORD FOR WORD — Includes
printing, lithographing, or other mode of representing words and
letters, but in all cases where the signature of any person is required,
the proper handwriting of the person, or his/her mark, is intended.
B. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this
Code of Ordinances shall be liberally construed in order that the true
intent and meaning of the Board of Aldermen may be fully
accomplished.
Section
100.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.030
AO:5
provision of this Code imposes restrictions upon the subject matter differing
from a general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the
greater restriction shall be deemed to be controlling.
Section 100.040. Catchlines of Sections [CC 1970 §1-4]
The catchlines of the several Sections of this codification printed in boldface
type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the
Section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such Sections, nor
as any part of the Section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such Sections, including the catchlines, are amended
or re-enacted.
Section 100.050. Effect of Repeal of Ordinance [CC 1970 §1-5; Ord.
No. 6534, 5-8-2018]
Section 100.060. Severability of Code [CC 1970 §1-6]
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Board of Aldermen that
the Sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code
are severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or Section
of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by
the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses,
sentences, paragraphs and Sections of this Code, since the same would
have been enacted by the Board of Aldermen without the incorporation in
this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph or Section.
Section 100.070. Amendments To Code [CC 1970 §1-7]
A. No offense committed and no fine, penalty or forfeiture incurred, or
prosecution commenced or pending previous to or at the time when any
statute, ordinance or provision of this Code is repealed or amended,
shall be affected by the repeal or amendment, but the trial and
punishment of all such offenses, and the recovery of the fines, penalties
or forfeitures shall be had, in all respects, as if the provision had not
been repealed or amended, except that all such proceedings shall be
conducted according to existing procedural laws.
B. When any ordinance repealing another ordinance or a provision of this
Code shall itself be repealed, such repeal shall not constitute a revival
of such other ordinance or provision, unless it is expressly so provided.
A. All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which
amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances may be
numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and
printed for inclusion therein or in the case of repealed Chapters,
Sections and Subsections or any part thereof by subsequent
ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by
omission from reprinted pages affected thereby and the subsequent
Section
100.030
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
100.070
AO:6
Section 100.080. Official Time [CC 1970 §§1-16—1-18; CC 1947
§§12-15—12-17]
Section 100.090. Administrative Copies To Be Kept By City Clerk
[CC 1970 §1-15]
ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal,
shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until
such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances
numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by
the Board of Aldermen.
B. Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the Section
amended.
C. All Sections, Articles, Chapters or other provisions of this Code desired
to be repealed should be specifically repealed by Section number,
Article number, Chapter or other number, as the case may be.
A. Established. United States standard time for the zone in which the City
is located shall be the official time of the City, but if that time is not later
than the mean astronomical time of the ninetieth degree (90°) of
longitude west from Greenwich, the official time of the City shall be
advanced one (1) hour from 2:00 A.M. on the last Sunday in April until
2:00 A.M. on the last Sunday in October in each year.
B. References To Time. When reference is made to any time without
qualification in any ordinance, resolution or order heretofore passed or
which may be passed hereafter by the Board of Aldermen or in any
official notice, advertisement or document of the City or in any contract
to which the City is a party, it shall be understood to refer to the official
time of the City as herein described. When the words "daylight-saving
time" are used, the reference shall be to the advanced time herein
prescribed as the official time from the last Sunday in April until the last
Sunday in October.
C. Time Prescriptions To Be Of Official Time. In all ordinances, resolutions
or orders of the Board of Aldermen and in all official notices,
advertisements or documents of the City and in all contracts to which
the City is a party relating to the time of performance of any act by any
officer or department of the City or relating to the time within which
any rights shall accrue or determine or which any act shall or shall not
be performed by any person, it shall be understood and intended that
the time shall be the official time of the City as herein prescribed.
A. The City Clerk shall keep three (3) copies of this Code of Ordinances.
These copies shall be so preserved by the City Clerk that all
amendments to, or general ordinances affecting, such codification shall
be shown by appropriate notes. The purpose of this provision is to
insure the maintenance in the office of the City Clerk of three (3) master
Section
100.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.090
AO:7
copies of the codification in which shall be shown all changes which
have taken place since the publication thereof.
B. In determining whether any ordinances hereafter passed or any part
thereof shall be noted in the copies of the codification so preserved by
the City Clerk and in determining the form of any such note and its
location, if any doubt arises, the City Clerk shall be guided by the advice
of the City Attorney or his/her assistants.
Section
100.090
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
100.090
AO:8
ARTICLE II
City Seal
Section 100.100. Official City Seal [CC 1970 §2-1; CC 1947 §2-56]
The official Seal of the City shall be a metallic disc not more than two and
one-half (2½) inches in diameter with the words "City of Clayton, St. Louis
County, Missouri" engraved in the border and the word "Seal" engraved
across the center.
Section
100.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.100
AO:9

ARTICLE III
Violations
Section 100.110. Violations — General Penalty — Limits —
Continuing Violations — Exceptions2 [CC 1970 §1-8; Ord. No. 5464
§1, 10-13-1998]
Section 100.120. Violations — Penalty Included in Reference To Any
Portion of The Code [CC 1970 §1-9; Ord. No. 1281 §1-10, 5-13-1947]
Reference to any Section of this Code shall be understood to refer to
the penalty Section relating thereto, including Section 100.110, unless
otherwise expressly provided therein.
Section 100.130. Violations — Amendment of Section Subject To
Penalty [CC 1970 §1-10]
In case of the amendment of any Section of this Code of Ordinances or
of any ordinance containing provisions for which a penalty is provided in
another Section thereof, the penalty so provided in such other Section shall
be held to relate and apply to the Section so amended, whether re-enacted
in the amendatory ordinance or not, unless otherwise specifically provided
therein.
Section 100.140. Violations — Offenses Having Two Penalties [CC
1970 §1-11]
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable by different clauses
or Sections of this Code or of any ordinance now or hereafter becoming
a law, the City, in a prosecution based thereunder, may elect under which
A. Whenever in any Section of this Code of Ordinances or in any ordinance
the doing of any act is required or is prohibited or is declared to be
unlawful or a misdemeanor and no specific fine or penalty is provided
for a violation thereof, any person who shall be convicted of a violation
of any such provision of this codification or of any such ordinance shall,
for each offense, be fined not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or be punished by imprisonment in jail not to exceed ninety
(90) days or be punished by both fine and imprisonment.
B. Each days violation of or failure, refusal or neglect to comply with any
provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
C. This Section shall not apply to any Section of this Code or to any
ordinance in which there is expressly provided a penalty for its violation
or for any offense the penalty for the violation of which is fixed by
Statute.
2. Cross Reference—Municipal court, ch. 130.
Section
100.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.140
AO:11
clause or Section to proceed; but not more than one (1) recovery shall be
had against the same person for the same offense.
Section 100.150. Violations — Disposition of Fines and Costs [CC
1970 §1-13]
All fines and costs collected for the violation of any provision of this Code
shall be turned into the City Treasury to the credit of the General Fund.
Section 100.160. Code of Ordinances As Evidence [CC 1970 §1-14]
Any printed copy of this Code of Ordinances containing a printed certificate
of the City Clerk as to the correctness of such codification shall be received
in evidence in any court for the purpose of proving the ordinances therein
contained, the same and for the same purpose as the original ordinances,
minutes or journals would be received.
Section
100.140
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
100.160
AO:12
ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Code Provisions
Section 100.170. Equitable Relief To Aid in Enforcement of Code
Provisions [CC 1970 §1-21; Ord. No. 5600 §1, 12-12-2000]
In addition to any other penalties established for violations of any of the
ordinances of the City and/or any provisions or Sections of this Code, the
City Manager and/or officials of the City responsible for enforcement of
any such ordinance or Code Section may apply to a court of competent
jurisdiction for such legal or equitable relief as may be necessary to enforce
compliance with the provisions of this Code and any other ordinances
adopted by the City. In such action the court may grant such legal or
equitable relief, including, but not limited to, mandatory or prohibitory
injunctive relief, as the facts may warrant.
Section 100.180. Restrictions on Delinquent Applicants. [Ord. No.
6330 §1, 7-22-2014]
A. For the purposes of this Section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
APPLICANT — An individual or a corporation, firm, partnership, joint
venture, association, organization or entity of any kind, including any
shareholder, owner, officer, partner, joint venturer or member of such
entity or any other person holding an ownership interest in such entity,
requesting any City permit, license, franchise or other approval.
RELATED PERSON OR ENTITY —
RELEVANT LAW —
A firm, partnership, joint venture, association, organization or
entity of any kind in which the applicant holds any stock, title, or
other ownership interest of at least twenty percent (20%);
1.
A firm, partnership, joint venture, association, organization or
entity of any kind which holds any stock, title, or other ownership
interest in the applicant of at least twenty percent (20%); or
2.
An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
organization or entity of any kind, whose affairs the applicant has
the legal or practical ability to direct, either directly or indirectly,
whether by contractual agreement, majority ownership interest,
any lessor ownership interest, familial relationship or in any other
manner.
3.
Any statute or regulation of the United States or the State of
Missouri;
1.
Any ordinance or Code Section of the City, or any rule, regulation,
notice, condition, term or order promulgated by any officer or
agency of the City under duly vested authority of the City; or
2.
Section
100.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.180
AO:13
Any final judgment or order of any court of competent jurisdiction,
when a statute, ordinance, Code Section, rule, regulation, notice,
condition, term, order or judgment at issue regulates conduct or
conditions germane to the issuance of the requested permit,
license, franchise or other approval as provided by the applicable
ordinance or Code Section of the City.
3.
B. In enforcing or administering the ordinances of the City, no permit,
license, franchise or approval of any kind shall be granted to any
applicant if the applicant or a related person or entity is charged with or
in violation of any relevant law until such time as the applicant or the
related person or entity resolves the pending charge or comes into
compliance with the relevant law.
C. In acting on any new application or on any reapplication by an applicant
whose prior permit, license, franchise or other approval has been
denied, suspended, revoked or forfeited, the reviewing or enforcement
officer may consider past violations of relevant law by the applicant or a
related person or entity in considering whether to issue the permit,
license, franchise or approval requested by the applicant. Taking into
account the nature and character of the permit, license, franchise or
other requested approval in question and the need for the City to rely
on representations and/or future conduct by the applicant when acting
pursuant to the permit, license, franchise or other requested approval
by the City, the reviewing or enforcement officer may deny the
application or reapplication if the past violations of relevant law are
reasonably recent in time and of such character or magnitude as to
reasonably call into question the fitness of the applicant or the City's
ability to rely on representations and/or future conduct by the
applicant.
D. If a permit, license, franchise or other approval has been denied,
suspended, revoked or forfeited, the applicant may not submit a new
application for one (1) year from the date of the denial, suspension,
revocation or forfeiture unless the reviewing or enforcement officer
finds that substantial new facts or a change in circumstances warrant
reconsideration; provided, however, that if the ordinances governing
the particular permit, license, franchise or other approval in question
prescribe a different disqualification period, those ordinances shall
govern.
E. Any aggrieved applicant may appeal the decision of the reviewing or
enforcement officer to the City Manager within five (5) business days of
said decision. The City Manager may reverse or modify the decision of
the reviewing or enforcement officer, provided the applicant:
1. Establishes an inability to effect compliance with any relevant law
because of the ownership structure of any pertinent related entity,
if the denial in question was due to conduct or circumstances of a
related person or entity; or
Section
100.180
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
100.180
AO:14
Section 100.190. Reimbursement Of City Costs For Processing
Applications. [Ord. No. 6530, 4-10-2018]
2. Establishes that the applicant has not been charged with, or is or, if
applicable, was not in violation of any relevant law.
A. Definitions. For purposes of this Section the following terms shall have
the meanings given in the following definitions.
APPLICANT — Any person or entity who: (a) applies for any license,
permit, regulatory approval or other authorization required by the
ordinances of the City of Clayton; or (b) applies for, seeks or proposes
any economic development or redevelopment incentive, public-private
partnership, or other grant or benefit of any sort related to a proposed
development within the City, or (c) applies for or proposes adoption
of any new ordinance or amendment to any existing ordinance for the
purpose of enabling a course of conduct desired by the applicant.
COSTS — All charges incurred or likely to be incurred by the City
for services rendered by any person or organization other than a City
employee in order to assist the City in acting upon any request of
an Applicant. Such services may, include, but are not limited to,
accounting, architectural, communications services, design,
engineering, environmental, financial, landscaping, land use, legal,
parking, planning, public engagement, public finance, technical code
assessment, inspection or enforcement, traffic, zoning and any other
field of expertise, professional judgment or specialized knowledge
which the City, in its sole judgment, seeks in order to assist in
considering the request of an Applicant.
OVERHEAD — Employee time, resources and expenses for things such
as (but not limited to) facilities and/or equipment rental, stenography,
mailing, security, publication, etc., expended or incurred by the City in
the course of acting on the request of an Applicant.
B. It is the policy of the City of Clayton that an Applicant should bear and
reimburse to the City in a timely manner any and all Costs and
Overhead incurred by the City to assess, process, evaluate, act upon,
effectuate and, if necessary, litigate issues associated with the request
of an Applicant.
C. If the City Manager determines that any fee, charge or payment
previously established by law for submitting or processing an
application is insufficient to adequately reimburse the City for
Overhead and Costs associated with the request of an Applicant, or if
there is no pre-established fee applicable to the request, the City
Manager may determine, and from time to time increase or decrease as
circumstances may warrant, the amount and terms of an escrow fund to
be deposited with the City by the Applicant to fully reimburse the City
for Costs and Overhead incurred or likely to be incurred in considering
the request of an Applicant.
Section
100.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.190
AO:15
D. The City Manager shall notify the Applicant, in writing, of the amount
and terms of the required escrow fund or of any change in the required
amount of a previously established fund. The Applicant shall have ten
(10) days to make the required deposit and fund the escrow as directed
by the City Manager.
E. The escrow arrangements shall include a process for periodic
reimbursement to the City for Costs and Overhead, notice of proposed
reimbursement and opportunity for the Applicant to dispute the amount
of reimbursement, and closure of the fund and return of unused funds
to the Applicant.
F. If an Applicant is aggrieved by a determination of the City Manager as
to initial establishment or terms of an escrow fund or one (1) or more
proposed expenditures from an established fund the Applicant may
appeal to the Board of Aldermen to review the City Manager's decision.
Any such appeal must be filed with the City Clerk, in writing, within ten
(10) days of the City Manager's decision and shall set forth all reasons
known to the Applicant as to wherein and why the decision of the City
Manager is in error. The Board of Aldermen may consider the appeal in
such manner as it deems appropriate and may affirm, modify or reverse
the decision appealed from. If an Applicant is aggrieved by a decision of
the Board of Aldermen the Applicant must submit a written request for
reconsideration to the City Clerk within five (5) days of the date of the
Board's decision. An Applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Board of
Aldermen on reconsideration may seek review of that decision in the
Circuit Court of St. Louis County within fifteen (15) days of the Board's
decision pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 536, RSMo.
G. If an Applicant fails to comply with the determination of the City
Manager as to the establishment of an escrow fund or subsequent
additions thereto in a timely manner, or if an Applicant appeals the City
Manager's decision as to establishment or additional deposits to the
Board of Aldermen, the City may suspend processing and consideration
of the Applicant's request until the Applicant complies and/or the
appeal is resolved. If there is a deadline for processing Applicant's
request or application pursuant to the City's ordinances (such as, for
instance, the time limit for Plan Commission action on conditional use
permit applications pursuant to Section 405.820(C) of this Code of
Ordinances) any such the time limit or deadline shall automatically be
extended for so long as the Applicant is not in compliance or an appeal
is pending.
Section
100.190
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
100.190
AO:16
Chapter 105
MAYOR AND BOARD OF ALDERMEN
Charter References — Board of aldermen, art. II; mayor, art. II §2.
Section
100.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.190
AO:17

ARTICLE I
Mayor and Board of Aldermen — Generally
Section 105.010. Mayor — Conservator of The Peace [CC 1970
§2-21; CC 1947 §2-12]
The Mayor shall be a conservator of the peace. He/she shall be active and
vigilant in enforcing all laws and ordinances for the government of the City
and may call on every male inhabitant of the City over eighteen (18) years
of age and under fifty (50) years of age to aid in enforcing the laws.
Section 105.020. Mayor — Administering Oaths [CC 1970 §2-22; CC
1947 §2-20]
The Mayor shall have power to administer oaths to witnesses to any matter
under consideration in which the interest of the City is involved.
Section 105.030. Mayor — Additional Powers As Prescribed By Law
[CC 1970 §2-23; CC 1947 §2-21]
The Mayor shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as
may be provided by the Charter, laws of the State and by ordinance.
Section 105.040. Committees [CC 1970 §2-39; CC 1947 §2-37]
The Mayor or the Mayor Pro Tempore in the absence of the Mayor may
create standing committees and special committees and make
appointments thereto, which appointments shall be subject to the approval
of a majority of the members of the Board, which standing or special
committees may hold hearings upon any matter pending before the Board.
Section 105.050. Appointive Boards and Commissions —
Appointment, Term of Office, Removal, Non-Remunerative Position
[CC 1970 §2-41; Ord. No. 5941 §1, 8-8-2006]
Section 105.060. Remuneration [CC 1970 §2-42; Ord. No. 3823 §1,
6-22-1976; Ord. No. 5605 §1, 12-19-2000]
Subject to the provisions of Section 4, Article II of the Charter of the City of
Clayton, each elected official shall receive remuneration as set by ordinance
A. Appointment to all boards and commissions of the City shall be made by
the Mayor, with the approval of the Board of Aldermen, in accord with
the Charter, and removal shall be made, for cause, in like manner.
Service on such boards shall be without compensation.
B. The terms of office for all members of boards and commissions who are
appointed for a fixed term, other than the Clayton Sports, Recreation
and Wellness Commission (an independent joint entity of which the City
is a member), shall begin on July first (1st) and end on June thirtieth
(30th) of the year in which said term concludes.
Section
105.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
105.060
AO:19
from time to time. The Board of Aldermen may by ordinance alter the
compensation of the Mayor and other Aldermen, but such change shall not
apply during the terms they are serving at the time the change is adopted.
Section
105.060
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
105.060
AO:20
ARTICLE II
Board of Aldermen Meetings
Section 105.070. Regular Meetings — Days and Time3 [CC 1970
§2-24; CC 1947 §2-24; Ord. No. 5371 §1, 9-9-1997]
The Board of Aldermen shall meet regularly, but not less frequently than
twice each month. All regular meetings shall be open to the public and
notice of all meetings shall be given to the public in the manner prescribed
by applicable Missouri law and rules prescribed by the Board.
Section 105.080. Special Meetings — Calling — Notice [CC 1970
§2-26; CC 1947 §2-25]
Special meetings of the Board of Aldermen may be called by motion of
the Board at any meeting, by the Mayor or the Mayor Pro Tempore in the
absence of the Mayor or in the absence of the Mayor and the Mayor Pro
Tempore, the next senior member of the Board then present in the City or
by the City Clerk at the request, in writing, of any three (3) members of the
Board. Written notices designating the time and place of a special meeting
shall be given in person or by mail. If the notice is given in person, it shall
be given at least twenty-four (24) hours before the time set for the meeting.
If the notice is given by mail, it shall be deposited in the mail at least fortyeight
(48) hours before the time set for the meeting. Notice of a special
meeting may be waived by unanimous consent of all members of the Board.
Section 105.090. Special Meetings — Matters Which May Be
Considered — Emergency Meetings [CC 1970 §2-27; CC 1947 §2-25]
At a special meeting the Board of Aldermen may consider and take action
upon any business which it could consider and take action upon at a regular
meeting. Emergency meetings may be called at the discretion of the Mayor
or, in the absence of the Mayor, by any member of the Board. Emergencies
are deemed to mean fire, flood, tornado, enemy attack or civil disorder.
Section 105.100. Board Members Roll Call Attendance [CC 1970
§2-29; CC 1947 §2-26]
Failure of a member who is present to answer to the roll call shall not
prevent the Clerk from recording his/her presence in counting for a
quorum. While the Board is in session, no member shall leave the room
without permission of the Presiding Officer.
Section 105.110. Presiding Officer in Absence of Mayor and Mayor
Pro Tempore [CC 1970 §2-30; CC 1947 §2-27]
In the absence of both the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tempore, the member
of the Board next in seniority, who is present, shall preside until either the
Mayor or the Mayor Pro Tempore arrives.
3. Charter Reference—Required number of meetings, art. II §7.
Section
105.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
105.120
AO:21
Section 105.120. Recording "Present But Not Voting" Members [CC
1970 §2-31; CC 1947 §2-29]
Any Alderman who is present but does not vote at any roll call shall be
recorded in the journal as "present but not voting".
Section 105.130. Filing Dissent Statement By Absent Members [CC
1970 §2-32; CC 1947 §2-31]
Any absent member of the Board of Aldermen shall have the right to file a
written statement with the City Clerk expressing his/her dissent from any
action taken by the Board when he/she was absent. Such dissent, if filed
not later than the next regular meeting following the meeting at which the
action was taken, shall be entered in the journal.
Section 105.140. Robert's Rules of Order Govern — Appealing
Ruling of Presiding Officer [CC 1970 §2-33; CC 1947 §2-28]
Except as otherwise provided by the rules of the Board of Aldermen, the
proceedings of the Board shall be governed by the latest revised edition of
Robert's Rules of Order. Any member may appeal to the Board on a ruling
of the Presiding Officer by making a motion to override the ruling of the
Chairman. If the motion is seconded, the member making the motion may
briefly state his/her position and the Chairman may briefly explain his/her
ruling. The Chairman shall ask for a roll call on the motion to override the
ruling of the Chairman. If a majority of the members of the Board who are
present vote in favor of the motion, the Chairman is overruled, otherwise
the ruling is sustained.
Section 105.150. Preparation of Agenda [CC 1970 §2-35; CC 1947
§2-33]
The City Clerk shall prepare an agenda of matters to be presented to the
Board at each meeting. Such agenda shall include any matters relevant to
the administration of the City on which the City Manager or any member
desires a report or discussion.
Section 105.160. Legislative Enactment — Preparation or Certifying
of Bills By City Attorney — Numbering4 [CC 1970 §2-36; CC 1947
§2-34]
Bills for proposed ordinances shall be prepared by the City Attorney or shall
be submitted to him/her for certification as to form. Bills shall be numbered
in the order of their introduction.
Section 105.170. Legislative Enactment — Bill Introduction By
Board Members — Furnishing Copies — Reading — Motion To
Consider Amendments or For Final Passage — Posting Copies [CC
1970 §2-37; CC 1947 §2-35]
4. Charter Reference—See art. II §8.
Section
105.120
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
105.170
AO:22
A. Any member of the Board may introduce a bill by securing recognition
from the Chairman and stating that he/she desires to introduce Bill No.
__________. If copies of the bill have not previously been supplied to
members, each member shall be given a copy at the time the bill is
introduced. The bill shall be read in full if two (2) members of the Board
so request.
B. The member introducing a bill may move that the bill be considered for
possible amendments and be placed on the calendar for consideration
on final passage at the next meeting of the Board, with the exception of
amendments in substance as provided in Section 8, Article II of the
Charter, or he/she may move that the bill be considered for final
passage immediately.
Section
105.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
105.170
AO:23
Chapter 110
CITY OFFICIALS
Section
105.170
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
105.170
AO:24
ARTICLE I
City Manager5
Section 110.010. City Manager — Communicating Appointments To
Board — Supervising City Affairs — Enforcing Laws [CC 1970 §2-2;
CC 1947 §2-16]
The City Manager shall communicate to the Board of Aldermen his/her
appointments of officers of department head level. He/she shall exercise a
general supervision over all the officers and affairs of the City and shall take
care that there is compliance with the ordinances of the City and the laws
of the State relating thereto.
Section 110.020. City Manager — Dealing With Subordinate
Officers [CC 1970 §2-3; CC 1947 §2-17]
The City Manager shall cause all subordinate officers to be dealt with
promptly for any neglect or violation of duty and he/she shall have power, as
often as he/she may deem it necessary, to require any such officer of the City
to exhibit his/her accounts or other papers or records and to make reports
to the Board of Aldermen, in writing, touching any matter relating to his/her
office.
5. Charter Reference—See art. III.
Section
110.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.020
AO:25

ARTICLE II
City Clerk6
Section 110.030. Duties Generally [CC 1970 §2-52; CC 1947
§§2-43—2-44]
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to attend the meetings of the Board
of Aldermen; to keep regular minutes of its proceedings and to record
the same and all ordinances which may become laws and all resolutions
passed by the Board in the journal. He/she shall have the custody of the
City Seal, the original rolls of ordinances and resolutions passed by the
Board of Aldermen, the public records of the City and all such other papers,
records and documents as may be entrusted to his/her care and shall safely
and properly keep the same. He/she shall record the official bonds of all
City Officers, and all other bonds executed to the City and filed in his/her
office, in a book kept for that purpose. He/she shall affix the City Seal to
and countersign all such public instruments, documents and papers as are
required by law or ordinance to be attested with the Seal of the City. He/she
shall certify under his/her hand and the Seal of the City all such documents,
copies of papers in his/her office as may be required for the use of any
City Officer or private citizen. He/she shall furnish to the City Attorney or
Board of Aldermen any record, document or paper in his/her office, which
either may be called for or be used in any court; but for the same he/she
shall take and file a receipt. He/she shall, whenever required, furnish the
Board of Aldermen or any committee of the Board copies or abstracts of any
books, accounts, records, vouchers or documents in his/her office or any
information relating to the business of the City or of his/her office and he/
she shall at all times permit any member of the Board of Aldermen or the
City Manager to examine any books, papers or documents in his/her office.
Section 110.040. Administering Oaths or Affirmations [CC 1970
§2-54; CC 1947 §2-52]
The City Clerk shall have the power to administer oaths or affirmations to
parties or witnesses in any case before the Board; and all oaths required by
law, including oaths of office, may be administered by the City Clerk, except
oaths in the Municipal Court, which shall be administered by the Municipal
Judge or Clerk of the Municipal Court.
Section 110.050. Assistant City Clerk — Appointment [CC 1970
§2-55; Ord. No. 1708 §1, 4-16-1957]
There shall be an assistant City Clerk who shall be appointed by the Board
of Aldermen.
6. Charter Reference—See art. II §11.
Section
110.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.050
AO:27

ARTICLE III
Prosecuting Attorney7
Section 110.060. City Attorney — Designating Prosecutor [CC 1970
§2-5; CC 1947 §2-42.1]
The City Attorney shall designate one (1) assistant City Attorney as
prosecutor who shall represent the City and prosecute all cases in the
Municipal Court and perform such other services as requested by the City
Attorney.
7. Charter Reference—See art. V.
Section
110.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.060
AO:29

ARTICLE IV
Indemnification of City Personnel
Section 110.070. Indemnification Of City Personnel. [Ord. No. 6538,
6-12-2018]
A. In addition to any existing insurance coverage, the City will defend and
indemnify to the fullest extent allowed by law, subject to the limitations
of the Constitutions of the United States and the State of Missouri, in
any threatened, pending or completed civil claim, suit, action or
proceeding, other than an action by or in the right of the City, its past,
present or future City officials or officers, whether elected or appointed,
employees or agents of the City, in both their official and individual
capacities, against expenses, including attorney fees, judgments, fines
and amounts paid in settlement or compromise, actually and reasonably
incurred by him or her in connection with such civil action, suit or
proceeding arising from or related to the performance of their duties
with the City if he or she acted in good faith and in a manner he or she
reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the
City. The termination of any civil action, suit, or proceeding by
judgment, order, settlement or its equivalent shall not, of itself, create a
presumption that the person did not act in good faith and in a manner
which he or she reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best
interests of the City, except that no indemnification shall be made in
respect to any civil action, suit or proceeding which such person shall
have been finally adjudged by a judicial court of last resort to have
acted maliciously, or to have acted outside the course and scope of their
employment or services to the City.
B. Expenses incurred in defending a civil action, suit or proceeding may be
paid by the City in advance of the final disposition of the action, suit or
proceeding as authorized by the Board of Aldermen in the specific case
upon receipt of an undertaking on behalf of the City official or officer,
whether elected or appointed, employee or agent of the City, in both
their official and individual capacities, to repay the expense of such
action, suit or proceeding if it ultimately determined that the official or
officer was not entitled to reimbursement under the standards adopted
hereby.
C. Any person seeking defense and indemnification from the City shall, in
the event of any occurrence that might result in, and upon receipt of
notice of, a claim, suit, action or proceeding, promptly notify, in writing,
the City Manager of the City of the identity of the persons seeking
defense and indemnification and also reasonably obtainable
information with respect to the time, place and circumstance that give
rise to the occurrence which may or has resulted in a claim, suit, action
or proceeding, including the name and address of the injured party and
of any witnesses.
D. The persons seeking defense and indemnification shall cooperate with
the City in any investigation, defense, negotiation or compromise of any
Section
110.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.070
AO:31
claim, suit, action or proceeding, even if any of the allegations are
groundless, false or fraudulent, and the City may make such
investigation and settlement of any claim, suit, action or proceeding as
it deems expedient, but the City shall not be obligated to pay any claim
or judgment or expense, including attorney fees, unless and until the
benefits of any available insurance have been exhausted.
E. Any investigation, defense, negotiation or compromise covered by this
Section shall be conducted by the City Attorney or by special counsel,
appointed and approved by the Board of Aldermen.
F. The City may, in its discretion, purchase and maintain insurance on
behalf of the City or any person who is a past, present or future City
official or officer, whether elected or appointed, employee or agent of
the City, in their official and individual capacities, against claims or
causes of action for property damage or personal injuries including
death, caused while in the exercise of government or proprietary
functions.
G. The indemnification provided herein is intended for the personal
enjoyment, protection and welfare of the City, past, present or future
City officials or officers, whether elected or appointed, employee or
agents of the City, in their official and individual capacities, as herein
set forth and no such person can assign, sell, pledge, hypothecate or in
any other manner anticipate or dispose of such right to indemnification;
and no party recovering any such judgment, fines, amounts paid in
settlement or compromise of a claim, cause of action, or expense
including attorney fees, against a person eligible for indemnification
can sue the City to recover or enforce any claim of indemnification.
H. Nothing herein shall be construed to constitute a plan or policy of
insurance or self-insurance or any obligation to insure any person or to
broaden the liability of the City, past, present or future City officials or
officers, whether elected or appointed, employees or agents of the City,
in both their official and individual capacities, nor to abolish or waive
any defense at law or in equity which might otherwise be available to
the City, its past, present or future City officials or officers, whether
elected or appointed, employees or agents of the City, in both their
official and individual capacities.
I. The payment of such amounts as may be necessary for the benefit of
any person covered hereby are deemed necessary and proper public
purposes for which funds of this City may be expended.
Section
110.070
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
110.070
AO:32
Chapter 115
OPEN MEETINGS AND RECORDS POLICY
Section
110.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.070
AO:33

ARTICLE I
In General
Section 115.010. Definitions [Ord. No. 5799 §1(2-131), 11-25-2003;
Ord. No. 5838 §1(2-131(6-8)), 8-24-2004]
As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the
following terms mean:
CLOSED MEETING, CLOSED RECORD OR CLOSED VOTE — Any meeting,
record or vote closed to the public.
COPYING — If requested by a member of the public, copies provided
as detailed in the provisions of this Chapter, if duplication equipment is
available.
PUBLIC BUSINESS — All matters which relate in any way to the
performance of the City's functions or the conduct of its business.
PUBLIC GOVERNMENTAL BODY — Any legislative, administrative,
governmental entity created by the Constitution or Statutes of this State,
orders or ordinance of the City, judicial entities when operating in an
administrative capacity or by executive order, including:
PUBLIC MEETING — Any meeting of a public governmental body subject
to this Chapter at which any public business is discussed, decided or
public policy formulated, whether corporeal or by means of communication
equipment. The term "public meeting" shall not include an informal
gathering of members of a public governmental body for ministerial or
social purposes when there is no intent to avoid the purposes of this
Chapter, but the term shall include a public vote of all or a majority of the
members of a public governmental body, by electronic communication or
any other means, conducted in lieu of holding a public meeting with the
members of the public governmental body gathered at one (1) location in
order to conduct public business.
Any advisory committee or commission appointed by the Mayor or
Board of Aldermen;
1.
Any other legislative or administrative governmental deliberative body
under the direction of three (3) or more elected or appointed members
having rulemaking or quasi-judicial power;
2.
Any committee appointed by or at the direction of any of the entities
and which is authorized to report to any of the above named entities,
any advisory committee appointed by or at the direction of any of the
named entities for the specific purpose of recommending, directly to
the Mayor, Board of Aldermen or the City Manager, policy or policy
revisions or expenditures of public funds. The custodian of the records
of any public governmental body shall maintain a list of the policy
advisory committees described in this Subsection; and
3.
4. Any quasi-public governmental body.
Section
115.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.010
AO:35
PUBLIC RECORD — Any record, whether written or electronically stored,
retained by or of any public governmental body including any report, survey,
memorandum, or other document or study prepared and presented to the
public governmental body by a consultant or other professional service
paid for in whole or in part by public funds, including records created
or maintained by private contractors under an agreement with a public
governmental body or on behalf of a public governmental body. The term
"public record" shall not include any internal memorandum or letter
received or prepared by or on behalf of a member of a public governmental
body consisting of advice, opinions and recommendations in connection
with the deliberative decision-making process of said body, unless such
records are retained by the public governmental body or presented at a
public meeting. Any document or study prepared for a public governmental
body by a consultant or other professional service as described in this
Section shall be retained by the public governmental body in the same
manner as any other public record.
PUBLIC VOTE — Any vote cast, whether conducted in person, by telephone
or by any other electronic means, at any public meeting of any public
governmental body.
QUASI-PUBLIC GOVERNMENTAL BODY — Any person, corporation or
partnership organized or authorized to do business in this State pursuant
to the provisions of Chapters 352, 353 or 355, RSMo., or unincorporated
association which either:
Section 115.020. Meetings, Records and Votes To Be Public —
Exceptions [Ord. No. 5799 §1(2-132), 11-25-2003; Ord. No. 5838
§2(2-132 b, c, o, p—s)), 8-24-2004]
Has as its primary purpose to enter into contracts with public
governmental bodies or to engage primarily in activities carried out
pursuant to an agreement or agreements with public governmental
bodies; or
1.
Performs a public function, as evidenced by a statutorily based capacity,
to confer or otherwise advance, through approval, recommendation or
other means, the allocation or issuance of tax credits, tax abatement,
public debt, tax exempt debt, rights of eminent domain or the
contracting of lease-back agreements on structures whose annualized
payments commit public tax revenues; or any association that directly
accepts the appropriation of money from the City, but only to the extent
that a meeting, record or vote relates to such appropriation.
2.
A. All meetings, records and votes are open to the public, except that any
meeting, record, minutes or vote relating to one (1) or more of the
following matters, as well as other materials designated elsewhere in
this Chapter, shall be closed unless the public governmental body votes
to make them public:
1. Legal actions, causes of action or litigation involving a public
governmental body and any confidential or privileged
Section
115.010
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
115.020
AO:36
communications between a public governmental body or its
representatives and its attorneys. However, any minutes, vote or
settlement agreement relating to legal actions, causes of action
or litigation involving a public governmental body or any agent
or entity representing its interests or acting on its behalf or with
its authority, including any insurance company acting on behalf
of a public government body as its insured, shall be made public
upon final disposition of the matter voted upon or upon the signing
by the parties of the settlement agreement, unless, prior to final
disposition, the settlement agreement is ordered closed by a court
after a written finding that the adverse impact to a plaintiff or
plaintiffs to the action clearly outweighs the public policy
considerations of Section 610.111, RSMo., however, the amount
of any monies paid by, or on behalf of, the public governmental
body shall be disclosed; provided however, in matters involving
the exercise of the power of eminent domain, the vote shall be
announced or become public immediately following the action on
the motion to authorize institution of such a legal action. Legal
work product shall be considered a closed record.
2. Leasing, purchase or sale of real estate by a public governmental
body where public knowledge of the transaction might adversely
affect the legal consideration therefor. However, any minutes or
vote or public record approving a contract relating to the leasing,
purchase or sale of real estate by a public governmental body shall
be made public upon execution of the lease, purchase or sale of the
real estate.
3. Hiring, firing, disciplining or promoting of particular employees by
a public governmental body when personal information about the
employee is discussed or recorded. However, any vote on a final
decision, when taken by a public governmental body, to hire, fire,
promote or discipline an employee of a public governmental body
shall be made available with a record of how each member voted to
the public within seventy-two (72) hours of the close of the meeting
where such action occurs; provided however, that any employee so
affected shall be entitled to prompt notice of such decision during
the seventy-two (72) hour period before such decision is made
available to the public. As used herein, the term "personal
information" means information relating to the performance or
merit of individual employees.
4. Non-judicial mental or physical health proceedings involving
identifiable persons, including medical, psychiatric, psychological
or alcoholism or drug dependency diagnosis or treatment.
5. Testing and examination materials, before the test or examination
is given or, if it is to be given again, before so given again.
6. Welfare cases of identifiable individuals.
Section
115.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.020
AO:37
7. Preparation, including any discussions or work product, on behalf
of a public governmental body or its representatives for
negotiations with employee groups.
8. Software codes for electronic data processing and documentation
thereof.
9. Specifications for competitive bidding, until either the
specifications are officially approved by the public governmental
body or the specifications are published for bid.
10. Sealed bids and related documents, until the bids are opened; and
sealed proposals and related documents or any documents related
to a negotiated contract until a contract is executed or all proposals
are rejected.
11. Individually identifiable personnel records, performance ratings or
records pertaining to employees or applicants for employment,
except that this exemption shall not apply to the names, positions,
salaries and lengths of service of officers and employees of public
agencies once they are employed as such. It is the policy of the City
that no information relating to present or past employees other
than names, positions, salaries and lengths of service shall be
provided to any person or agency other than:
a. As specifically requested in writing by the employee in
question in accord with applicable provisions of the City's
personnel policies;
b. As may be required in response to a subpoena lawfully issued
by a court of competent jurisdiction; or
c. As otherwise may be required by law.
12. Records which are protected from disclosure by law.
13. Meetings and public records relating to scientific and technological
innovations in which the owner has a proprietary interest.
14. Records relating to municipal hotlines established for the reporting
of abuse and wrongdoing.
15. Confidential or privileged communications between a public
governmental body and its auditor, including all auditor work
product; however, all final audit reports issued by the auditor are to
be considered open records pursuant to this Chapter.
16. Operational guidelines and policies developed, adopted or
maintained by any public agency responsible for law enforcement,
public safety, first response or public health for use in responding
to or preventing any critical incident which is or appears to be
terrorist in nature and which has the potential to endanger
individual or public safety or health. Nothing in this exception shall
Section
115.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
115.020
AO:38
be deemed to close information regarding expenditures, purchases
or contracts made by an agency in implementing these guidelines
or policies. When seeking to close information pursuant to this
exception, the agency shall affirmatively state in writing that
disclosure would impair its ability to protect the safety or health of
persons and shall in the same writing state that the public interest
in non-disclosure outweighs the public interest in disclosure of the
records. This exception shall expire and be of no further force or
effect on December 31, 2008.
17. Existing or proposed security systems and structural plans of real
property owned or leased by a public governmental body, and
information that is voluntarily submitted by a non-public entity
owning or operating an infrastructure to any public governmental
body for use by that body to devise plans for protection of that
infrastructure, the public disclosure of which would threaten public
safety.
a. Records related to the procurement of or expenditures relating
to security systems purchased with public funds shall be open;
b. When seeking to close information pursuant to this exception,
the public governmental body shall affirmatively state in
writing that disclosure would impair the public governmental
body's ability to protect the security or safety of persons or real
property and shall in the same writing state that the public
interest in non-disclosure outweighs the public interest in
disclosure of the records;
c. Records that are voluntarily submitted by a non-public entity
shall be reviewed by the receiving agency within ninety (90)
days of submission to determine if retention of the document is
necessary in furtherance of a State security interest. If
retention is not necessary, the documents shall be returned to
the non-public governmental body or destroyed;
d. This exception shall expire and be of no further force or effect
on December 31, 2008.
18. Records that identify the configuration of components or the
operation of a computer, computer system, computer network or
telecommunications network and would allow unauthorized access
to or unlawful disruption of a computer, computer system,
computer network or telecommunications network of a public
governmental body. This exception shall not be used to limit or
deny access to otherwise public records in a file, document, data
file or database containing public records. Records related to the
procurement of or expenditures relating to such computer,
computer system, computer network or telecommunications
network, including the amount of monies paid by, or on behalf of, a
Section
115.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.020
AO:39
Section 115.030. Records Pertaining To Internal Investigations and
Investigations of Allegedly Illegal Conduct [Ord. No. 5799
§1(2-133), 11-25-2003]
In order to allow the fullest cooperation by employees and members of
the public in investigation of matters wherein an employee of the City is
alleged to have engaged in any form of misconduct, all files, records and
documents relating to investigations of allegations of misconduct by City
employees will be considered to be personnel records and shall be closed
records under the custody of the respective department head or personnel
office.
Section 115.040. Records Pertaining To Medical Condition or
History [Ord. No. 5799 §1(2-134), 11-25-2003]
Section 115.050. Records Containing Confidential, Proprietary or
Private Information [Ord. No. 5799 §1(2-135), 11-25-2003; Ord. No.
5838 §3(2-135(4)), 8-24-2004]
public governmental body for such computer, computer system,
computer network or telecommunications network, shall be open.
19. Credit card numbers, personal identification numbers, digital
certificates, physical and virtual keys, access codes or
authorization codes that are used to protect the security of
electronic transactions between a public governmental body and a
person or entity doing business with a public governmental body.
Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to close the record of a
person or entity using a credit card held in the name of a public
governmental body or any record of a transaction made by a person
using a credit card or other method of payment for which
reimbursement is made by a public governmental body.
A. All information obtained by the City regarding medical examinations,
medical condition or medical history of City employees or job
applicants, if retained by the City, shall be collected and maintained on
separate forms and in separate medical files and shall be treated as
closed and confidential records, except that:
1. Supervisors and managers may be informed regarding necessary
restrictions on the work duties of employees and necessary
accommodations;
2. First aid and safety personnel may be informed, when appropriate,
if the information reflects the existence of a disability which might
require emergency treatment; or
3. Government officials investigating compliance with State or
Federal law pertaining to treatment of persons with disabilities
may be allowed access to such records.
Section
115.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
115.050
AO:40
A. In order to protect reasonable expectations of privacy on the part of
persons having dealings with the City, City records containing
information or entries of a personal, confidential, private or proprietary
nature, including, but not limited to, income, sales data, financial
circumstances, household and family relationships, Social Security
numbers, dates of birth, insurance information and other information
which reasonable persons generally regard as private and not a
customary subject for public discourse, which information or entries
have been provided to the City by one complying with regulations
requiring the disclosure of such information, shall be excised from
copies of City records disclosed or provided to members of the public
other than those persons to whom the information of entries pertain.
Persons desiring access to information or entries excised from such
records may file a supplementary written request with the City Clerk
for disclosure of material to be specified in the request, which request
should state:
1. Whether or not the requesting party has informed persons to whom
the requested information pertains of the request; and
2. All reasons why the requesting party believes disclosure by the City
of the specified information is in the public interest.
B. The City Clerk may afford all interested parties, including the persons
to whom the information pertains, a reasonable time within which to
comment on the requested disclosure prior to acting further on the
request. If an interested person objects to the disclosure of the
requested information, the City Clerk may conduct a hearing at which
all interested parties may be heard. At such hearing the Clerk shall
consider, among such other factors as may be reasonable and relevant:
1. The requirements and intent of State law, City ordinances and this
policy;
2. The legitimate expectations of privacy on the part of interested
parties;
3. The personal, confidential, private or proprietary nature of the
information at issue;
4. Whether the information was obtained by the City under
compulsion of law or was freely and voluntarily provided by the
persons objecting to the disclosure; and
5. The public purposes to be served by disclosure of the requested
information.
Section
115.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.050
AO:41
Section 115.060. Notices of Meetings [Ord. No. 5799 §1(2-136),
11-25-2003; Ord. No. 5838 §4(2-136(1, 4)), 8-24-2004; Ord. No.
6169 §1, 10-25-2011]
If the City Clerk determines that disclosure is legally required or
would otherwise serve the best interests of the public and that
such requirements or purpose outweigh the legitimate concerns
or interest of the persons to whom the information pertains, the
Clerk shall provide the requested information to the requesting
party.
C. In addition to or in lieu of the hearing described above, the City Clerk
may afford all interested parties a reasonable opportunity to seek
judicial review of or relief from the proposed disclosure. The City Clerk
may also utilize the procedures for judicial determination and/or
opinion solicitation provided in Section 115.120.
D. Records and information that have been closed pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter, Chapter 610, RSMo., and other relevant
State and Federal laws and regulations are to be treated as confidential
by all employees and elected and appointed officials of the City.
1. It shall be grounds for disciplinary action for any employee to:
a. Violate the confidentiality relating to such records or
information;
b. Copy or remove closed and/or confidential information without
the specific consent of the custodian thereof or in the normal
course of performing such employee's duties for the City;
c. Provide or discuss closed records or confidential information
with any person other than as a necessary part of performing
such employee's duties for the City; or
d. Divulge, discuss or disclose information or records addressed
in any closed meeting of a public governmental body, other
than as a necessary part of performing such employee's duties
for the City.
2. Elected and appointed officials are also expected to maintain the
same strict standards of confidentiality required of employees.
Breach of the confidentiality standards established by this Chapter
and required of employees in this Section may be grounds for
removal from office or other sanctions as may be deemed
appropriate by the body of which such official is a member or by the
Board of Aldermen.
A. Each public governmental body shall give notice of the time, date, place
and tentative agenda of each meeting in a manner reasonably
calculated to advise the public of the matters to be considered, and if
the meeting will be conducted by telephone or other electronic means,
Section
115.050
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
115.060
AO:42
the notice of the meeting shall identify the mode by which the meeting
will be conducted and the designated location where the public may
observe and attend the meeting. If a public body plans to meet by
Internet chat, Internet message board or other computer link, it shall
post a notice of the meeting on its website in addition to its principal
office and shall notify the public how to access that meeting.
Reasonable notice shall include making available copies of the notice to
any representative of the news media who requests notice of meetings
of a particular public governmental body concurrent with the notice
being made available to the members of the particular governmental
body and posting the notice on a bulletin board at City Hall or other
prominent place which is easily accessible to the public and clearly
designated for that purpose at the City Hall.
B. The notice shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours, exclusive of
weekends and holidays when the City Hall is closed, prior to the
commencement of any meeting of a governmental body unless for good
cause such notice is impossible or impractical, in which case as much
notice as is reasonably possible shall be given; provided however, that
for any public meeting where a vote of the Board of Aldermen is
required to implement a tax increase, or with respect to a retail
development project when the Board of Aldermen votes to utilize the
power of eminent domain, create a transportation development district
or a community improvement district, or approve a redevelopment plan
that pledges public funds as financing for the project or plan, the Board
of Aldermen shall give notice conforming with all the requirements of
law at least four (4) days before the Board of Aldermen may vote on
such issues, exclusive of weekends and holidays when the facility is
closed, and provided further that the exception above and in Subsection
(C) below concerning shorter reasonable notice periods if required
notice is impossible or impractical shall not apply to meetings requiring
four (4) days' notice.
C. When it is necessary to hold a meeting on less than twenty-four (24)
hours' notice or at a place that is not reasonably accessible to the public
or at a time that is not reasonably convenient to the public, the nature
of the good cause justifying that departure from the normal
requirements shall be stated in the minutes.
D. A formally constituted subunit of a parent governmental body may
conduct a meeting without notice as required by this Section during a
lawful meeting of the parent governmental body, a recess in that
meeting or immediately following that meeting, if the meeting of the
subunit is publicly announced at the parent meeting and the subject of
the meeting reasonably coincides with the subjects discussed or acted
upon by the parent governmental body.
E. A public body shall allow for the recording by audiotape, videotape or
other electronic means of any open meeting. A public body may
establish guidelines regarding the manner in which such recording is
conducted so as to minimize disruption to the meeting. No audio
Section
115.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.060
AO:43
Section 115.070. Closed Meetings — How Held [Ord. No. 5799
§1(2-137), 11-25-2003; Ord. No. 5838 §5(2-137(2, 3)), 8-24-2004]
recording of any meeting, record or vote closed pursuant to the
provisions of Section 610.021, RSMo., shall be allowed without
permission of the public body; any person who violates this provision
shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and punished by imprisonment
for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, a fine not to exceed three
hundred dollars ($300.00), or by both such fine and imprisonment.
A. A public governmental body proposing to hold a closed meeting or vote
may do so by either:
1. Giving notice of same pursuant to the provisions of this Article
along with reference to the specific exception allowing such a
closed meeting under State law; or
2. Upon an affirmative public vote of the majority of a quorum of the
public governmental body. The vote of each member of the public
governmental body on the question of closing a public meeting or
vote and the specific reason for closing that public meeting or vote
by reference to the specific exception allowing such a closed
meeting under State law shall be announced publicly at an open
meeting of the governmental body and entered into the minutes.
B. Any meeting or vote closed pursuant to Section 610.021, RSMo., shall
be closed only to the extent necessary for the specific reason
announced to justify the closed meeting or vote. Public governmental
bodies shall not discuss any business in a closed meeting, record or vote
which does not directly relate to the specific reason announced to
justify the closed meeting or vote. Public governmental bodies holding a
closed meeting shall close only an existing portion of the meeting
facility necessary to house the members of the public governmental
body in the closed session, allowing members of the public to remain to
attend any subsequent open session held by the public governmental
body following the closed session.
C. In the event any member of a public governmental body makes a motion
to close a meeting, or a record, or a vote from the public and any other
member believes that such motion, if passed, would cause a meeting,
record or vote to be closed from the public in violation of any provision
in Chapter 610, RSMo., or this Article, such latter member shall state
his or her objection to the motion at or before the time the vote is taken
on the motion. The public governmental body shall enter in the minutes
of the public governmental body any objection made pursuant to this
Subsection. Any member making such an objection shall be allowed to
fully participate in any meeting, record or vote that is closed from the
public over the member's objection. In the event the objecting member
also voted in opposition to the motion to close the meeting, record or
vote at issue, the objection and vote of the member as entered in the
Section
115.060
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
115.070
AO:44
Section 115.080. Journals of Meetings and Records of Voting [Ord.
No. 5799 §1(2-138), 11-25-2003; Ord. No. 5838 §6(2-138),
8-24-2004]
Section 115.090. Accessibility of Meetings [Ord. No. 5799
§1(2-139), 11-25-2003; Ord. No. 5838 §7(2-139), 8-24-2004]
Each meeting shall be held at a place reasonably accessible to the public
and of sufficient size to accommodate the anticipated attendance by
members of the public and at a time reasonably convenient to the public,
unless for good cause such a place or time is impossible or impractical.
Every reasonable effort shall be made to grant special access to the meeting
to handicapped or disabled individuals.
Section 115.100. Segregation of Exempt Material [Ord. No. 5799
§1(2-140), 11-25-2003]
If a public record contains material which is not exempt from disclosure,
as well as material which is exempt from disclosure, the custodian shall
minutes shall be an absolute defense to any claim filed against the
objecting member pursuant to Chapter 610, RSMo.
A. A journal or minutes of open and closed meetings shall be taken and
retained by the public governmental body including, but not limited to,
a record of any votes taken at such meeting. The minutes shall include
the date, time, place, members present, members absent and a record
of any votes taken.
B. All votes by members of a public governmental body at any meeting
shall be recorded. When a roll call vote is taken, the minutes shall
attribute each "yea" and "nay" vote, or abstinence if not voting, to the
name of the individual member of the body. Any votes taken during a
closed meeting shall be taken by roll call and the minutes of the closed
meeting, sufficient to reflect the vote pursuant to this Subsection, shall
be recorded. All votes taken by roll call in meetings of a public
governmental body consisting of members who are all elected, except
for the Missouri General Assembly and any committee established by a
public governmental body, shall be cast by members of the public
governmental body who are physically present and in attendance at the
meeting. When it is necessary to take votes by roll call in a meeting of
the public governmental body, due to an emergency of the public body,
with a quorum of the members of the public body physically present and
in attendance and less than a quorum of the members of the public
governmental body participating via telephone, facsimile, Internet or
any other voice or electronic means, the nature of the emergency of the
public body justifying that departure from the normal requirements
shall be stated in the minutes. Where such emergency exists, the votes
taken shall be regarded as if all members were physically present and
in attendance at the meeting.
Section
115.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.100
AO:45
separate the exempt and non-exempt material and make the non-exempt
material available for examination and copying in accord with the policies
provided herein. When designing a public record the custodian shall, to
the extent practicable, facilitate a separation of exempt from non-exempt
information. If the separation is readily apparent to a person requesting to
inspect or receive copies of the form, the custodian shall generally describe
the material exempted unless that description would reveal the contents of
the exempt information and thus defeat the purpose of the exemption.
Section 115.110. Custodian Designated — Response To Request For
Access To Records [Ord. No. 5799 §1(2-141), 11-25-2003; Ord. No.
5838 §8(2-141(4, 6)), 8-24-2004]
A. The City Clerk shall be the custodian of records and will be responsible
for maintenance and control of all records. The City Manager may
designate deputy custodians in operating departments of the City and
such other departments or offices as the City Manager may determine.
Deputy custodians shall conduct matters relating to public records and
meetings in accord with the policies enumerated herein.
B. Except as otherwise provided by law, the City shall provide access to
and, upon request, furnish copies of the City's public records subject to
the provisions of the Code of Ordinances relating to copying fees. No
person shall remove original public records from the City Hall or from
the office of the custodian of records without written permission of the
custodian. No public governmental body shall grant to any person or
entity, whether by contract, license or otherwise, the exclusive right to
access and disseminate any public record unless the granting of such
right is necessary to facilitate coordination with, or uniformity among,
industry regulators having similar authority.
C. The custodian of records may require persons seeking access to public
records to submit such request in writing and/or on a form designated
by the custodian for such purpose. Such written request shall be
sufficiently particular to reasonably apprize the custodian of the
records sought.
D. Each request for access to a public record shall be acted upon as soon
as possible, but in no event later than the end of the third (3rd) business
day following the date the request is received by the custodian of
records. If records are requested in a certain format, the public body
shall provide the records in the requested format, if such format is
available. If access to the public record is not granted immediately, the
custodian shall give a detailed explanation of the cause for further delay
and the place and earliest time and date that the record will be
available for inspection. This period for document production may
exceed three (3) days for reasonable cause.
E. If a request for access is denied, the custodian of records shall provide,
upon request, a written statement of the grounds for such denial. Such
statement shall cite the specific provision of law under which access is
Section
115.100
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
115.110
AO:46
Section 115.120. Procedures For Resolving Questions of Public
Accessibility [Ord. No. 5799 §1(2-142), 11-25-2003]
A public governmental body or record custodian in doubt about the legality
of closing a particular meeting, record or vote may, subject to approval
by the Board of Aldermen, bring suit in the Circuit Court for the County
of St. Louis to ascertain the propriety of such action. In addition, subject
to approval by the Board of Aldermen, the public governmental body or
custodian may seek a formal opinion of the Attorney General or an attorney
for the City regarding the propriety of such action. In such events, the
proposed closed meeting or public access to the record or vote shall be
deferred for a reasonable time pending the outcome of the actions so taken.
Section 115.130. Fees [Ord. No. 5799 §1(2-143), 11-25-2003; Ord.
No. 5838 §9(2-143), 8-24-2004]
denied and shall be furnished to the requester no later than the end of
the third (3rd) business day following the date that the request for the
statement is received.
F. Any member of a public governmental body who transmits any message
relating to public business by electronic means shall also concurrently
transmit that message to either the member's public office computer or
the custodian of records in the same format. The provisions of this
Subsection shall only apply to messages sent to other members of that
body so that, when counting the sender, a majority of the body's
members are copied. Any such message received by the custodian or at
the member's office computer shall be a public record, subject,
however, to the exceptions for closed records as provided by law.
A. The custodian shall charge ten cents ($0.10) per page for a paper copy
not larger than nine (9) by fourteen (14) inches, plus an hourly fee for
duplicating time not to exceed the average hourly rate of pay for
clerical staff of the City. Research time required for fulfilling records
requests may be charged at the actual cost of research time. Based on
the scope of the request, the City shall produce the copies using
employees of the City that result in the lowest amount of charges for
search, research and duplication time. Prior to producing copies of the
requested records, the person requesting the records may request the
City to provide an estimate of the cost to the person requesting the
records. The custodian shall receive (or may require) payment prior to
duplicating and/or searching for documents.
B. Fees for providing access to public records maintained on computer
facilities, recording tapes or disks, video tapes or films, pictures, maps,
slides, graphics, illustrations or similar audio or visual items or devices
and for paper copies larger than nine (9) by fourteen (14) inches shall
include only the cost of copies, staff time, which shall not exceed the
average hourly rate of pay for staff of the City required for making
copies and programming, if necessary, and the cost of the disk or tape
Section
115.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.130
AO:47
or other medium used for the duplication. Fees for maps, blueprints or
plats that require special expertise to duplicate may include the actual
rate of compensation for the trained personnel required to duplicate
such maps, blueprints or plats. If programming is required beyond the
customary and usual level to comply with a request for records or
information, the fees for compliance may include the actual costs of
such programming.
Section
115.130
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
115.130
AO:48
ARTICLE II
Law Enforcement Arrest Reports and Records, Incident Reports,
Etc.
Section 115.140. Definitions [Ord. No. 5799 §1(2-151), 11-25-2003]
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following
definitions:
ARREST — An actual restraint of the person of the defendant, or by his/
her submission to the custody of the officer, under authority of a warrant
or otherwise for a criminal violation which results in the issuance of a
summons or the person being booked.
ARREST REPORT — A record of a law enforcement agency of an arrest and
of any detention or confinement incident thereto together with the charge
therefor.
INACTIVE — An investigation in which no further action will be taken by a
law enforcement agency or officer for any of the following reasons:
INCIDENT REPORT — A record of a law enforcement agency consisting of
the date, time, specific location, name of the victim and immediate facts
and circumstances surrounding the initial report of a crime or incident,
including any logs of reported crimes, accidents and complaints maintained
by that agency.
INVESTIGATIVE REPORT — A record, other than an arrest or incident
report, prepared by personnel of a law enforcement agency inquiring into
a crime or suspected crime, either in response to an incident report or in
response to evidence developed by Law Enforcement Officers in the course
of their duties.
Section 115.150. Police Department Records [Ord. No. 5799
§1(2-152), 11-25-2003]
1. A decision by the law enforcement agency not to pursue the case.
Expiration of the time to file criminal charges pursuant to the
applicable statute of limitations or ten (10) years after the commission
of the offense, whichever date earliest occurs.
2.
Finality of the convictions of all persons convicted on the basis of the
information contained in the investigative report, by exhaustion of or
expiration of all rights of appeal of such persons.
3.
A. The Police Department of the City shall maintain records of all incidents
reported to the Police Department, and investigations and arrests made
by the Police Department. All incident reports and arrest reports shall
be open records. Notwithstanding any other provision of law other than
the provisions of Subsection (C) of this Section or Section 320.083,
RSMo., investigate reports of the Police Department are closed records
until the investigation becomes inactive. If any person is arrested and
Section
115.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.150
AO:49
Section 115.160. Effect of Nolle Pros, Dismissal and Suspended
Imposition of Sentence On Records [Ord. No. 5799 §1(2-153),
11-25-2003]
If the person arrested is charged but the case is subsequently nolle prossed,
dismissed, or the accused is found not guilty, or imposition of sentence is
not charged with an offense against the law within thirty (30) days
of the person's arrest, the arrest report shall thereafter be a closed
record, except that the disposition portion of the record may be
accessed except as provided in Section 115.170.
B. Except as provided in Subsections (C) and (D) of this Section, if any
portion of a record or document of a Police Department Officer or the
Police Department, other than an arrest report which would otherwise
be open, contains information that is reasonably likely to pose a clear
and present danger to the safety of any victim, witness, undercover
officer or other person; or jeopardize a criminal investigation, including
records which would disclose the identity of a source wishing to remain
confidential or a suspect not in custody; or which would disclose
techniques, procedures or guidelines for Police Department
investigations or prosecutions, that portion of the record shall be closed
and shall be redacted from any record made available pursuant to this
Article.
C. Any person, including a family member of such person within the first
degree of consanguinity if such person is deceased or incompetent,
attorney for a person or insurer of a person involved in any incident or
whose property is involved in an incident may obtain any records closed
pursuant to this Section or Section 115.170 for purposes of
investigation of any civil claim or defense as provided by this
Subsection. Any individual, his or her family member within the first
degree of consanguinity if such individual is deceased or incompetent,
his/her attorney or insurer, involved in an incident or whose property is
involved in an incident, upon written request, may obtain a complete
unaltered and unedited incident report concerning the incident and
may obtain access to other records closed by the Police Department
pursuant to this Section. Within thirty (30) days of such request, the
Police Department shall provide the requested material or file a motion
pursuant to this Subsection with the Circuit Court having jurisdiction
over the Police Department stating that the safety of the victim, witness
or other individual cannot be reasonably ensured, or that a criminal
investigation is likely to be jeopardized. Pursuant to Section 610.100(4),
RSMo., if, based on such motion, the court finds for the Police
Department, the court shall either order the record closed or order
such portion of the record that should be closed to be redacted from any
record made available pursuant to this Subsection.
D. The victim of an offense as provided in Chapter 566, RSMo., may
request that his/her identity be kept confidential until a charge relating
to such incident is filed.
Section
115.150
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
115.160
AO:50
suspended in the court in which the action is prosecuted, official records
pertaining to the case shall thereafter be closed records when such case
is finally terminated, except that the court's judgment or order or the
final action taken by the prosecutor in such matters may be accessed. If
the accused is found not guilty due to mental disease or defect pursuant
to Section 552.030, RSMo., official records pertaining to the case shall
thereafter be closed records upon such findings, except that the disposition
may be accessed only by law enforcement agencies, child care agencies,
facilities as defined in Section 198.006, RSMo., and in-home services
provider agencies as defined in Section 660.250, RSMo., in the manner
established by Section 115.170.
Section 115.170. Public Access of Closed Arrest Records
A. Records required to be closed shall not be destroyed; they shall be
inaccessible to the general public and to all persons other than the
defendant except as provided in this Section and Section 43.507, RSMo.
The closed records shall be available to: criminal justice agencies for
the administration of criminal justice pursuant to Section 43.500,
RSMo., criminal justice employment, screening persons with access to
criminal justice facilities, procedures and sensitive information; to law
enforcement agencies for issuance or renewal of a license, permit,
certification, or registration of authority from such agency including,
but not limited to, watchmen, security personnel, private investigators,
and persons seeking permits to purchase or possess a firearm; those
agencies authorized by Section 43.543, RSMo., to submit and when
submitting fingerprints to the central repository; the Sentencing
Advisory Commission created in Section 558.019, RSMo., for the
purpose of studying sentencing practices in accordance with Section
43.507, RSMo.; to qualified entities for the purpose of screening
providers defined in Section 43.540, RSMo.; the Department of
Revenue for driver license administration; the Division of Workers'
Compensation for the purposes of determining eligibility for crime
victims' compensation pursuant to Sections 595.010 to 595.075, RSMo.;
Department of Health and Senior Services for the purpose of licensing
and regulating facilities and regulating in-home services provider
agencies and Federal agencies for purposes of criminal justice
administration, criminal justice employment, child, elderly, or disabled
care, and for such investigative purposes as authorized by law or
presidential executive order.
B. These records shall be made available only for the purposes and to the
entities listed in this Section. A criminal justice agency receiving a
request for criminal history information under its control may require
positive identification, to include fingerprints of the subject of the
record search, prior to releasing closed record information.
Dissemination of closed and open records from the Missouri criminal
records repository shall be in accordance with Section 43.509, RSMo.
All records which are closed records shall be removed from the records
of the Police Department and Municipal Court which are available to
Section
115.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.170
AO:51
Section 115.180. "911" Telephone Reports [Ord. No. 5799
§1(2-155), 11-25-2003]
Excepted as provided by this Section, any information acquired by the
Police Department by way of a complaint or report of a crime made by
telephone contact using the emergency number "911" shall be inaccessible
to the general public. However, information consisting of the date, time,
specific location and immediate facts and circumstances surrounding the
initial report of the crime or incident shall be considered to be an incident
report and subject to Section 115.150. Any closed records pursuant to this
Section shall be available upon request by law enforcement agencies or
the Division of Workers' Compensation or pursuant to a valid court order
authorizing disclosure upon motion and good cause shown.
Section 115.190. Daily Log or Record Maintained By Police
Department of Crimes, Accidents or Complaints — Public Access To
Certain Information [Ord. No. 5799 §1(2-156), 11-25-2003; Ord. No.
5838 §10(2-156), 8-24-2004]
the public and shall be kept in separate records which are to be
held confidential and, where possible, pages of the public record shall
be retyped or rewritten omitting those portions of the record which
deal with the defendant's case. If retyping or rewriting is not feasible
because of the permanent nature of the record books, such record
entries shall be blacked out and recopied in a confidential book.
A. The City of Clayton Police Department, if it maintains a daily log or
record that lists suspected crimes, accidents or complaints, shall make
available the following information for inspection and copying by the
public:
1. The time, substance and location of all complaints or requests for
assistance received by the Police Department;
2. The time and nature of the Police Department's response to all
complaints or requests for assistance; and
3. If the incident involves an alleged crime or infraction:
a. The time, date and location of occurrence;
b. The name and age of any victim, unless the victim is a victim of
a crime under Chapter 566, RSMo.;
c. The factual circumstances surrounding the incident; and
d. A general description of any injuries, property or weapons
involved.
Section
115.170
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
115.190
AO:52
Chapter 120
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Section 120.010. Declaration of Policy [Ord. No. 5886 §1, 8-9-2005;
Ord. No. 5947 §1, 8-22-2006; Ord. No. 5982 §1, 7-10-2007; Ord. No.
6023 §1, 7-8-2008; Ord. No. 6083 §1, 7-14-2009]
The proper operation of municipal government requires that public officials
and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people;
that government decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of
the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal
gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government.
In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a procedure for
disclosure by certain officials and employees of private financial or other
interests in matters affecting the City.
Section 120.020. Conflicts of Interest [Ord. No. 5886 §2, 8-9-2005;
Ord. No. 5947 §2, 8-22-2006; Ord. No. 5982 §2, 7-10-2007; Ord. No.
6023 §2, 7-8-2008; Ord. No. 6083 §2, 7-14-2009]
All elected and appointed officials as well as employees of the City of
Clayton shall comply with Section 105.454, RSMo., on conflicts of interests
as well as any other State law governing official conduct. The Mayor or
any member of the Board of Aldermen who has a substantial personal or
private interest, as defined by State law, in any measure, bill, order or
ordinance proposed or pending before the Board of Aldermen shall disclose
that interest to the City Clerk and such disclosure shall be recorded in the
records of the Board of Aldermen and shall disqualify himself/herself from
voting on any matters relating to this interest.
Section 120.030. Disclosure Reports [Ord. No. 5886 §3, 8-9-2005;
Ord. No. 5947 §3, 8-22-2006; Ord. No. 5982 §3, 7-10-2007; Ord. No.
6023 §3, 7-8-2008; Ord. No. 6083 §3, 7-14-2009]
A. Each elected official, the City Manager as Chief Administrative Officer,
the City Manager or someone appointed by him as provided in Article
VII, Section 3 of the Clayton Charter as the Chief Purchasing Officer
and the full-time general counsel, if any, shall disclose the following
information by May first (1st) if any such transactions were engaged in
during the previous calendar year:
1. For such person and all persons within the first degree of
consanguinity or affinity of such person, the date and the identities
of the parties to each transaction with a total value in excess of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), if any, that such person had with the
political subdivision, other than compensation received as an
employee or payment of any tax, fee or penalty due to the political
subdivision, and other than transfers for no consideration to the
political subdivision; and
Section
115.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
120.030
AO:53
Section 120.040. Filing of Reports [Ord. No. 5886 §4, 8-9-2005;
Ord. No. 5947 §4, 8-22-2006; Ord. No. 5982 §4, 7-10-2007; Ord. No.
6023 §4, 7-8-2008; Ord. No. 6083 §4, 7-14-2009]
The reports, in a form acceptable to the Missouri Ethics Commission, shall
be filed with the City Clerk and with the Missouri Ethics Commission
in accordance with the Commission's requirements. The reports shall be
available for public inspection and copying during normal business hours.
Section 120.050. When Filed [Ord. No. 5886 §5, 8-9-2005; Ord. No.
5947 §5, 8-22-2006; Ord. No. 5982 §5, 7-10-2007; Ord. No. 6023 §5,
7-8-2008; Ord. No. 6083 §5, 7-14-2009]
2. The date and the identities of the parties to each transaction known
to the person with a total value in excess of five hundred dollars
($500.00), if any, that any business entity in which such person had
a substantial interest, had with the political subdivision, other than
payment of any tax, fee or penalty due to the political subdivision or
transactions involving payment for providing utility service to the
political subdivision, and other than transfers for no consideration
to the political subdivision.
3. The Chief Administrative Officer and the Chief Purchasing Officer
also shall disclose by May first (1st) for the previous calendar year
the following information:
a. The names and addresses of each of the employers of such
person from whom income of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
or more was received during the year covered by the
statement;
b. The name and address of each sole proprietorship that he
owned; the name, address and the general nature of the
business conducted of each general partnership and joint
venture in which he was a partner or participant; the name and
address of each partner or co-participant for each partnership
or joint venture unless such names and addresses are filed by
the partnership or joint venture with the Secretary of State;
the name, address and general nature of the business
conducted of any closely held corporation or limited
partnership in which the person owned ten percent (10%) or
more of any class of the outstanding stock or limited
partnership units; the name of any publicly traded corporation
or limited partnership that is listed on a regulated stock
exchange or automated quotation system in which the person
owned two percent (2%) or more of any class of outstanding
stock, limited partnership units or other equity interests;
c. The name and address of each corporation for which such
person served in the capacity of a director, officer or receiver.
Section
120.030
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
120.050
AO:54
Section 120.060. Conflicts of Interest — Contracts and Agreements
[CC 1970 §17-118; Ord. No. 5391 §3, 10-28-1997]
A. The financial interest statements shall be filed at the following times,
but no person is required to file more than one (1) financial interest
statement in any calendar year:
1. Each person appointed to office shall file the statement within
thirty (30) days of such appointment or employment;
2. Every other person required to file a financial interest statement
shall file the statement annually not later than May first (1st) and
the statement shall cover the calendar year ending the immediately
preceding December thirty-first (31st); provided that any member
of the Board of Aldermen may supplement the financial interest
statement to report additional interests acquired after December
thirty-first (31st) of the covered year until the date of filing of the
financial interest statement.
A. The following provisions, in substantially the form set forth below, shall
be incorporated in all contracts and agreements with governmental
bodies, governmental entities and private parties and corporations
wherein the City's public powers, obligations, consents or funds or
other financial obligation are involved:
1. The parties agree to abide by all applicable Federal, State and local
laws, ordinances and regulations relating to conflicts of interest.
Additionally, but not in limitation of the foregoing, no elected
official or other official of the City having any power of review or
approval of any of the undertakings contemplated by the
agreement shall knowingly participate in any decision(s) relating
thereto which affect his/her personal interests or those of his/her
immediate family or those of any corporation or partnership in
which he/she or a member of his/her immediate family is directly or
indirectly interested.
2. The City shall not knowingly, after due inquiry, employ or contract
with any person if a member of his/her immediate family is a
member of the Board of Aldermen or is employed by the City in an
administrative capacity (i.e., those who have selection, hiring or
supervisory or operational responsibility for the work to be
performed pursuant to this agreement); provided however, that the
foregoing shall not apply to temporary or seasonal employment.
The City shall not knowingly, after due inquiry, employ or contract
with any corporation or partnership if an elected official of the City
or a person employed by the City in an administrative capacity (as
defined in the foregoing sentence) or a member of the immediate
family of such elected official or person employed in an
administrative capacity shall have an interest, directly or indirectly,
therein.
Section
120.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
120.060
AO:55
Section 120.070. Penalty [Ord. No. 6114 §1, 8-10-2010]
Any person violating any part of this Chapter shall be prosecuted under
the general penalty ordinance of the City of Clayton as set forth at Section
100.110 of the Code of Ordinances.
Chapter 125
PERSONNEL
3. For the purposes of this Section, "immediate family" includes:
husband, wife, son, daughter, father, mother, brother, sister,
brother-in-law, sister-in-law, father-in-law, mother-in-law, uncle,
aunt, nephew, niece, stepparent and stepchild.
4. For purposes of this Section, a person shall be deemed to have an
interest in a corporation or partnership if he/she or any member of
his/her immediate family shall own, whether singularly or
collectively, directly or indirectly, ten percent (10%) more of any
corporation or partnership or shall own an interest having a value
of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more therein or an
individual or a member of his/her immediate family shall receive,
whether singularly or collectively, directly or indirectly, of a salary,
gratuity or other compensation or remuneration of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) or, per year therefrom.
5. In the event that any or all of the foregoing provision(s) shall
conflict with Federal, State or other local laws, ordinances or
regulations, then the requirements of such Federal, State or local
laws, ordinances or regulations shall prevail. Compliance with the
foregoing provisions shall not relieve parties contracting with the
City from adherence to any and all additional requirements
regarding conflicts of interest set forth in such Federal, State or
other local laws, ordinances or regulations.
Section
120.060
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
120.070
AO:56
ARTICLE I
In General
Section 125.010. Powers and Duties of City Manager8 [CC 1970
§19-1]
The City Manager shall appoint and, when necessary for the good of the
service, remove any officer or employee of the City, except as otherwise
provided in the Charter and except as he/she may authorize the head of
a department or office to appoint and remove subordinates. He/she shall
prescribe the powers and duties of officers and employees of the City not
otherwise prescribed by the Charter or by ordinances. He/she may assign
particular officers and employees to one (1) or more departments, require
an officer or employee to perform duties in two (2) or more departments
and make such other personnel rules and regulations as he/she may deem
necessary or proper for the efficient and economical conduct of the business
of the City.
8. Charter Reference—See art. III §3(1, 6).
Section
125.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.010
AO:57

ARTICLE II
Social Security
Section 125.020. Declaration of Policy [CC 1970 §19-12; CC 1947
§2-57]
It is declared to be the policy and purpose of the City to extend to all
eligible employees and officials of said City who are not excluded by law or
by this Article, and whether employed in connection with a governmental
or proprietary function of said City, the benefits of the system of Federal
Old-Age and Survivors Insurance as authorized by the Social Security Act
Amendments of 1950 and by Section 105.300 et seq., RSMo., and
amendments thereof, as the same may be now and hereafter in effect.
Section 125.030. Plan and Agreements — Effective Date [CC 1970
§19-13; CC 1947 §2-58]
The Mayor and City Clerk are authorized and directed, on behalf of this City,
to prepare, execute and submit to the State agency a plan and agreement
for extending said benefits to said eligible employees and officials of the
City in the form prepared by the State agency and hereby approved and
adopted by the Board of Aldermen of this City, which plan and agreement
are to become effective upon approval thereof by the State agency and are
further authorized and directed to execute agreements and modifications
and amendments thereof with said State agency, providing for the extension
of said benefits to said employees and officials as set forth in said plan
and agreement as provided for in this Article, said plan and agreement to
provide that said extension of benefits be effective on July 1, 1951.
Section 125.040. Deductions From Wages [CC 1970 §19-14; CC
1947 §2-59]
Commencing on the first (1st) day of the month following the date of the
approval of the plan and agreement of this City by the State agency, there
shall be deducted from the wages of all employees and officials of the
City to whom the benefits of said system of Federal Old-Age and Survivors
Insurance are extended, by virtue of the plan and agreement hereinbefore
provided for, the amount of each of said employees' and officials'
contributions as determined by the applicable State and Federal laws and
by said plan and agreement, the aggregate amount of said deductions to be
paid into the contributions fund created by Section 105.300 et seq., RSMo.;
provided however, from the first (1st) payment of wages made to each of
said employees and officials after the benefits of said system have been
extended to such employees and officials, there shall be deducted a sum
equal to the amount which would have been due and payable from each of
said employees and officials had said extension of benefits been provided on
July 1, 1951.
Section
125.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.050
AO:59
Section 125.050. Employer Contributions [CC 1970 §19-15; CC
1947 §2-60]
Commencing on the first (1st) day of the month following the date of the
approval of the plan and agreement of this City by the State agency, there
is appropriated from the General Revenue Fund of the City sums of money
necessary to pay the contributions of the City, which shall be due and
payable by virtue of the extension of the benefits of the Federal Old-Age
and Survivors Insurance system to the eligible employees and officials of
said City, said sums of money to be paid into the contributions fund created
by Section 105.300 et seq., RSMo., provided however, in making the first
(1st) payment to said contributions fund, after the benefits of said system
have been extended to such employees and officials, said first (1st) payment
shall include a sum equal to the amount which would have been due and
payable had said extension of benefits been provided on July 1, 1951. The
fund from which said appropriation is made will, at all times, be sufficient to
pay the contributions of the City by this Section directed to be paid to said
contributions fund.
Section 125.060. Records and Reports [CC 1970 §19-16; CC 1947
§2-61]
The City shall fully comply with and shall keep such records, make such
reports and provide such methods of administration of said plan and
agreement as may be required by all applicable State and Federal laws,
rules and regulations now and hereafter in effect with respect to the
extension of the benefits of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance
system to the employees and officials of this City. For the purpose of
administering said plan agreement, the Director of Finance of this City shall
be the official who shall make all required reports, keep all records and be
responsible for the administration of said plan and agreement on behalf of
this City and any and all notices and communications from the State agency
to this City with respect to said plan and agreement shall be addressed to
"City Treasurer, Clayton, Missouri".
Section
125.050
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
125.060
AO:60
ARTICLE III
Pension and Related Benefit Programs
Section 125.070. Non-Uniformed Employee Pension Plan [CC 1970
§19-30; Ord. No. 5561 §1, 5-9-2000; Ord. No. 5704 §1, 6-25-2002]
Section 125.080. Trustee Board Established [CC 1970 §19-31; Ord.
No. 5561 §1, 5-9-2000; Ord. No. 5704 §1, 6-25-2002]
A. The Board of Aldermen may provide, by ordinance, for a plan to provide
pension benefits to non-uniformed employees. For purposes of this and
related Sections, "non-uniformed employees" shall mean those persons
employed by the City on a regular, full-time, permanent basis, but shall
not include uniformed Fire or Police Department personnel or persons
employed in advisory capacities. Any person employed by the City for at
least the number of hours per week (but not less than thirty (30)) and
for at least the number of months per year which are customarily
considered "full-time and permanent" for such person's office or
department as set forth in the City personnel regulations shall be
deemed to be employed on a regular full-time permanent basis.
B. The Board of Aldermen shall have the right to terminate the plan at any
time and to make from time to time any amendments to the plan which
do not cause any part of the funds of the retirement fund to be used for,
or diverted to, any purpose other than the exclusive benefit of
employees included in the plan.
C. Providing such a plan shall not be construed as an employment contract
between the City and any employee. Participation in the plan shall not
give any employee the right to be retained in the employ of the City or
to have any right or interest in the plan or trust related thereto other
than as provided by law or in the plan itself.
A. The non-uniformed pension plan shall be administered by a Board of
Trustees of seven (7) persons. Three (3) members shall be residents of
the City, who shall be appointed by the Board of Aldermen and who
shall serve terms of three (3) years, except that the first (1st) such
members shall serve terms of one (1), two (2) and three (3) years,
respectively. Two (2) members shall be elected by the participants in
the plan from different offices or departments and shall serve terms of
two (2) years, except that the first (1st) such members shall serve terms
of one (1) and two (2) years respectively. Two (2) members shall be
members of the Board of Aldermen, one (1) of whom may be the Mayor,
who shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of Aldermen. In addition to
the foregoing members, the Director of Finance of the City shall serve
as an ex officio member of the Board of Trustees without the power to
vote and as its Secretary-Treasurer.
B. The Board of Trustees shall elect its own Chairman and Vice Chairman.
Section
125.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.080
AO:61
Section 125.090. Fire and Police Retirement Plan [CC 1970 §19-32;
Ord. No. 5561 §1, 5-9-2000]
Section 125.100. Administrator of Uniformed Pension Plan [CC
1970 §19-33; Ord. No. 5561 §1, 5-9-2000]
C. The Board of Trustees shall perform such duties and exercise such
powers as may be specified in the plan approved by the Board of
Aldermen.
A. The Board of Aldermen may provide, by ordinance, for a plan to provide
pension benefits to Police and fire employees. For purposes of this and
related Sections, "Police and fire employees" shall mean employees
employed full-time by the City as a Police Officer or firefighter,
including all ranking officers but excluding civilian employees.
B. The Board of Aldermen shall have the right to terminate the plan at any
time and to make from time to time any amendments to the plan which
do not cause any part of the funds of the retirement fund to be used for,
or diverted to, any purpose other than the exclusive benefit of
employees included in the plan.
C. Providing such a plan shall not be construed as an employment contract
between the City and any employee. Participation in the plan shall not
give any employee the right to be retained in the employ of the City or
to have any right or interest in the plan or trust related thereto other
than as provided by law or in the plan itself.
A. The Board of Aldermen shall appoint an administrator for the uniformed
employee pension plan, who may be a single individual or may consist
of a committee of three (3) or more persons. Such administration shall
serve at the pleasure of the Board of Aldermen. Any such individual may
resign by submitting his/her written resignation to the Board of
Aldermen. The administrator also may serve as a trustee, if so
designated by the Board of Aldermen.
B. If the administrator is a committee, it shall elect one (1) of its members
to be the chairman. The administrator or the chairman of the
committee, as the case may be, shall be the agent for service of legal
process on the plan. If the administrator shall be a committee, a
majority thereof shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business, but the concurrence of a majority of the members shall be
necessary for any resolution or other action taken by the committee. No
individual acting as administrator and no individual acting as a member
of a committee constituting the administrator shall act or vote on any
question relating solely to himself/herself or act or vote in any case in
which his/her individual right or claim to any benefit under this
agreement is particularly involved. In any case in which the individual
serving as administrator is so disqualified or in which a majority of the
members of the committee constituting the administrator are so
disqualified, the Board of Aldermen of the City shall be constituted as
Section
125.080
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
125.100
AO:62
Section 125.110. Trustee of Uniformed Pension Plan [CC 1970
§19-34; Ord. No. 5561 §1, 5-9-2000; Ord. No. 6312 §4, 3-25-2014]
administrator to exercise all of the powers of the administrator
concerning the matter over which the administrator is disqualified.
C. If the administrator is a committee, one (1) or more of their number of
any agent may be authorized by the committee to execute or deliver any
instrument on behalf of the committee, including directions,
notifications and instructions to the Trustee. The Committee shall notify
the Trustee by written instrument signed by all members of the
committee of the person or persons having such authority. The Trustee
may rely on such authority until revoked in writing by the committee.
D. No individual serving as administrator, or as a member of the
committee constituting the administrator, shall receive any
compensation for his/her service in such capacity if he/she is also an
employee of the City. Any other person shall receive his/her
compensation, if any, from the City.
E. The administrator shall have such power, not specifically reserved to
the Board of Aldermen or to the Trustee, as may be provided in the plan
or as may be necessary, expedient or advisable in administering the
plan.
A. The Board of Aldermen shall appoint a trustee pursuant to the terms of
the plan, which shall continue to consist of seven (7) members serving
without compensation, comprised of the Mayor of the City, two (2)
members of the Board of Aldermen to be chosen by the Board, one (1)
citizen of the City, outside of the City administration, to be appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of the Board of Aldermen, one (1) member
of the Police Department, one (1) member of the Fire Department and
one (1) additional member of either the Fire or Police Department to be
elected by the majority vote of the employees of their respective
departments, with the additional member of either the Fire or Police
Department to be elected alternately from the Fire Department and the
Police Department by a majority vote of the employees of such
department. Members of the Board of Trustees shall serve for a term of
two (2) years or until their successors shall be chosen in the manner
provided herein. Should any vacancy occur during the term of any
appointment by reason of death, resignation or inability to perform the
duties of trustee, such vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as
prescribed above, and the appointee shall serve the remaining term of
membership or until his/her successor shall be chosen.
B. The Board of Trustees shall perform the duties assigned to them by
Federal and State law and by the Charter and Ordinances of the City
and by the terms of the plan as provided from time to time. The Board of
Aldermen shall have the authority and responsibility to adopt and revise
from time to time an investment policy to guide the general goals and
Section
125.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.110
AO:63
Section 125.120. Additional Employee Benefits [CC 1970 §19-35;
Ord. No. 5561 §1, 5-9-2000]
objectives that the Board of Trustees should pursue and follow in its
investment of assets held by the plan.
A. The City Manager may, from time to time, establish and provide for
such additional benefits and benefit programs, establish conditions of
eligibility with respect to such benefits and, from time to time, amend,
revise, abolish, terminate or withdraw such benefits, as may be
determined to be in the best interests of the City and its inhabitants and
otherwise legally permissible for municipal employees in this State
including, but not limited to, deferred compensation benefits; 401(k)
savings plan; flexible spending plan; health, life and disability
insurance; retiree health care coverage; tuition reimbursement
program; and other benefit programs deemed appropriate to attract
and retain a qualified and experienced workforce.
B. Any such benefits or programs now in force or available to City
employees shall continue in full force and effect until and unless
hereafter modified as provided herein, notwithstanding repeal of any
Municipal Code provisions related thereto.
Section
125.110
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
125.120
AO:64
Chapter 130
COURTS AND CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
Charter Reference—See art. VI §1 for provision for court, jurisdiction,
contempt, punishment power, right of appeal and enforcement of orders.
Cross References—General penalty, §100.110; failure to comply with
subpoenas, §215.085.
State Law Reference—Municipal courts, ch. 98, RSMo.
Section
125.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
125.120
AO:65

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 130.010. Court Established
There is hereby established in the City of Clayton a Municipal Court to
be known as the "Clayton Municipal Court, a Division of the 21st Judicial
Circuit Court of the State of Missouri". In the event a Police Court existed
prior to the establishment of a Municipal Court, this Court is a continuation
of the Police Court of the City as previously established and is termed herein
"The Municipal Court".
Section 130.020. Jurisdiction
Violations of municipal ordinances shall be heard and determined only
before divisions of the Circuit Court as hereinafter provided in this Chapter.
"Heard and determined", for purposes of this Chapter, shall mean any
process under which the court in question retains the final authority to
make factual determinations pertaining to allegations of a municipal
ordinance violation.
Section 130.030. Municipal Judge — Vacation of Office
Section 130.040. Superintending Authority
The Municipal Court of the City shall be subject to the rules of the Circuit
Court of which it is a part and to the rules of the State Supreme Court. The
Municipal Court shall be subject to the general administrative authority of
the Presiding Judge of the Circuit Court, and the Judge and Court personnel
of said Court shall obey his/her directives.
Section 130.050. Docket and Court Records
The Municipal Judge shall be a conservator of the peace. He/she shall keep
a docket in which he/she shall enter every case commenced before him/her
and the proceedings therein and he/she shall keep such other records as
may be required. Such docket and records shall be records of the Circuit
Court of St. Louis County. The Municipal Judge shall deliver said docket,
records and all books and papers pertaining to his/her office to his/her
successor in office or to the Presiding Judge of the Circuit.
A. The Municipal Judge shall vacate his/her office under the following
conditions:
1. Upon removal from office by the State Commission on the
Retirement, Removal and Discipline of Judges as provided in
Missouri Supreme Court Rule 12;
2. Upon attaining his/her seventy-fifth (75th) birthday; or
3. If he/she should lose his/her license to practice law within the State
of Missouri.
Section
130.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
130.060
AO:67
Section 130.060. Municipal Judge — Powers and Duties Generally
Section 130.070. Prosecutions Based On Information Only,
Proceedings
All prosecutions for the violation of municipal ordinances shall be instituted
by information and may be based upon a complaint. Proceedings shall be in
accordance with the supreme court rules governing practice and procedure
in proceedings before Municipal Judges.
Section 130.080. Violations Bureau
Should the Municipal Judge determine that there shall be a Violations
Bureau, the City shall provide all expenses incident to the operation of the
same.
Section 130.090. Issuance and Execution of Warrants
All warrants issued by a Municipal Judge shall be directed to the City
Marshal, Chief of Police or any other Police Officer of the municipality or to
the Sheriff of the County. The warrants shall be executed by the Marshal,
Chief of Police, Police Officer or Sheriff at any place within the limits of the
County and not elsewhere, unless the warrants are endorsed in the manner
A. The Municipal Judge shall be and is hereby authorized to:
1. Establish a Violations Bureau as provided for in the Missouri Rules
of Practice and Procedure in Municipal and Traffic Courts and
Section 479.050, RSMo.
2. Administer oaths and enforce due obedience to all orders, rules and
judgments made by him/her and may fine and imprison for
contempt committed before him/her while holding Court in the
same manner and to the same extent as a Circuit Judge.
3. Stay execution of any fine or sentence, suspend any fine or
sentence, and make such other orders as the Municipal Judge
deems necessary relative to any matter that may be pending in the
Municipal Court.
4. Make and adopt such rules of practice and procedure as are
necessary to implement and carry out the provisions of this
Chapter, and to make and adopt such rules of practice and
procedure as are necessary to hear and decide matters pending
before the Municipal Court, and to implement and carry out the
provisions of the Missouri Rules of Practice and Procedure in
Municipal and Traffic Courts.
5. The Municipal Judge shall have such other powers, duties and
privileges as are or may be prescribed by the laws of this State, this
Code or other ordinances of this City.
Section
130.060
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
130.090
AO:68
provided for warrants in criminal cases and, when so endorsed, shall be
served in other Counties as provided for in warrants in criminal cases.
Section 130.100. Jury Trials
Any person charged with a violation of a municipal ordinance of this City
shall be entitled to a trial by jury as in prosecutions for misdemeanors
before an Associate Circuit Court Judge. Whenever a defendant accused of
a violation of a municipal ordinance has a right to and demands such trial
by jury, the Municipal Court shall certify the case to the Presiding Judge of
the Circuit Court for reassignment.
Section 130.110. Duties of The City's Prosecuting Attorney
It shall be the duty of an attorney designated by the City to prosecute the
violations of the City's ordinances before the Municipal Judge or before
any Circuit Judge hearing violations of the City's ordinances. The salary
or fees of the attorney and his/her necessary expenses incurred in such
prosecutions shall be paid by the City. The compensation of such attorney
shall not be contingent upon the number of cases tried, the number of guilty
verdicts reached, or the amount of fines imposed or collected.
Section 130.120. Summoning of Witnesses
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Judge to summon all persons whose
testimony may be deemed essential as witnesses at the trial and to enforce
their attendance by attachment, if necessary. The fees of witnesses shall be
the same as those fixed for witnesses in trials before Associate Circuit Court
Judges and shall be taxed as other costs in the case. When a trial shall be
continued by a Municipal Judge, it shall not be necessary to summon any
witnesses who may be present at the continuance, but the Municipal Judge
shall orally notify such witnesses as either party may require to attend
before him/her on the day set for trial to testify in the case and enter the
names of such witnesses on his/her docket, which oral notice shall be valid
as a summons.
Section 130.130. Transfer of Complaint To Associate Circuit Judge
If, in the progress of any trial before the Municipal Judge, it shall appear
to the Judge that the accused ought to be put upon trial for an offense
against the criminal laws of the State and not cognizable before him/her
as Municipal Judge, he/she shall immediately stop all further proceedings
before him/her as Municipal Judge and cause the complaint to be made
before some Associate Circuit Court Judge of the County.
Section 130.140. Jailing of Defendants
If, in the opinion of the Municipal Judge, the City has no suitable and safe
place of confinement, the Municipal Judge may commit the defendant to the
County Jail, and it shall be the duty of the Sheriff, if space for the prisoner is
available in the County Jail, upon receipt of a warrant of commitment from
Section
130.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
130.140
AO:69
the Judge to receive and safely keep such prisoner until discharged by due
process of law. The municipality shall pay the board of such prisoner at the
same rate as may now or hereafter be allowed by law to such Sheriff for the
keeping of other prisoners in his/her custody. The same shall be taxed as
cost.
Section 130.150. Parole and Probation
Section 130.160. Right of Appeal
In any case tried before the Municipal Judge, except where there has been
a plea of guilty or where the case has been tried with a jury, the defendant
shall have a right of trial de novo before a Circuit Court Judge or upon
assignment before an Associate Circuit Court Judge. An application for a
trial de novo shall be filed within ten (10) days after judgment and shall be
A. Any Judge hearing violations of municipal ordinances may, when in his/
her judgment it may seem advisable, grant a parole or probation to any
person who shall plead guilty or who shall be convicted after a trial
before such Judge. When a person is placed on probation, he/she shall
be given a certificate explicitly stating the conditions on which he/she is
being released.
B. In addition to such other authority as exists to order conditions of
probation, the Court may order conditions which the Court believes will
serve to compensate the victim of the crime, any dependent of the
victim, or society in general. Such conditions may include, but need not
be limited to:
1. Restitution to the victim or any dependent of the victim in an
amount to be determined by the Judge; and
2. The performance of a designated amount of free work for a public
or charitable purpose or purposes as determined by the Judge.
C. A person may refuse probation conditioned on the performance of free
work. If he/she does so, the Court shall decide the extent or duration of
sentence or other disposition to be imposed and render judgment
accordingly. Any County, City, person, organization or agency or
employee of a County, City, organization or agency charged with the
supervision of such free work or who benefits from its performance
shall be immune from any suit by the person placed on parole or
probation or any person deriving a cause of action from him/her if such
cause of action arises from such supervision of performance, except for
intentional torts or gross negligence. The services performed by the
probationer or parolee shall not be deemed employment within the
meaning of the provisions of Chapter 288, RSMo.
D. The Court may modify or enlarge the conditions of probation at any
time prior to the expiration or termination of the probation term.
Section
130.140
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
130.160
AO:70
filed in such form and perfected in such manner as provided by Supreme
Court rule.
Section 130.170. Breach of Recognizance
In the case of a breach of any recognizance entered into before a Municipal
Judge or an Associate Circuit Court Judge hearing a municipal ordinance
violation case, the same shall be deemed forfeited and the Judge shall cause
the same to be prosecuted against the principal and surety, or either of
them, in the name of the municipality as plaintiff. Such action shall be
prosecuted before a Circuit Court Judge or Associate Circuit Court Judge,
and in the event of cases caused to be prosecuted by a Municipal Judge,
such shall be on the transcript of the proceedings before the Municipal
Judge. All monies recovered in such actions shall be paid over to Municipal
Treasury to the General Revenue Fund of the municipality.
Section 130.180. Absence of Judge — Procedure
If a Municipal Judge be absent, sick or disqualified from acting pursuant to
the general administrative authority of the Presiding Judge of the Circuit
Court over the Municipal Divisions within the circuit contained in Section
478.240, RSMo., a special Municipal Judge may be designated in
accordance with the provisions of Section 479.230, RSMo., until such
absence or disqualification shall cease.
Section 130.190. Failure To Appear in Municipal Court
A. A person commits the offense of failure to appear in Municipal Court if:
1. He/she has been issued a summons for a violation of any ordinance
of the City of Clayton and fails to appear before the Judge of the
Municipal Court at the time and on the date on which he/she was
summoned, or at the time or on the date to which the case was
continued;
2. He/she has been released upon recognition of bond and fails to
appear before the Judge of the Municipal Court at the time and on
the date on which he/she was summoned, or at the time or on the
date to which the case was continued;
3. He/she has been placed on Court supervised probation and fails to
appear before the Judge of the Municipal Court at the time
specified by said Judge as a condition of the probation.
B. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the exercise of the Municipal
Court of its power to punish for contempt.
Section
130.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
130.190
AO:71

ARTICLE II
Court Costs
Section 130.200. Court Costs9 [CC 1970 §7-6; CC 1947 §4-6; Ord.
No. 4525 §1, 9-5-1986; Ord. No. 4887 §1, 6-9-1992; Ord. No. 5172
§1, 7-25-1995; Ord. No. 5300 §1, 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 5546 §1,
12-21-1999; Ord. No. 5645 §1, 8-28-2001; Ord. No. 5650 §1,
9-11-2001; Ord. No. 5721 §§1—2, 9-24-2002; Ord. No. 6017 §1,
6-10-2008]
A. Definitions. The following words and phrases, as used in this Chapter,
shall have the following respective meanings:
COURT COSTS — The total of fees, miscellaneous charges and
surcharges imposed in a particular case.
FEES — The amount charged for services to be performed by the
Municipal Court.
MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES — The amount allowed by law for
services provided by individuals or entities other than the Municipal
Court.
SURCHARGES — Additional charges allowed by law which are allowed
for specific purposes designated by law.
B. In addition to any fine that may be imposed by the Municipal Judge,
there shall be assessed as court costs in all cases the following:
1. Court fees in the amount of twelve dollars ($12.00).
2. In addition to any other court costs, an additional surcharge in the
sum of three dollars ($3.00) shall be assessed and added to the
basic court fees in paragraph (1) of this Subsection, provided that
no such surcharge shall be collected in any proceeding when the
proceeding or the defendant has been dismissed by the court. All
sums collected pursuant to this Subsection shall be distributed as
follows:
a. Two dollars ($2.00) of each such surcharge shall be
transmitted monthly to the Treasurer of the City and used to
pay for Police Officer training as provided by Sections 590.100
to 590.180, RSMo. The City shall not retain for training
purposes more than one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) of such funds for each certified Law Enforcement
Officer or candidate for certification employed by the City. Any
excess funds shall be transmitted quarterly to the City's
General Fund.
b. One dollar ($1.00) of each such surcharge shall be sent to the
State Treasury to the credit of the Peace Officers Standards
9. State Law References—Training of peace officers, §§590.100—590.180, RSMo.
Section
130.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
130.200
AO:73
and Training Commission Fund created by Section 590.178,
RSMo.
3. Other miscellaneous charges, such as for the issuance of a warrant,
a commitment or a summons, as provided before the Associate
Circuit Judge in criminal prosecutions.
4. Actual miscellaneous charges assessed against the City for
apprehension or confinement in any municipal, County or State jail
or prison.
5. Miscellaneous charges for mileage, in the same amount as
provided to the Sheriff in criminal violations, for each mile and
fraction thereof the officer must travel (both directions) in order to
serve any warrant or commitment or order of this court.
6. In addition to any other court costs, an additional surcharge in the
sum of seven dollars fifty cents ($7.50) shall be assessed and added
to the basic court fees in paragraph (1) of this Subsection, provided
that no such surcharge shall be collected in any proceeding when
the proceeding or the defendant has been dismissed by the court.
All sums collected pursuant to this Subsection shall be distributed
as follows:
a. Ninety-five percent (95%) of such surcharge shall be paid to
the Director of Revenue of the State for deposit to the Crime
Victims' Compensation Fund as provided in Section 595.045,
RSMo.
b. Five percent (5%) of such surcharge shall be paid to the City
treasury.
7. Any other reasonable cost as may be otherwise provided by
ordinance including, but not limited to, costs of confinement,
including any necessary transportation related thereto, medical
costs incurred by the City while a defendant is in City custody, and
costs related to the arrest and testing of any person for any
intoxication-related traffic offense as set out in Section 130.200(8)
hereof.
8. Reimbursement of certain costs of arrest.
a. Upon a plea or a finding of guilty of violating the provisions of
Sections 342.010 of this Code or any ordinance of the City of
Clayton involving alcohol- or drug-related traffic offenses, the
Court may, in addition to imposition of any penalties provided
by law, order the convicted person to reimburse the Police
Department for the costs associated with such arrest.
b. Such costs hereby authorized shall include the reasonable cost
of making the arrest, including the cost of any chemical test
made as authorized or required by law or ordinance to
Section
130.200
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
130.200
AO:74
determine the alcohol or drug content of the person's blood,
and the costs of processing, charging, booking and holding
such person in custody.
c. The Chief of Police may establish a schedule of such costs
hereby authorized and shall submit the same to the Municipal
Judge. However, the Court may order the costs reduced if it
determines that the costs are excessive.
d. Upon receipt of such additional costs authorized by this
Subparagraph, the City Treasurer shall retain such costs in a
separate fund to be known as the "DWI/Drug Offense Cost
Reimbursement Fund". Monies with such fund shall be
appropriated by the Board of Aldermen to the Police
Department in amounts equal to those costs so collected and
shall be used by such department specifically to enhance and
support the enforcement and prosecution of alcohol- and drugrelated
traffic laws within the City.
9. In addition to any other court costs provided in this Code
pertaining to cases filed in the Clayton Municipal Division, an
additional surcharge in the sum of two dollars ($2.00) shall be
assessed in each proceeding filed in the Clayton Municipal Division
for the violation of the ordinances of said City. All sums collected
pursuant to this Subsection shall be distributed on a monthly basis
to St. Louis County to be used only for the purpose of providing
operating expenses for shelters for battered persons as provided in
Section 488.607, RSMo.
10. In addition to any other court costs, the court may assess a fee of
two dollars ($2.00) pursuant to Section 488.5026, RSMo., in all
cases except where the proceeding is dismissed by the Court, in
order to develop and maintain biometric identification systems and
for other prisoner expenses. All fees collected pursuant to this
Subsection shall be transmitted monthly to the Finance Director of
the City of Clayton, who shall deposit funds generated by the
surcharge into the "Inmate Security Fund".
11. There shall be assessed to each defendant who pleads guilty, or is
found guilty, in each proceeding filed in the Clayton Municipal
Court for the violation of the ordinances of the City, an additional
surcharge in the amount of seven dollars ($7.00) for the Statewide
Court Automation Fund, provided that no such fee shall be
collected in any case that has been dismissed by the Court or where
costs have been waived by the Court. All sums collected pursuant
to this Subsection shall be paid to the State Director of Revenue to
the credit of the Statewide Court Automation Fund in accordance
with Sections 476.056, 488.012 and 488.027, RSMo. [Ord. No.
6578, 1-22-2019]
Section
130.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
130.200
AO:75

ARTICLE III
Search Warrants
Section 130.210. Administrative Search Warrants [CC 1970 §7-19;
Ord. No. 5602 §1, 12-19-2000; Ord. No. 5885 §1, 8-9-2005]
A. Search Warrant Defined—Who May Issue, Execute.
1. An "administrative warrant" is a written order of the Municipal
Judge permitting the entry of City Officials on or into private
property to enforce the City's housing, zoning, health and safety
regulations when government entry on or into such private
property is otherwise authorized by Missouri law. A warrant may be
issued only in conformance with this Section and only for the
enforcement of the City's housing, zoning, health and safety
regulations, specifically:
a. To inspect private property to determine or prove the existence
of physical conditions in violation of a specified regulation,
b. To seize, photograph, copy or record evidence of such physical
conditions, and
c. To abate such physical conditions.
2. The Municipal Judge having original and exclusive jurisdiction to
determine violations against the ordinances of the municipality
may issue an administrative warrant when:
a. The property or place to be searched or inspected or the thing
to be seized is located within the City at the time of the making
of the application; and
b. The owner or occupant of the property or place to be searched
or inspected or the thing to be seized:
(1) Has refused to allow same after official request by the
City; or
(2) Is not available, after reasonable investigation and effort,
to consent to such search or inspection.
3. Any such warrant shall be directed to the Chief of Police or any
other Police Officer of the City and shall be executed by the Chief of
Police or said Police Officer, in conjunction with the Code
Enforcement Officer or other appropriate City Official, within the
City limits and not elsewhere.
B. Who May Apply For Warrant—Contents Of Application.
1. Any Code Enforcement Officer, Police Officer or attorney of the City
may make application to the Municipal Judge for the issuance of an
administrative warrant.
Section
130.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
130.210
AO:77
2. The application shall:
a. Be in writing;
b. State the time and date of the making of the application;
c. Identify the property or places to be entered, searched,
inspected or seized in sufficient detail and particularity that
the officer executing the warrant can readily ascertain it;
d. State that the owner or occupant of the property or places to
be entered, searched, inspected or seized:
(1) Has been requested by the City to allow such action and
has refused to allow such action; or
(2) Is not available, after reasonable investigation and effort,
to consent to such search or inspection.
e. State facts sufficient to show probable cause for the issuance
of a search warrant:
(1) To search or inspect for violations of an ordinance or Code
Section specified in the application; or
(2) To show that entry or seizure is authorized and necessary
to enforce an ordinance or Code Section specified in the
application and that due process has been afforded prior to
the entry or seizure.
f. Be verified by the oath or affirmation of the applicant; and
g. Be signed by the applicant and filed in the Municipal Court.
3. The application may be supplemented by a written affidavit verified
by oath or affirmation. Such affidavit shall be considered in
determining whether there is probable cause for the issuance of a
search warrant and in filling out any deficiencies in the description
of the property or place to be searched or inspected. Oral testimony
shall not be considered. The application may be submitted by
facsimile or other electronic means.
C. Hearing And Procedure—Contents Of Warrant—Execution And Return.
1. Hearing and procedure.
a. The Municipal Judge shall determine whether probable cause
exists to inspect or search for violations of any City ordinance
or Code Section or to enforce any such ordinance or Code
Section.
b. In doing so the Municipal Judge shall determine whether the
action to be taken by the City is reasonable in light of the facts
stated. The Municipal Judge shall consider the goals of the
Section
130.210
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
130.210
AO:78
ordinance or Code Section sought to be enforced and such
other factors as may be appropriate including, but not limited
to, the physical condition of the specified property, the age
and nature of the property, the condition of the area in which
the property is located, the known violation of any relevant
City ordinance or Code Section, the passage of time since
the property's last inspection and the authority authorizing
government entry onto private property. The standard for
issuing a warrant need not be limited to actual knowledge of
an existing violation of a City ordinance or Code Section.
c. If it appears from the application and any supporting affidavit
that there is probable cause to inspect or search for violations
of any City ordinance or Code Section or to enforce any such
ordinance or Code Section, a search warrant shall immediately
be issued.
d. The warrant shall be issued in the form of an original and two
(2) copies and the application, any supporting affidavit and one
(1) copy of the warrant as issued shall be retained in the
records of the Municipal Court.
2. Contents of search warrant. The search warrant shall:
a. Be in writing and in the name of the City;
b. Be directed to any Police Officer in the City;
c. State the time and date the warrant was issued;
d. Identify the property or places to be searched, inspected or
entered upon in sufficient detail and particularity that the
officer executing the warrant can readily ascertain it;
e. Command that the described property or places be searched or
entered upon and that any evidence of any suspected City
ordinance violations or any pertinent property conditions
found therein or thereon be seized, recorded or photographed
and a description of such property be returned, within ten (10)
days after filing of the application, to the Clerk of the Municipal
Court, to be dealt with according to law;
f. Be signed by the Judge with his/her title of office indicated.
3. Execution and return.
a. A search warrant issued under this Section shall be executed
only by a City Police Officer, provided however, that one (1) or
more designated City Officials may accompany the officer and
the warrant shall be executed in the following manner:
(1) The warrant may be issued by facsimile or other electronic
means.
Section
130.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
130.210
AO:79
(2) The warrant shall be executed by conducting the search,
inspection, entry or seizure as commanded and shall be
executed as soon as practicable and in a reasonable
manner.
(3) The officer shall give the owner or occupant of the
property searched, inspected or entered upon a copy of
the warrant.
(4) Seized property.
(a) If any property is seized incident to the search, the
officer shall give the person from whose possession it
was taken, if the person is present, an itemized receipt
for the property taken. If no such person is present,
the officer shall leave the receipt at the site of the
search in a conspicuous place.
(b) A copy of the itemized receipt of any property taken
shall be delivered to an attorney for the City within
two (2) working days of the search.
(c) The disposition of property seized pursuant to a
warrant under this Section shall be in accordance with
an applicable City ordinance or Code Section but, in
the absence of same, then with Section 542.301,
RSMo.
(5) The officer may summon as many persons as he/she deems
necessary to assist him/her in executing the warrant and
such persons shall not be held liable as a result of any
illegality of the search and seizure.
(6) An officer making a search pursuant to an invalid warrant,
the invalidity of which is not apparent on its face, may use
such force as he/she would be justified in using if the
warrant were valid.
(7) A search warrant shall expire if it is not executed and the
required return made within ten (10) days after the date of
the making of the application.
b. Search warrant—delivery.
(1) After execution of the search warrant, the warrant, with a
return thereon signed by the officer making the search,
shall be delivered to the Municipal Court.
(2) The return shall show the date and manner of execution
and the name of the possessor and of the owner, when not
the same person, if known, of the property or places
searched or seized.
Section
130.210
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
130.210
AO:80
(3) The return shall be accompanied by any photographs,
copies or recordings made and by any property seized,
along with a copy of the itemized receipt of such property
required by this Section; provided however, that seized
property may be disposed of as provided herein and in
such a case a description of the property seized shall
accompany the return.
(4) The Court Clerk, upon request, shall deliver a copy of the
return to the possessor and the owner, when not the same
person, of the property searched or seized.
D. Warrant Invalid, When A Search Warrant Shall Be Deemed Invalid.
1. If it was not issued by the Municipal Judge;
2. If it was issued without a written application having been filed and
verified;
3. If it was issued without sufficient probable cause in light of the
goals of the ordinance to be enforced and such other factors as
provided in Subsection (C)(1)(b) hereof;
4. If it was not issued with respect to property or places in the City;
5. If it does not describe the property or places to be searched,
inspected, entered upon or seized with sufficient certainty;
6. If it is not signed by the Judge who issued it; or
7. If it was not executed and the required return made within ten (10)
days after the date of the making of the application.
Section
130.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
130.210
AO:81
Chapter 135
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT - RELOCATION POLICY
Section 135.010. Relocation Policy. [Ord. No. 6332 §1, 8-12-201410]
A. The Relocation Policy, as set forth in this Section, is hereby established,
adopted and approved.
B. The following Relocation Policy shall apply to any plan, project or area
for redevelopment under the operation of Chapter 99, RSMo., Chapter
100, RSMo., or Chapter 353, RSMo., which proposes or includes within
its provisions or necessitates displacement of persons, when such
displacement is not subject to the provisions of the Federal Uniform
Relocation and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 (42 U.S.C.
§§ 4601 to 4655, as amended) or to other state law requirements.
1. As used herein, the following terms shall mean:
BUSINESS — Any lawful activity that is conducted:
DECENT, SAFE AND SANITARY DWELLING — A dwelling which
meets applicable housing and occupancy codes. The dwelling shall:
DISPLACED PERSON — Any person that moves from the real
property or moves his personal property from the real property
permanently and voluntarily as a direct result of the acquisition,
Primarily for the purchase, sale or use of personal or real
property or for the manufacture, processing or marketing of
products or commodities;
a.
b. Primarily for the sale of services to the public; or
On a not-for-profit basis by any organization that has obtained
an exemption from the payment of federal income taxes as
provided in § 501(c)(3) of Title 26, U.S.C., as amended, and
veterans organizations.
c.
a. Be structurally sound, weathertight and in good repair;
b. Contain a safe electrical wiring system;
c. Contain an adequate heating system;
Be adequate in size with respect to the number of rooms
needed to accommodate the displaced person; and
d.
For a handicapped person, be free of any barriers which would
preclude reasonable ingress, egress or use of the dwelling.
e.
10.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former § 135.010, Relocation
Policy, adopted 12-13-2005 by Ord. No. 5910.
Section
130.210
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
135.010
AO:82
rehabilitation or demolition of or the written notice of intent to
acquire such real property, in whole or in part, for a public purpose.
HANDICAPPED PERSON — Any person who is deaf, legally blind
or orthopedically disabled to the extent that acquisition of another
residence presents a greater burden than other persons would
encounter or to the extent that modifications to the replacement
residence would be necessary.
INITIATION OF NEGOTIATIONS — The delivery of the initial
written offer of just compensation by the acquiring entity, to the
owner of the real property, to purchase such real property for the
project, or the notice to the person that he will be displaced by
rehabilitation or demolition.
PERSON — Any individual, family, partnership, corporation, or
association that has a legal right to occupy the property, including
but not limited to month-to-month tenants.
PUBLIC AGENCY — The State of Missouri or any political
subdivision or any branch, bureau or department thereof, any
public school district, and any quasi-public corporation created or
existing by law which are authorized to acquire real property for
public purpose and which acquire any such property either partly
or wholly with aid or reimbursement from federal funds.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT CORPORATION — A corporation
organized pursuant to Chapter 353, RSMo., as further defined in
Section 353.020 RSMo.
2. Every urban redevelopment corporation acquiring property within
a redevelopment area shall submit a relocation plan as part of the
redevelopment plan. The relocation plan shall comply with all
applicable provisions of this Relocation Policy.
3. Unless the property acquisition under the operation of Chapter 99,
RSMo., Chapter 100, RSMo., or Chapter 353, RSMo., is subject to
federal relocation standards or subsection 1 of Section 523.205
RSMo., the relocation plan shall provide for the following:
a. Payments to all eligible displaced persons who occupied the
property to be acquired for not less than ninety (90) days prior
to the initiation of negotiations who are required to vacate the
premises;
b. A program for identifying special needs of displaced persons,
with specific consideration given to income, age, size of family,
nature of business, availability of suitable replacement
facilities and vacancy rates of affordable facilities;
c. A program for providing proper and timely notice to all
displaced persons, including a general description of their
potential rights and benefits if they are displaced, their
eligibility for relocation assistance, and the nature of that
Section
135.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.010
AO:83
assistance. The notices required for compliance with this
Section are as follows:
(1) A general information notice that shall be issued at the
approval and selection of a designated redeveloper and
shall inform residential and non-residential owners and
occupants of a potential project, including the potential
acquisition of the property; and
(2) A notice of relocation eligibility that shall be issued as soon
as feasible after the execution of the redevelopment
agreement and shall inform residential and non-residential
occupants within the project area who will be displaced of
their relocation assistance and nature of that assistance,
including ninety (90) days' advance notice of the date the
occupants must vacate;
d. A program for referrals of displaced persons with provisions
for a minimum of three (3) decent, safe and sanitary housing
referrals for residential persons or suitable referral sites for
displaced businesses, a minimum of ninety (90) days' notice of
referral sites for all displaced persons prior to the date such
displaced persons are required to vacate the premises, and
arrangements for transportation to inspect referral sites; and
e. Every displaced person shall be given a ninety-day notice to
vacate, prior to the date such displaced person is required to
vacate the premises.
4. All displaced residential persons eligible for payments shall be
provided with relocation payments based upon one of the following,
at the option of the person:
a. A fixed moving expense payment of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00); or
b. Actual reasonable costs of relocation, including, but not limited
to, actual moving costs, utility deposits, key deposits, storage
of personal property up to one (1) month, utility transfer and
connection fees and other initial rehousing deposits, including
first and last month's rent and security deposit. Such costs of
relocation shall not include the cost of a replacement property
or any capital improvements thereto.
5. All displaced businesses eligible for payments shall be provided
with relocation payments based upon the following, at the option of
the business:
a. A fixed moving expense payment of three thousand dollars
($3,000.00) and up to an additional ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) for reestablishment expenses. Reestablishment
expenses are limited to costs incurred for physical
Section
135.010
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
135.010
AO:84
improvements to the replacement property to accommodate
the particular business at issue; or
b. Actual costs of moving, including costs for packing, crating,
disconnection, dismantling, reassembling and installing all
personal equipment and costs for relettering similar signs and
similar replacement stationery, and up to an additional ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for reestablishment expenses.
Reestablishment expenses are limited to actual costs incurred
for physical improvements to the replacement property to
accommodate the particular business at issue.
6. If a displaced person demonstrates the need for an advance
relocation payment, in order to avoid or reduce a hardship, the
developer or the City or other acquiring public agency shall issue
the payment subject to such safeguards as are appropriate to
ensure that the objective of the payment is accomplished. Payment
for a satisfactory claim shall be made within thirty (30) days
following receipt of sufficient documentation to support the claim.
All claims for relocation payment shall be filed with the displacing
agency within six (6) months after:
a. For tenants, the date of displacement;
b. For owners, the date of displacement or the final payment for
the acquisition of the real property, whichever is later.
7. Any displaced person, who is also the owner of the premises, may
waive relocation payments as part of the negotiations for
acquisition of the interest held by such person. Such waiver shall
be in writing, shall disclose the person's knowledge of the
provisions of this Relocation Policy and his entitlement to payment
and shall be filed with the City or other acquiring public agency.
However, any such waiver shall not include a waiver of any notice
provisions of this Relocation Policy, and a displaced person shall
remain entitled to all of the provisions regarding programs which
are contained in Subsection B3b and c above.
8. All persons eligible for relocation benefits shall be notified in
writing of the availability of such relocation payments and
assistance, with such notice to be given concurrently with the
notice of referral sites as required in Subsection B3d above.
9. Any urban redevelopment corporation, its assigns or transferees,
which have been provided any assistance under the operation of
Chapter 99, RSMo., Chapter 100, RSMo., Chapter 353, RSMo., or
Chapter 523, RSMo., with land acquisition by the City, shall be
required to make a report to the Board of Aldermen or appropriate
public agency which shall include, but not be limited to, the
addresses of all occupied residential buildings and structures
within the redevelopment area and the names and addresses of
persons displaced by the redeveloper and specific relocation
Section
135.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.010
AO:85
Chapter 140
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COUNCILS AND COMMITTEES
Section 140.010. Parks and Recreation Commission [CC 1970 §2-9;
Ord. No. 4864 §1, 2-11-1992]
Charter Reference — Creation, etc., of parks and recreation commission,
art. IV §§1, 7.
The Board of Aldermen shall appoint seven (7) members to a Parks and
Recreation Commission which shall act in an advisory capacity to the Board
of Aldermen and the Director in matters pertaining to parks and public
recreation. The Board of Education of the Clayton school district shall be
requested to recommend two (2) of its members as additional members of
the Commission, and if so recommended, such members shall be appointed.
benefits provided to each person, as well as a sample notice
provided to each person.
10. An urban redevelopment corporation which fails to comply with the
relocation requirements provided in this Relocation Policy shall not
be eligible for tax abatement as provided for in Chapter 353, RSMo.
11. The requirements set out herein shall be considered minimum
standards. In reviewing any proposed relocation plan under the
operation of Chapter 99, RSMo., Chapter 100, RSMo., or Chapter
353, RSMo., the Board of Aldermen or appropriate public agency
shall determine the adequacy of the proposal and may require
additional elements to be provided.
12. Relocation assistance shall not be provided to any person who
purposely resides or locates his business in a redevelopment area
solely for the purpose of obtaining relocation benefits.
C. The Relocation Policy shall apply to any plan, project, or area for
redevelopment under the operation of Chapter 99, Chapter 100, or
Chapter 353 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri, as amended, which is
hereafter filed for approval, approved, or amended, and any other land
acquisition by the City through condemnation proceedings initiated
after December 31, 2006.
D. The Sections of this Chapter shall be severable. If any Section of this
Chapter is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the
remaining Sections of this Chapter are valid, unless the court finds the
valid Sections of this Chapter are so essential and inseparably
connected with and dependent upon the void Section that it cannot be
presumed that the Board of Aldermen would have enacted the valid
Sections without the invalid ones, or unless the court finds that the
valid Sections standing alone are incomplete and are incapable of being
executed in accordance with the legislative intent.
Section
135.010
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
140.010
AO:86
All members shall be electors of the City and shall hold no other office
or employment in the government of the City. Commencing with the
appointments in 1992, two (2) members shall be appointed for a two (2)
year term and two (2) members shall be appointed for a three (3) year
term. Thereafter members shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years
each. Those members in office at the time of adoption of this Section shall
serve the terms for which they were appointed. Vacancies shall be filled
by appointments for unexpired terms. The Chairman shall be named by the
Board of Aldermen; said officer may be appointed to such office for one (1)
year term.
Section 140.020. Economic Development Advisory Committee [Ord.
No. 6028 §§1—2, 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 6207 §1, 6-12-2012]
The Mayor, with the approval of the Board of Aldermen, shall appoint
an Advisory Committee consisting of not more than seven (7) members
and two (2) ex-officio representatives as provided below, to consider and
make recommendations to the Board of Aldermen on the use of the Special
Business District Fund (Special Tax District) and upon request, to make
recommendations regarding significant matters related to the vitality of
the business community. The Advisory Committee shall consist of seven (7)
voting representatives, of which at least two (2) will be from each Ward.
Each member shall serve for a term of three (3) years. Vacancies on the
Committee shall be filled by the Mayor with the approval of the Board of
Aldermen for the unexpired term of the vacating member. No member may
be appointed to serve more than three (3) full terms consecutively. The
terms of all members shall expire on June thirtieth (30th) of the appropriate
year. These representatives should be from such groups as the commercial
real estate community; the financial industry; the legal field; businesses
maintaining an office located in the central business district; and businesses
maintaining retail business located in the central business district. In
addition, the Clayton School District and the Clayton Chamber of Commerce
may each appoint a member to serve in an ex-officio non-voting capacity.
The Chair of such Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of the Board of Aldermen. In addition, the Mayor, along with
two (2) Aldermen assigned by the Mayor on an annual basis, may serve as
liaisons to the Committee.
Section 140.030. Public Art Advisory Committee [Ord. No. 6105 §1,
5-25-2010; Ord. No. 6207 §1, 6-12-2012; Ord. No. 6506, 11-14-2017]
A. There is hereby established the Public Art Advisory Committee of the
City of Clayton to assist the City in acquiring, promoting and enhancing
public art and the quality of life throughout the City.
B. The Committee shall consist of three (3) members appointed by the
Board of Aldermen. There shall also be two (2) alternate members
appointed by the Board of Aldermen to serve at the request of the
Committee Chairperson at any meeting in the absence or
disqualification of one (1) or more regular members. All members and
Section
140.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
140.030
AO:87
alternate members shall be residents and registered voters of the City
of Clayton at the time of appointment and while serving on the
Committee. Members and alternates shall be art professionals or have
extensive background in and familiarity with the field of art. Members
and alternates shall hold no other office or position in the City
Government except for short term or ad hoc study or advisory
committees. Members and alternates shall serve without remuneration.
C. The original appointees shall be appointed for staggered terms such
that one (1) member shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year; one
(1) member for a term of two (2) years; a third (3rd) member for a term
of three (3) years; one (1) alternate for a term of one (1) year, and the
other alternate for a term of two (2) years. Thereafter, members shall be
appointed for a term of three (3) years. Alternate members shall be
appointed for a term of two (2) years. Vacancies on the Committee shall
be filled by the Board of Aldermen for the unexpired term of the
vacating member. The terms of all members and alternates shall expire
on June thirtieth (30th) of the appropriate year.
D. The Board of Aldermen shall appoint one (1) member as Chairperson to
serve for a term of one (1) year. Meetings of the Committee shall be
held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the
Committee may determine. The Committee shall keep minutes of all
meetings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact and shall keep records of
its official actions.
E. The Committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Mayor and
Board of Aldermen and the Plan Commission/Architectural Review
Board to review, consider and render advice and recommendations on
such City and private developments, planned unit developments,
special development district developments or other matters involving
public art as may be referred to the Committee by the Mayor, Board of
Aldermen or, as to private developments, Plan Commission/
Architectural Review Board. The City Manager shall designate an
appropriate staff member, taking into account the location and nature
of the matter under review and the availability, experience and training
of staff personnel, to support and coordinate the work of the Committee
on each matter referred to the Committee.
F. For purposes of this Section, the term “public art” refers to works of art
in any media that have been planned, executed and so situated as to
evidence intent that they be observed by the members of the public
located in the physical public domain, usually outside and accessible to
all. “Public art” shall not include works of art that are displayed for
purposes of sale or works located inside buildings and only incidentally
or occasionally observable from the public domain.
G. In considering opportunities for public art the Committee shall consider
and render advice on:
Section
140.030
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
140.030
AO:88
Section 140.040. Sustainability Committee [Ord. No. 6208 §1,
6-12-2012; Ord. No. 6507, 11-14-2017]
Chapter 145
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING COMMISSION/PROCEDURES
1. Whether the proposed artist is qualified for an assignment of the
character proposed;
2. Whether the proposed artwork fits the project conceptually and
economically and has an appropriate visual impact;
3. Whether the scale and value of the proposed public art piece is
reasonable and appropriate for the site and the nature of the
development under consideration; and
4. Whether the site for the proposed public art installation within the
development under consideration is appropriate.
A. There is hereby established the Sustainability Committee of the City of
Clayton, which Committee shall consist of seven (7) voting
representatives appointed by the Board of Aldermen, at least two (2) of
which will be from each ward. One member shall be appointed each
year by the Board of Aldermen to serve as Chairman. The Board of
Aldermen may also appoint one (1) member each of such other citizen
boards, committees or commissions as the Board believes appropriate
to serve as an ex officio (non-voting) liaison representative to the
Sustainability Committee.
B. The role of the Committee shall be to advise the Mayor, Board of
Aldermen and City Manager with respect to the development and
support of ecologically sound and sustainable programs and practices
within Clayton's municipal government, the Clayton community and the
metropolitan St. Louis region.
C. Each member shall serve for a term of three (3) years, though initial
appointments of new members expanding the membership of the
Committee should be for one (1) or two (2) year terms in order to
stagger the terms of the Committee's membership such that, as nearly
as possible, the terms of one-third (1/3) of the Committee's members
expire each year. Appointments to succeed to an existing Committee
membership position shall be for three (3) year terms. Vacancies on the
Committee shall be filled for the unexpired term of the vacating
member. No member may be appointed to serve more than three (3) full
terms consecutively. The terms of all members shall expire on June
thirtieth (30th) of the appropriate year.
Section
140.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
140.040
AO:89

ARTICLE I
Tax Increment Financing Commission
Section 145.010. Definitions [Ord. No. 5991 §1, 9-11-2007]
When used in this Article, the following words shall have the meaning
indicated herein:
ACT — The Real Property Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act,
Sections 99.800 thru 99.865, RSMo., as amended.
CITY — The Mayor and Board of Aldermen of the City of Clayton, Missouri,
acting in their official capacity.
REDEVELOPMENT AREA — An area designated by the City in respect
to which the City, after consideration and recommendation of its TIF
Commission, has made a finding that there exist conditions which caused
the area to be classified as a blighted area, a conservation area, or an
economic development area or a combination thereof.
REDEVELOPMENT PLAN — The comprehensive plan for redevelopment of
a redevelopment area by the payment of redevelopment costs to reduce
or eliminate those conditions, the existence of which qualified the
redevelopment area as a blighted area, a conservation area, an economic
development area or a combination thereof, and thereby enhance the tax
base of the taxing districts which extend into the redevelopment area. Each
redevelopment plan adopted shall conform to the requirements of Section
99.810 of the Act.
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT — Any redevelopment project within a
designated redevelopment area in furtherance of the objectives of the
redevelopment plan.
TIF COMMISSION — The Tax Increment Financing Commission of the City
of Clayton, Missouri, as authorized pursuant to Section 99.820 of the Act
and established by Section 145.020 herein.
Section 145.020. Commission Established [Ord. No. 5991 §2,
9-11-2007]
There is hereby established a Commission to be known as the "Tax
Increment Financing Commission of the City of Clayton, Missouri." All
members of the TIF Commission shall serve without compensation.
Section 145.030. Authority [Ord. No. 5991 §3, 9-11-2007]
The TIF Commission shall serve as an advisory body to the City as it
relates to the consideration of tax increment financing proposals submitted
by interested parties or initiated by any public agency in accordance with
the Act. The TIF Commission shall hold public hearings and give notice
pursuant to Sections 99.825 and 99.830 of the Act on proposed
redevelopment plans, redevelopment projects and designation of
redevelopment areas and amendments thereto. The TIF Commission shall
Section
145.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
145.030
AO:91
vote on all proposed redevelopment plans, redevelopment projects and
designations of redevelopment areas and amendments thereto, within thirty
(30) days following completion of a hearing on any such plan, project,
designation or amendment and shall make recommendations to the City
within ninety (90) days of a hearing referred to in Section 99.825 of the
Act concerning adoption of or amendment to redevelopment plans,
redevelopment projects and/or designation of redevelopment areas.
Section 145.040. Organization [Ord. No. 5991 §4, 9-11-2007]
The TIF Commission shall elect from among its number a Chairman, Vice-
Chairman and Secretary. Meetings of the TIF Commission shall be open to
the public to the extent provided by law and a record of each meeting shall
be kept. The TIF Commission shall have the authority to establish rules and
procedures not in conflict with City ordinances or policies or the Act and
shall meet as required to fulfill its obligations set forth in the Act.
Section 145.050. Membership [Ord. No. 5991 §5, 9-11-2007]
Membership on the TIF Commission shall consist of two (2) classes of
members: City appointees and other appointees. The TIF Commission shall
be composed of twelve (12) persons of whom six (6) shall be City appointees
and six (6) shall be other appointees. Regardless of class, each member of
the TIF Commission shall have one (1) vote on all matters properly before
it and shall participate in all deliberations of the TIF Commission without
differentiation.
Section 145.060. Appointment of City Appointees [Ord. No. 5991 §6,
9-11-2007]
Section 145.070. Appointment of Other Appointees [Ord. No. 5991
§7, 9-11-2007]
A. The City appointees shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent
and approval of the Board of Aldermen. Any vacancies shall be filled for
the unexpired terms in the same manner as were the original
appointments.
B. Terms of office for City appointees shall be for a term of four (4) years,
except two (2) of the initial appointments shall be for term of two (2)
years and two (2) of the initial appointments shall be for a term of three
(3) years from the date of initial appointment.
A. Other appointees shall be appointed in accordance with the Act when a
redevelopment area, redevelopment plan or redevelopment project is
proposed to be established or amended or at such earlier date as the
City shall invite other affected taxing jurisdictions to do so. Three (3) of
the other appointees shall be appointed by the County Executive with
the consent of a majority of the County Council in accord with Section
99.820.2(6) of the Act, as amended. Two (2) of the other appointees
shall be appointed by the Board of Education of the School District(s)
Section
145.030
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
145.070
AO:92
Section 145.080. Procedures For Bids and Proposals [Ord. No. 5991
§8, 9-11-2007]
whose district(s) is (are) included within the Redevelopment Plan or
Redevelopment Area in accord with Section 99.820.2(1) of the Act, as
amended; such members shall be appointed in any manner agreed upon
by such school districts. One (1) other appointee shall be appointed
in accord with Section 99.820.2(2) of the Act, as amended, in any
manner agreed to by the other affected taxing jurisdictions levying ad
valorem taxes within the contemplated redevelopment area included
in a redevelopment plan. The City shall not be considered a taxing
jurisdiction for purposes of appointment of this other appointee.
B. The term of office of the other appointees shall consist of the period of
time from the time that the affected school district(s) and other affected
taxing jurisdictions are notified in writing of a proposed redevelopment
plan or designation of a redevelopment area until final approval or
disapproval of the redevelopment plan, redevelopment project or
designation of a redevelopment area by the City in response to an
initiating proposal.
C. In the event the appropriate appointing authority, affected School
District(s), or other affected taxing jurisdictions shall fail to appoint
other appointees within thirty (30) days of receipt of written notice of a
proposed redevelopment plan, redevelopment project, designation of a
redevelopment area or amendment thereto, the remaining City
appointees and other appointees may proceed to exercise the power of
the TIF Commission as it relates to proposals then before it.
A. The City hereby adopts the following procedures for bids and proposals
for the implementation of redevelopment projects:
1. The City or the TIF Commission shall solicit proposals with respect
to the implementation of each proposed redevelopment project.
2. Each request for proposals, or notice thereof, shall be published in
a newspaper of general circulation in the City and shall be mailed
to those persons or firms that the City Manager or the City's
planning consultant determines might be interested in submitting a
bid. Each request for proposals shall provide at least thirty (30)
days for the submission of a proposal.
3. Criteria for the selection of proposals will include the impact of the
proposed project on the City and other taxing jurisdictions,
including the projected term for which tax increment financing will
be utilized. The City or the TIF Commission may establish such
additional criteria as it deems appropriate for the selection of bids
and proposals. The City or the TIF Commission shall provide
reasonable opportunity for any person to submit alternative
proposals or bids.
Section
145.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
145.080
AO:93

ARTICLE II
Procedures
Section 145.090. Procedure For Considering Redevelopment Plans
and Tax Abatement or Exemption [Ord. No. 5907 §§1—2,
10-25-2005]
A. Not less than twenty (20) days before a public hearing to consider a
redevelopment plan that provides for tax abatement or tax exemption
pursuant to Chapter 353, RSMo., the City shall furnish to the political
subdivisions whose boundaries for ad valorem taxation purposes
include any portion of the property to be affected by tax abatement:
1. Notice of the scheduled public hearing, which shall include:
a. The time, date and place of the public hearing,
b. A general description of the boundaries of the proposed
redevelopment area,
c. A general description of the proposed redevelopment plan,
d. An invitation to submit comments to the Board of Aldermen
prior to the date of the public hearing concerning matters that
will be discussed at the public hearing, and to appear at the
public hearing and provide comments, and
e. A statement that all interested persons and all political
subdivisions will have the opportunity to be heard on such
grant of tax abatement or exemption; and
2. A written statement of the impact on ad valorem taxes such tax
abatement or exemption will have on the political subdivisions,
which shall be prepared by or at the direction of the applicant and
shall include an estimate of the amount of ad valorem tax revenues
of each political subdivision which will be affected by the proposed
tax abatement or exemption, based on the estimated assessed
valuation of the real property involved as such property would exist
before and after it is redeveloped.
B. The applicant for tax abatement or exemption under Chapter 353,
RSMo., shall provide or cause to be provided to the City: a complete list
of all political subdivisions whose boundaries for ad valorem taxation
purposes include any portion of the property to be affected by tax
abatement or exemption; the written statement specified in Subsection
(A)(2) above, in a form approved by the City Manager; and any other
information deemed necessary by the City Manager or his/her designee
to evaluate the proposed redevelopment plan and comply with the
requirements of this Section.
Section
145.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
145.090
AO:95
Chapter 200
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Charter Reference — Created, art. IV §1.
Cross References — Pension fund, §§125.070 et seq., as to ambulance fees
adopted by the city, a current schedule of these fees is held on file in the
city offices.
Section
145.090
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
145.090
AO:96
ARTICLE I
Chief of Police
Section 200.010. Chief — Responsibility For Functioning of
Department — Official Bond [CC 1970 §2-96; CC 1947 §8-2]
The Chief of Police is in charge of and responsible for the efficient
organization and functioning of the Police Department under the general
supervision of the City Manager. Before entering upon the duties of his/her
office, he/she shall give a surety company bond to the City in the sum of
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to be approved by the Board of Aldermen,
with conditions and subject to the provisions of the Charter and this Code
relating to bonds of City Officers.
Section 200.020. Custody of Property — Responsibility For
Performance By Department Members — Specific Duties Provided
By Law [CC 1970 §2-97; CC 1947 §8-9]
The Chief of Police shall have custody of all of the books, records, property,
weapons, badges, furniture, vehicles, equipment, supplies and merchandise
of the Police Department and shall direct and have the responsibility for the
good conduct and proper and efficient performance of their duties by the
members and employees of the Police Department. In all such matters, he/
she shall be subject to and have the advice of the City Manager. He/she shall
perform such specific duties as may be provided by the laws of the State
and the provisions of this Code.
Section 200.030. Promulgating, Amending and Repealing Rules and
Regulations [CC 1970 §2-98; CC 1947 §8-10]
The Chief of Police may promulgate rules and regulations for the
government of the Police Department and Policemen, to be subject to
approval by the City Manager, and may in like manner from time to time
amend or repeal such rules and regulations or adopt new rules and
regulations.
Section
200.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
200.030
AO:97

ARTICLE II
Collective Bargaining With Law Enforcement Personnel
Section 200.040. Purpose. [Ord. No. 6568, 12-11-2018]
These provisions are adopted for the purpose of providing a framework
within which law enforcement personnel employed by the City of Clayton
can exercise their rights under Mo. Const. Art. I, § 29, to bargain
collectively with the City through representatives of their own choosing.
Section 200.050. Coverage. [Ord. No. 6568, 12-11-2018]
Section 200.060. Designation Of Exclusive Bargaining
Representative. [Ord. No. 6568, 12-11-2018]
A. These provisions shall apply to all regular, sworn full-time personnel
employed in the Police Department.
B. It is the City's determination that all regular full-time non-supervisory
employees employed within the Police Department constitute the most
appropriate unit for the purpose of collective bargaining. Any election
conducted for the purpose of allowing employees to designate an
exclusive bargaining representative, as provided below, shall take place
within this unit, subject to the following exclusions:
1. To avoid the division of loyalties and conflicts of interest,
supervisory personnel shall not be included within the same
bargaining unit as employees they supervise. Further, the same
labor organization shall not represent both non-supervisory and
supervisory employees within the Police Department. For the
purposes of this Subsection, Sergeants, Lieutenants, Captains, and
the Chief of Police shall be considered supervisory employees.
A. Any labor organization wishing to represent employees employed in the
City's Police Department, in either a supervisory or non-supervisory
bargaining unit, shall present to the City's City Manager cards
containing the signature of at least thirty percent (30%) of the
employees in the unit, indicating that they wish to select the labor
organization in question as their exclusive bargaining representative
for the purpose of collective bargaining.
B. Upon receiving such cards, the City Manager shall validate the
signatures on the cards, and confirm that at least thirty percent (30%)
of the employees in the bargaining unit have signed cards. If the City
Manager determines that at least thirty percent (30%) of the employees
in the unit have signed valid cards, the City Manager shall consult with
the Chief of Police and the representative of the labor organization that
has presented the cards, and together they shall select a mutually
agreeable date for a secret ballot election to take place. The election
shall be held at City Hall, and shall be set for a date falling no less than
one (1) and no more than four (4) weeks after the day upon which the
Section
200.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
200.060
AO:99
City Manager first receives the cards from the labor organization's
representative, unless the City and the representative of the labor
organization both agree upon a date outside that period.
C. Once an election date has been set, the City Manager shall issue a
notice informing all eligible voters of the date, time, and place of the
election. Such notice shall be distributed to all employees in the
bargaining unit and shall be posted within the Department.
D. From the time the election notice is first posted until the date of the
election, all employees (including management) of the City have the
right to freely express their opinions about whether or not the labor
organization should be selected as the exclusive bargaining
representative of the employees in the bargaining unit. However, no
employee of the City and no representative of the labor organization
shall attempt to threaten, intimidate, coerce, or otherwise restrain any
eligible voter in the free exercise of his or her individual choice to
support or oppose the selection of the labor organization in question as
the exclusive bargaining representative of the employees in the
bargaining unit.
E. The election shall be conducted by secret ballot, using such procedures
as the City Manager shall determine are appropriate for ensuring the
privacy and security of each employee's vote. Once the poll is closed,
both parties shall oversee the counting of the ballots. One (1)
representative of the City and one (1) representative of the labor
organization shall have the right to be present during the counting of
the ballots.
1. The ballots shall read "Do you wish to select [labor organization] as
the exclusive bargaining representative for [description of
bargaining unit] employed within the City of Clayton Police
Department?" The ballot will include check boxes for marking "yes"
or "no" in response to this question.
2. In the event that more than one (1) labor organization seeks to
represent employees in the unit, and in the event both labor
organizations have obtained signatures from at least thirty percent
(30%) of the employees in the unit stating that they wish to
designate the labor organization as their exclusive bargaining
representative, then the ballot shall read "Do you wish to select
[labor organization A], [labor organization B], or no labor
organization as the exclusive bargaining representative for
[description of bargaining unit] employed within the City of Clayton
Police Department?" The ballot will then include check boxes for
marking "I wish to select [labor organization A] as my exclusive
bargaining representative," "I wish to select [labor organization B]
as my exclusive bargaining representative," and "I do not wish to
select any labor organization as my exclusive bargaining
representative."
Section
200.060
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
200.060
AO:100
Section 200.070. Collective Bargaining Process. [Ord. No. 6568,
12-11-2018]
3. Any labor organization receiving more than fifty percent (50%) of
the votes of all eligible voters shall be designated and recognized
by the City as the exclusive bargaining representative for all
employees in the bargaining unit.
F. Employees within the bargaining unit shall have the right to seek to
decertify the labor organization as their exclusive bargaining
representative at any time. If any employee within the bargaining unit
presents to the City Manager cards bearing the signatures of at least
thirty percent (30%) of the employees within the bargaining unit stating
that those employees no longer wish to be represented by the labor
organization in question, the City Manager shall first validate the
signatures on the cards.
1. If the City Manager confirms that at least thirty percent (30%) of
the employees in the bargaining unit have signed decertification
cards, the City Manager shall consult with the Chief of Police and
the designated representative of the labor organization to select a
date for a decertification election. Such election shall take place at
least four (4) weeks after the City Manager receives the
decertification cards, and no later than six (6) weeks after the City
Manager receives the decertification cards unless the City
Manager and the representative of the labor organization both
agree upon a date outside that period. Notice of such election shall
be distributed to all employees within the bargaining unit and
posted within the Police Department.
2. If more than fifty percent (50%) of the employees in the bargaining
unit cast votes to terminate the labor organization's representation
of the employees in the bargaining unit, the labor organization
shall immediately cease to represent the employees in the
bargaining unit.
3. In the event of the decertification of the exclusive bargaining
representative of the employees in any bargaining unit within the
Police Department, all terms and conditions of employment existing
at the time of decertification shall remain in place until such time
as those terms or conditions of employment may be altered by the
City from time to time.
G. No more than one (1) election shall take place in any bargaining unit
within the same twelve-month period. Once an election takes place, the
City Manager shall not accept cards from labor organizations or
employees within the bargaining unit seeking another election for one
(1) full calendar year after the date of the election.
A. Within four (4) weeks after a labor organization is certified as the
exclusive bargaining representative for the employees in a bargaining
Section
200.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
200.070
AO:101
Section 200.080. Content Of Labor Agreements. [Ord. No. 6568,
12-11-2018]
unit as set out above, representatives of the City, designated by the
City Manager, and representatives of the labor organization, selected
by the labor organization, shall meet and begin bargaining for an
agreement covering the terms of employment for the employees within
the bargaining unit.
B. Both sides shall bargain in good faith and make an earnest effort to
reach a mutually acceptable agreement, but neither side shall be
required to offer any particular concession or withdraw any particular
proposal.
C. The City may pay union representatives for time spent participating in
collective bargaining or preparing for collective bargaining as agreed
upon by the City and the labor organization through the collective
bargaining process.
D. The union and its members shall not refuse to meet with City's
designated representatives or attempt to bargain with anyone other
than the City's designated representatives. The union and its members
shall not engage in conduct intended to cause the removal or
replacement of any designated representative by the City. Any labor
organization violating this provision may be sued for damages to the
extent that the labor organization contributed to the removal of the
representative of the City.
E. The completion of discussions, as referenced above, shall include the
ratification of any such proposal by the labor organization prior to its
presentation to the Board of Aldermen for adoption, modification or
rejection. The Board may approve the entire agreement or any part(s)
thereof. If the Board rejects any portion of the agreement, the Board
may return the rejected portion(s) of the agreement to the parties for
further bargaining, or the Board may adopt a replacement provision of
its own design, or the Board may state that no provision covering the
topic in question shall be adopted.
F. After the first agreement between the City and the labor organization is
adopted, bargaining for renewal agreements shall occur according to
the Agreement.
A. Labor agreements negotiated between the parties may cover wages,
benefits, and all other terms of employment for employees within the
bargaining unit, subject to the following limitations.
1. Every labor agreement shall include a provision reserving to
management the right to hire, promote, assign, direct, transfer,
schedule, discipline, and discharge employees, so long as those
rights are not exercised in a way that conflicts with any express
provision of the labor agreement. Every labor agreement shall also
Section
200.070
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
200.080
AO:102
Section 200.090. Effect Of Labor Agreement. [Ord. No. 6568,
12-11-2018]
Section 200.100. Validity And Enforcement. [Ord. No. 6568,
12-11-2018]
include a provision reserving to management the right to make,
amend, and rescind reasonable work rules and standard operating
procedures, so long as such work rules and standard operating
procedures do not conflict with any express provision of the labor
agreement.
2. To the extent that it is constitutionally permitted, every labor
agreement shall expressly prohibit all strikes and picketing of any
kind. Every labor agreement shall include a provision
acknowledging that any employee who engages in any strike or
concerted refusal to work, or who pickets over any personnel
matter shall be subject to immediate termination of employment.
A. In the event of a budget shortfall, the Board of Aldermen shall have the
right to request the modification of the economic terms of any labor
agreement.
B. Should the Board deem it necessary to modify the economic terms of
any labor agreement, it shall so notify the relevant labor organization,
and shall provide a period of thirty (30) days during which the City and
the labor organization shall bargain in good faith over any necessary
adjustments to the economic terms of the agreement.
C. If, at the end of the thirty-day period, the parties have been unable to
agree upon modifications that meet the Board's requirements, the
Board shall have the right to make necessary adjustments on its own
authority. The Board's decision may be appealed pursuant to the
grievance procedure contained in a Collective Bargaining Agreement.
A. If the State of Missouri passes any law governing collective bargaining
for law enforcement personnel, then to the extent any of the provisions
established herein are inconsistent with the Missouri Statute, the
inconsistent provisions shall be superseded in whole or in part by such
Statute.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any of the provisions
established herein to be unenforceable under any State or Federal
Statute, regulation, or other authority, the unenforceable portion of the
provisions shall be removed, but all other provisions contained herein
shall remain in effect.
Section
200.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
200.100
AO:103
Chapter 205
FIRE PROTECTION AND FIRE PREVENTION
Section
200.100
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
200.100
AO:104
ARTICLE I
Fire Department11
Section 205.010. Composition [CC 1970 §2-116; CC 1947 §8-19]
The City Fire Department shall consist of the Chief of the Fire Department,
the Fire Marshal, Fire Captains and such firefighters and employees as the
City Manager may from time to time determine to be required for efficient
fire protection in the City.
Section 205.020. Responsibility [CC 1970 §2-117; CC 1947 §8-20]
The Chief of the Fire Department shall have charge of the station houses,
vehicles, supplies and equipment of said department. He/she shall have
direct charge and supervision of all firefighters and shall see that the
equipment and property are kept in good order and condition and that
the department is active and vigilant in promptly answering fire calls,
extinguishing fires and protecting lives and property within the City.
Section 205.030. Promulgating, Amending or Repealing Rules and
Regulations [CC 1970 §2-118; CC 1947 §8-24]
The Chief of the Fire Department may promulgate rules and regulations for
the government of the firefighters and department, subject to approval by
the City Manager, and may, subject to like approval, amend or repeal any
such rule or regulation or adopt new rules or regulations.
Section 205.040. Appointment and Term of Firefighters and
Department Employees [CC 1970 §2-119; CC 1947 §8-21]
The firefighters and employees of the Fire Department shall be appointed
by the City Manager and shall serve at the will of the City Manager.
Section 205.050. Removal, Transfer, Etc., of Firefighters [CC 1970
§2-120; CC 1947 §8-22]
Any firefighter may be removed, promoted, demoted or transferred within
the department at the will of the City Manager.
Section 205.060. Obedience To Rules, Etc., By Firefighters — Acting
As Safety Inspectors [CC 1970 §2-121; CC 1947 §8-25]
It shall be the duty of each firefighter to be responsive to and obey all rules
and regulations adopted for the Fire Department, as herein provided, and
all orders and directions of the Chief or firefighter of superior rank. They
shall, as directed, also serve as inspectors or assistants in the carrying out
and enforcement of the provisions of this Code relating to public safety.
11.Charter Reference—Created, art. IV §1. Cross Reference—As to ambulance fees adopted by
the city, a current schedule of these fees is held on file in the city offices.
Section
205.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.060
AO:105

ARTICLE II
Fire Prevention Code12
Section 205.070. Adoption of Fire Prevention Code [CC 1970 §10-1;
Ord. No. 5816 §1(10-1), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6005 §1, 12-18-2007;
Ord. No. 6130 §1, 12-14-2010; Ord. No. 6396 §1, 10-13-2015]
That a certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of Clayton, Missouri, being marked and designated
as the ICC International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., together with the standards which are
referenced in Chapter 47 and including Appendix Chapters B, C, D, E, F, G,
H, I, J, K, L, and M be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of
the City of Clayton, Missouri, for the control of buildings and structures as
herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions,
and terms of the ICC International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if more fully set out in this
Article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in
this Article.
Section 205.080. Amendments To Fire Prevention Code [CC 1970
§10-2; Ord. No. 5816 §1(10-2), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6005 §1,
12-18-2007; Ord. No. 6130 §1, 12-14-2010; Ord. No. 6293 §1,
11-12-2013; Ord. No. 6396 §1, 10-13-2015]
The following numbered Sections and Subsections of the Fire Prevention
Code adopted in Section 205.070 are hereby amended by the following
additions, insertions, deletions and changes. The Chapter and Section
numbering format of the ICC International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, is
used herein to enhance the understanding of the code by maintaining a
consistent format throughout the code. Each Section or Subsection set out
below is to be considered as fully a part of the Fire Prevention Code as
adopted. The amended Sections and Subsections shall read as follows:
AMENDMENTS TO THE ICC INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE, 2015
EDITION
Section 101.1 is amended by substituting "The City of Clayton, Missouri,"
for [NAME OF JURISDICTION] on line two thereof.
Section 103.1 delete existing text. Insert:
103.1 General. The Bureau of Fire Prevention is established within
the jurisdiction under the direction of the code official. The function
of the bureau shall be the implementation, administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this code.
Section 103.2 delete existing text. Insert:
12.Cross Reference—Building and structures, Title V.
Section
205.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.080
AO:107
103.2 Enforcement Official. It shall be the duty and the
responsibility of the chief executive officer, designated as the fire chief,
to enforce the provisions of this code. The fire chief shall be the Code
Official.
Section 103.2.1 add a new Section. Insert:
103.2.1 Bureau Organization. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall
operate under the direct supervision of the fire marshal. The fire
marshal shall be a uniformed member and chief officer of the fire
department and operate under the direct supervision of the fire chief.
The fire marshal shall be appointed on the basis of his/her
administrative abilities and qualifications to understand, interpret and
enforce the technical provisions of this code. All uniformed members
of the fire department shall be considered members of the Bureau
of Fire Prevention. The fire marshal may assign or appoint technical
assistants, inspectors or other employees that may be necessary for
the effective and efficient operation of the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
All appointments to the bureau shall be made in conformance with the
provisions of the Municipal Code.
Section 103.3 delete existing text. Insert:
103.3 Bureau members code enforcement duties and authority.
The fire marshal, and all properly assigned or appointed members of
the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall have the duty to assist the fire chief
in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this code. As
agents of the fire chief, all properly assigned or appointed members of
the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall have the authority to exercise all of
the powers of the code official as detailed within this code.
Section 104.11.4 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
104.11.4 Compliance with orders. A person shall not willfully fail or
refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the fire official or
interfere with the compliance attempts of another individual.
Section 104.11.5 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
104.11.5 Vehicles crossing hoses. A vehicle shall not be driven or
propelled over any unprotected fire hose of the fire department when
laid down on any street, alleyway, private drive or any other vehicular
roadway without the consent of the fire official in command of said
operation.
Section 104.11.6 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
104.11.6 Vehicles following emergency apparatus. It shall be
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on official
emergency business, to follow closer than 300 feet from any fire
apparatus or other emergency vehicle traveling in response to a fire
alarm or other emergency or to drive any vehicle within the block or
immediate area where a fire apparatus or other emergency vehicle has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm or other emergency.
Section 104.11.7 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
Section
205.080
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
205.080
AO:108
104.11.7 Unlawful boarding or tampering with emergency
equipment. A person shall not, without proper authorization from the
fire official in charge of said fire department emergency equipment,
cling to, attach oneself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon
any fire department emergency vehicle, whether the same is in motion
or at rest; or sound the siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing
device thereon; or manipulate, remove or tamper with, or attempt
to manipulate, remove or tamper with any levers, valves, switches,
starting devices, brakes, pumps or any equipment or protective
clothing on, or a part of, any fire department emergency vehicle.
Section 104.11.8 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
104.11.8 Damage or injury to fire department equipment or
personnel. It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or
attempt to damage or deface, any fire department emergency vehicle
at any time or to injure, or attempt to injure, fire department personnel
while performing departmental duties.
Section 105.1.4 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
105.1.4 Permit fees. Permit fees, inspection fees and fees for the
board of appeals shall be in accordance with the fee schedule as
established by the City of Clayton, Missouri. The code official is
authorized to establish a refund policy.
Section 105.3.3 delete existing text. Insert:
105.3.3 Occupancy prohibited before approval. Except as
specifically provided for temporary occupancy in the building code
adopted by the City, a building, structure or portion thereof, shall not
be used or occupied in whole or in part until all fire protection devices
and equipment protecting the building, structure or portion to be
occupied, have been tested and approved by the code official charged
with enforcing this code. All portions of the means of egress for the
building, structure or portion to be occupied shall be unobstructed and
available for immediate use.
Section 105.3.8.1 add a new Section. Insert:
105.3.8.1 Work commencing before permit issuance. If any
person commences any work or operation before obtaining the
necessary permits, the permit fee shall be increased to two hundred
percent (200%) of the usual permit fee. If the work or operation to be
permitted is twenty-five-percent or less completed before the necessary
permits are obtained, the permit fee shall be increased to three
hundred percent (300%) of the usual permit fee. If the work or
operation to be permitted is more than twenty-five-percent but equal
to or less than fifty-percent completed before the necessary permits
are obtained, the permit fee shall be increased to four hundred percent
(400%) of the usual permit fee, and if the work or operation to be
permitted is more than fifty-percent completed before the necessary
permits are obtained, the permit fee shall be increased to five hundred
percent (500%) of the usual permit fee.
Section
205.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.080
AO:109
Section 105.6.16 delete Exception. Insert:
Exceptions:
1. A permit is not required where a valid permit from the water
company that supplies the system is displayed and an appropriate
backflow prevention device is utilized.
2. A permit is not required for authorized employees of the water
company that supplies the system or the fire department to use or
operate fire hydrants or valves.
Section 105.3.8.1 add a new Section. Insert:
105.3.8.1 Asphalt kettles. An operational permit is required for the
operation of asphalt kettles inside or on the roof of any building or
structure.
Section 105.6.50 add a new Section. Insert:
105.6.50 Helicopter landing/lift-off, hoisting and lowering
operations. An operational permit is required for helicopter landing/
lift-off, hoisting and lowering operations in accordance with the
following. Proof of financial responsibility must be submitted to the
code official before a permit is issued.
The helicopter service or the contractor in charge of a helicopter
landing/lift-off, hoisting or lowering operations shall demonstrate
financial responsibility of liability for damages arising from the landing/
lift-off, hoisting or lowering operation by providing the code official
with proof of insurance or other appropriate financial responsibility.
The amount of financial liability shall be adequate for the payment of
all damages which may be caused either to a person or persons, or
to property by reasons of the permitted operation, and arising from
any actions, or in-actions, of the permit holder, or the permit holder's,
employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors.
Permit applications must include a description of the landing/lift-off
operation or work to be performed and the safety precautions to be
used. Forty-eight hour notice shall be provided before the landing/liftoff,
hoisting or lowering operation is to begin. Notification shall be
made to other jurisdictional agencies as listed below:
Police department: Written or oral permission must be obtained from
the Clayton Police Department in accordance with the Clayton Code of
Ordinances.
Housing and Planning department: If mechanical equipment,
machinery or building materials are being removed or installed on
a building or structure, a permit must be obtained from the Clayton
Housing and Planning department.
City Manager: When the hours for operation for the landing/lift-off or
erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or structure
is to occur other than between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M.
on weekdays a permit shall be secured from the City Manager in
accordance with the Clayton Code of Ordinances.
Section
205.080
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
205.080
AO:110
Exceptions:
1. Emergency or precautionary landings.
2. Law enforcement or medical evacuation operations.
3. Other operations approved by the code official.
Section 105.6.50.1 add a new Section. Insert:
105.6.50.1 Safety precautions. During all helicopter landing/liftoff,
lifting or lowering operations, the following applicable safety
precautions shall be followed:
The fire and police departments shall approve landing sites, if landings
are necessary.
All materials or equipment to be lifted shall be brought as close as
possible to the building or structure site by road vehicles.
The helicopter shall not carry equipment or materials lifted to or
lowered from a building or structure over pedestrians, spectators,
other buildings or vehicles.
When the operation involves setting or removing equipment or
materials from or on an occupied building, the top two (2) floors of
the building shall not be occupied by anyone, other than individuals
directly involved with the operation while the hoisting or lifting
operation is in progress.
All flammable or combustible liquids brought to the site for refueling
helicopters shall be stored, used and dispensed in accordance with
Chapters 11 and 34 of this code.
A fire department safety officer, or fire department safety team, must
be present on the site during all helicopter landing/lift-off, lifting or
lowering operations. The safety officer, or safety team, shall terminate
the landing/lift-off or lift if weather conditions or other variables make
the operation unsafe. The safety officer, or safety team, shall be
provided radio communications with the helicopter pilot in the event
safety conditions mandate evasive action.
Exceptions:
4. Emergency or precautionary landings.
5. Law enforcement or medical evacuation operations.
6. Other operations approved by the code official.
Section 108.1 delete existing text. Insert:
108.1 Board of Appeals. There shall be a Board of Appeals to hear
and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by
the code official relative to the application and interpretation of this
code. The Board of Appeals shall consist of the Board of Appeals
appointed and serving in accord with the Building Code adopted by the
City and the procedures, rules and regulations governing organization,
operation and procedures of the Board of Appeals under the said
Building Code shall apply to appeals under this code.
Section
205.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.080
AO:111
Section 109.4 delete existing text. Insert:
109.4. Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code
or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit
or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days,
or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues
after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 109.4.2 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
109.4.2 False alarms. In the event of false alarms, after the second
false alarm in any twelve-month period, the alarm user, in lieu of court
appearance, may pay to the director of finance a penalty of fifty dollars
($50.00), and further, after the third false alarm in any twelve-month
period, the alarm user, in lieu of court appearance, may pay to the
director of finance a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00). For
the fifth and subsequent false alarms in any twelve-month period the
penalty shall be an amount that is double the amount of the prior
penalty (e.g. fifth false alarm, two hundred dollars ($200.00), sixth false
alarm, four hundred dollars ($400.00), etc.) plus court costs of twentyfive
dollars ($25.00) for each offense thereafter.
Section 111.4 delete existing text. Insert:
111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work
after having been served with a stop work order, except such work
that a person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and punished as
provided in Section 109.4 of this code.
Section 114 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
SECTION 114 UNSAFE CONDITIONS
114.1 General. Whenever the code official shall find in any structure
or upon any premises dangerous or hazardous conditions or materials
as follows, the code official shall order such hazardous conditions or
materials to be removed or remedied in accordance with the provisions
of this code:
1. Hazardous conditions liable to cause or contribute to the spread of
fire in or on said premises or structure or endanger the occupants
thereof;
2. Conditions that interfere with the efficiency or operation of any fire
protection equipment or system;
3. Obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or
windows, that are liable to interfere with the egress of occupants
or the operation of the fire department in case of fire;
4. Accumulations of dust or waste material in air-conditioning or
ventilating systems or grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts;
Section
205.080
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
205.080
AO:112
5. Accumulations of grease on kitchen cooking equipment, or oil,
grease or dirt upon, under or around any mechanical equipment;
6. Accumulations of rubbish, waste, paper, boxes, shavings or
excessive storage of any combustible material;
7. Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly utilized
or installed electrical wiring, equipment or appliances;
8. Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed
equipment for handling or using combustible, explosive or
otherwise hazardous materials;
9. Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible, explosive or
otherwise hazardous materials; and
10. All equipment, materials, processes or operations that are in
violation of the provisions or intent of this code.
11. Vehicles or equipment that impairs or obstructs fire department
access to an occupied structure hindering or delaying fire
department operations in case of an emergency.
Section 301.2 delete in its entirety. Insert:
301.2 Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Section 105.6
for the activities or uses regulated by Sections 303, 306, 307, 308.1.3,
308.1.6, 308.3 and 315.
Section 303.2 delete in its entirety. Insert:
303.2 Location. Asphalt (tar) kettles shall not be located within 20
feet (6096 mm) of any combustible material, combustible building
surface or any building opening and within a controlled area identified
by the use of traffic cones, barriers or other approved means. Asphalt
(tar) kettles and pots shall not be utilized inside of a building or
structure. Roofing kettles and operating asphalt (tar) kettles shall not
block means of egress, gates, roadways or entrances.
Section 303.10 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
303.10 Permits. Asphalt (tar) kettles shall not be used inside or on the
roof of any building or structure without first obtaining a permit from
the code official.
Section 303.10.1 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
303.10.1 Safety precautions. ll operations shall comply with the
following safety precautions:
1. Fired asphalt (tar) kettles shall not be left unattended.
2. Torches or other flame-producing devices shall be fueled with LP
gases only.
3. LP gas containers or cylinders shall be stored in accordance with
Chapter 38 of this code and with NFPA 58 listed in Chapter 80 of
this code.
Section
205.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.080
AO:113
4. Torches, flame-producing devices, containers, cylinders,
regulators, hoses and other equipment must be designed and
approved for the specific purpose intended.
5. LP gas containers or cylinders shall not be transported to the roof
in elevators or exit stairways that are occupied by non-construction
personnel.
6. Flames from the torch shall not impinge on combustible "Cant
Strips" or other combustible structural elements.
7. A firewatch shall be established and conducted in accordance with
Section 2604.2 of this code. The firewatch person shall be provided
with water hoses connected to an adequate water supply on the
premises. The firewatch person shall remain on the premises and
in position to observe residual fire effects at least one (1) hour after
each use of the torch or flame-producing device.
8. Before a torching operation begins, the site shall be inspected
and approved by the fire department. Where climatic, operational
or construction conditions warrant specific inspections or
observations, a fire department employee shall act as an additional
firewatch. Inspection fees for the fire department firewatch shall be
paid in accordance with Section 105.1 of this code.
Section 401.5 delete in its entirety. Insert:
401.5 Making false report. It shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully or maliciously give, turn in, signal, transmit or cause to be
made, a false alarm or report that a fire or medical emergency has
occurred, or is in progress, by any action or means whatsoever, and
said false alarm or report causes the unnecessary movement or use
of fire department apparatus or personnel, or causes the evacuation
of building occupants or the disruption of the building occupant's
normal activities. The provisions of Sections 215.800 through 215.930
of Article XVIII of Chapter 215 of the Clayton Code of Ordinances shall
also apply to false fire alarms.
Section 408 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
` 408 Firefighter assist plans. An approved pictographic display (sign,
drawing or wall marking) shall be posted within all enclosed stairways
at each floor landing in all new and existing high-rise buildings.
Individual displays, or signs shall show the floor level number where
the graphic is displayed, the configuration of exit access corridors
including all door openings, exit stairways, elevators, exterior building
walls, fire alarm pull stations, fire hoses and sprinkler valves. The sign
shall be located five (5) feet (1524 mm) above the floor landing in a
position that is readily visible when the doors are in the open or closed
positions.
Section 503.7 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
Section
205.080
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
205.080
AO:114
503.7 Street obstructions: No person shall erect, construct, place or
maintain any bumps, humps, fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or
metal horse or any other type of obstruction in or upon any fire access
road unless approved by the Clayton Fire Department.
Section 507.4.1 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
507.4.1 Water flow tests: Water flow tests shall be conducted
between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 4:30 P.M., Monday through Friday.
Section 507.4.2 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
507.4.2 Water flow safety factor: A safety factor shall be applied to
all flow tests for fire sprinkler systems. A parallel curve shall be drawn
to the actual flow test curve that has been reduced by twenty percent
(20%) of the static pressure. A sprinkler system shall not exceed the
twenty percent (20%) curve.
Section 507.6 add a new section as follows. Insert:
507.6 Public water supply. The fire prevention code official shall
recommend to the chief administrative official of the municipality the
location or relocation of new or existing fire hydrants and the
placement or replacement of inadequate water mains located upon
public property and deemed necessary to provide an adequate fire
flow and distribution pattern. A fire hydrant shall not be placed into
or removed from service until approved by the fire prevention code
official.
Section 507.6.1 add a new Section. Insert:
507.6.1 Color coding of public fire hydrants. All public fire hydrant
barrels are to be painted yellow. All fire hydrant bonnets are to be
painted as follows:
COLOR WATER MAIN SIZE
Green Twelve (12) inch and larger
Orange Eight (8) and ten (10) inch
Red Six (6) inch and smaller
Section 507.6.2 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
507.6.2 Color coding of private fire hydrants. All private fire
hydrants shall be painted yellow, including the bonnet.
Section 607.3.1 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
607.3.1 Information signs. An approved graphic display of
evacuation routes and written information concerning basic evacuation
procedures, including the location of the exit stairs, shall be posted
in an approved location in all common hallways, in or near elevator
lobbies, on all floor levels of all new and existing high rise buildings.
Section 607.9 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
Section
205.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.080
AO:115
607.9 Elevator emergency operations testing. All elevators that are
equipped with emergency elevator operations in accordance with Rule
211.3 of ASME A17.1 listed in Chapter 80, shall be tested at least once
each year in all phases of emergency functions. An approved elevator
service company shall conduct tests.
Section 607.10 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
607.10 Prohibited lockout systems, key-ways and devices.
Elevator service shall be provided for fire department emergency
access to all floors in all high rise buildings. The use of security lockout
systems, key operated floor selection buttons or other key-ways or
other devices which are not automatically rendered inoperative by the
fire sensing devices or the key-operated fire service master switch is
prohibited. Walls, security bars, equipment or storage may not obstruct
access to any building level from any elevator.
Section 806.1.1 delete in its entirety, including exception. Insert:
806.1.1 Restricted occupancies. Natural cut trees shall be
prohibited in Group A, B, E, I-1, I-2, I-3, I-4, M, R-1, R-2 and R-4
occupancies.
Exception: Trees located in areas protected by an approved automatic
sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or
903.3.1.2 shall not be prohibited in Groups A, B, E, M, R-1 and R-2.
Section 901.6.2 delete in its entirety. Insert:
901.6.2 Records. Records of all system inspections, tests and
maintenance (IT&M) required by the referenced standards shall be
maintained on the premises for a minimum of three (3) years. If the
required testing frequency is greater than three (3) years, records must
be kept for the number of years of the testing frequency plus three
(3) years. Upon receipt the building representative or building owner
shall forward all IT&M records to the fire code official. If applicable the
building representative or building owner can request/direct the IT&M
company to forward IT&M records to the code official upon completion.
Section 901.6.2.1 delete in its entirety. Insert:
901.6.2.1 Records information. Accurate logs shall be maintained
indicating the number, location and type of device tested. Any defect,
modification, maintenance, inspection, testing or repair shall be
logged. Initial records shall include the name of the installation
contractor, type of components installed, manufacturer of the
components, location and number of components installed per floor.
Records shall also include the manufacturers' operation and
maintenance instruction manuals. Such records shall be maintained on
the premises.
Section 901.6.3 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
Section
205.080
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
205.080
AO:116
901.6.3 High-rise standpipe tests. In addition to the standards listed
in Table 901.6.1, standpipe flow tests approved by the code official
shall be conducted in accordance with NFPA 25 listed in Chapter 80
on standpipe systems in all high-rise buildings every two (2) years.
The flow shall not be less than the flow demands required at the time
of installation, or not less than 200 GPM at the topmost hose outlet
while maintaining a residual pressure of 50 psi, whichever is the higher
demand. At the time of the test, all control valves, including those
inside hose cabinets, shall also be operated and tested to insure proper
operation of the valves. The results of the tests must be submitted to
the code official and also must be entered into the log book.
Section 903.3.1.1 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
903.3.1.1 Sprinklers required. Clean agent, halogenated or carbon
dioxide extinguishing systems shall not be considered as an alternative
to an automatic sprinkler system in computer rooms, vaults or other
rooms where an automatic sprinkler system is required.
Section 903.4.4 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
903.4.4 Post indicating valves. An above ground post indicating
valve (PIV) is required on all new structures that require an automatic
fire sprinkler suppression system. The private fire service main to a
building shall be provided with a listed post indicator valve located to
control all sources of water supply as stated in NFPA 24. The valve shall
be supervised as listed in Section 903.4.
Section 903.4.5 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
903.4.5 Control valves. At the discretion of the Clayton Fire Marshal
additional floor control valves controlling flow to sprinklers in
circulating closed loop systems may be required and shall comply with
NFPA 13.
Section 907.2.13.1.1 add a new item #3 to Section as follows: Insert:
3. All enclosed pressurized exit stairways in all new and existing highrise
buildings shall comply with Section 1023.11. Pressurization
equipment for pressurized stairways shall be activated by smoke
detectors installed on the building side of all stairway doors in
an approved location. ON-AUTO-OFF control switches shall be
provided in the Fire Command Center as required by Section
909.16.
Section 907.3 delete in its entirety. Insert:
907.3 Where required — retroactive in existing buildings and
structures. An approved manual, automatic or manual and automatic
fire alarm system shall be installed in existing buildings and structures
in accordance with Sections 1103.7 through 1103.8.3. Where
automatic sprinkler protection is provided in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and connected to the building fire alarm system,
automatic heat detection required by this Section shall not be required.
Section
205.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.080
AO:117
An approved automatic fire detection system shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of this code and NFPA 72. Devices,
combinations of devices, appliances and equipment shall be approved.
The automatic fire detectors shall be smoke detectors, except an
approved alternative type of detector shall be installed in spaces such
as boiler rooms where, during normal operation, products of
combustion are present in sufficient quantity to actuate a smoke
detector.
Section 907.7.4 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
907.7.4 Detector indicators. Smoke detectors or duct detectors
located above a ceiling or behind a wall must be provided with a
remote indicating device in an approved location at the ceiling or wall
to indicate the location of the device.
Exception: Where approved by the code official.
Section 907.7.5 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
907.7.5 Monitoring. All fire alarm and detection systems shall be
monitored by an approved central station as defined in NFPA 72. A
UL Certificate or FM Placard, in accordance with the 2007 Edition of
NFPA 72 Chapter 8, shall be issued by the UL Listed or FM Approved
prime contractor for all newly installed required fire alarm systems.
This regulation shall apply to all newly installed required fire alarm
systems with an installation permit issued on or after December 1,
2007. An existing required fire alarm system wherein the control panel
and alarm components are to be replaced, shall be considered newly
installed for the purposes of this Section. The code official shall
maintain a listing of local UL Listed or FM Approved prime contractors.
Central station service in full compliance with the 2007 Edition of NFPA
72 Chapter 8 shall be maintained at the protected property, so long as
the requirement for the fire alarm system exists.
Exceptions:
1. Proprietary and Remote Station systems where approved by the
code official.
2. Fire alarm and detection systems in one- and two-family dwellings.
Section 907.15.1 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
907.15.1 Fire alarm systems monitoring. Central-station
monitoring centers must be listed by Underwriters Laboratories.
Monitoring information, including company name, address and phone
number, method of transmission and UL listing information shall be
provided. Where deemed necessary by the code official, the UL listing
information shall be provided along with a copy of the UL Fire Alarm
Certificate for the appropriate category (Central Station, Remote
Station, or Proprietary).
Section 909.22 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
Section
205.080
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
205.080
AO:118
909.22 Stairway pressurization systems. Stairway pressurization
systems that supply air to interior exit stairways to provide a positive
pressure in stairways shall be tested annually. Stairways shall be
pressurized to a minimum of 0.15 inches of water column and a
maximum of thirty-five hundredths (0.35) inches of water column in the
stairway relative to the pressure in the building with all stairway doors
closed under the maximum anticipated stack pressure.
Section 1026.6 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
1025.6 Exterior floor identification dots. All new high-rise buildings
shall be marked on their exterior with floor level identification dots.
These dots shall be not less than eight (8) inches in diameter and
be of an approved illumination reflective material. Dots shall identify
every fifth floor level of the building, in relationship to the floor level
indicators on the elevator cars. Dots shall be visible on all faces or
sides of the building. Specific dot locations must be approved by the
fire department.
Section 1031.1.1.1 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
1031.1.1.1 Maintenance. The means of egress from each part of
the structure, including exits, stairways, egress doors and any panic
hardware installed thereon, aisles, corridors, passageways and similar
elements of the means of egress, shall at all times be maintained in
a safe condition and available for immediate utilization and free of all
obstructions.
Section 1103.7.7.1 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
1103.7.7.1 High-rise buildings. An approved automatic fire alarm
system shall be installed in existing high-rise buildings. The system
shall be monitored in accordance with Section 907.7.5. The
annunciator panel shall be installed in a location approved by the code
official and shall give visual indication of the location of all alarm zones
that may be in alarm. Systems that are upgraded shall be designed and
installed in accordance with the requirements of Section 907.2.13 of
this code.
Section 1104.26 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
1104.26 Exterior floor identification dots. All existing high-rise
buildings shall be marked on their exterior with floor level
identification dots. These dots shall be not less than eight (8) inches in
diameter and be of an approved illumination reflective material. Dots
shall identify every fifth floor level of the building, in relationship to the
floor level indicators on the elevator cars. Dots shall be visible on all
faces or sides of the building. Specific dot locations must be approved
by the fire department.
Section 2304.3.8 add a new Section. Insert:
2304.3.8 Fire suppression system. The dispensing area (pump
islands, canopy and adjacent ground area) shall be provided with an
approved fire suppression system.
Section
205.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.080
AO:119
Section 5003.5.2 add a new Section as follows: Insert:
5003.5.2 Hazard sign required. Any occupancy required by this code
and/or State law to provide material safety data sheets, shall provide
visible markings on the outside of buildings, rooms and containers
where hazardous substances are present. These markings shall be in
a location approved by the code official. These markings shall conform
to the NFPA 704 marking system or with other Federal laws or
regulations, or in the case of containers, may as an option comply with
Safety and Health Administration Hazard Communication Rule, 29 CFR
1910.1200(f). To avoid duplication of markings, marking requirements
of the United States Department of Transportation shall satisfy the
requirements in regard to motor vehicles, rolling stock and aircraft.
Section 5003.5.3 add a new Section as follows:
5003.5.3 Main entrance. Where required by Section 5003.5, all
buildings shall have a placard located on the main entry door a
minimum of eighteen (18) inches from the bottom edge of the door. This
placard shall have a minimum dimension of five (5) inches. This placard
is not required to be lettered or numbered.
Section 5003.5.4 add a new Section as follows:
5003.5.4 Other doors. All other doors shall have a placard with a
minimum dimension of ten (10) inches located in an approved location
that identifies the worst hazard category of the product(s) in that
area. This placard shall be provided with numerals in accordance with
Section 5003.6.1.
Section 5003.6.1 add a new Section as follows:
5003.6.1 Sign size. The exterior markings of buildings or site
entrances where materials are stored shall have a minimum signal size
of four (4) inches. All numbers/letters shall be reflective.
Section 5601.1.3 modify as follows: Delete Exception #4 in its entirety.
Section 5601.2.4 delete in its entirety. Insert:
5601.2.4 Financial responsibility. Before a permit is issued, as
required by Section 5601.2, the applicant shall file with the jurisdiction
a corporate surety bond in the principal sum of two million dollars
($2,000,000.00) or a public liability insurance policy for the same
amount, for the purpose of the payment of all damages to persons or
property which arise from, or are caused by, the conduct of any act
authorized by the permit upon which any judicial judgment results. The
fire code official is authorized to specify a greater or lesser amount
when, in his or her opinion, conditions at the location of use indicate
a greater or lesser amount is required. Government entities shall be
exempt from this bond requirement.
Section 5704.2.13.1.4 modify as follows: Delete Exception for item #3 in
its entirety.
Section 5704.3.2.3 add a new Section as follows:
Section
205.080
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
205.080
AO:120
5704.3.2.3 Storage cabinets. Unless otherwise mandated by this
code, all flammable and combustibles must be stored in an approved
flammable liquids storage cabinet. Cabinet doors must be kept closed.
Section Appendix D103.6 add a new Section as follows. Insert:
D103.6.3 Fire lanes. Fire lanes so legally designated by the chief of
the fire department shall be posted with appropriate signs or markings
as specified by the chief of the fire department and approved by the
board of aldermen so that the public will be aware of the existence of
such fire lanes. If said fire lanes are marked by painting them, then
they shall be painted red in color. In cases of fire lanes established
on private property, the owner thereof, shall provide such signs or
markings at his expense and in cases of fire lanes established on
public property, the director of public works shall provide such signs or
markings at the expense of the City of Clayton
Section M102 in Appendix M is amended by the insertion and addition of
a new subsection M102.1.1 to read as follows: [Ord. No. 6487,
7-11-2017]
M102.1.1 High-rise residential buildings. High-rise buildings
containing residential R-2 dwelling units which are platted and
constructed as a condominium pursuant to Chapter 448, RSMo., shall
be deemed in compliance with Appendix M when all of the following
conditions are met :
1. An approved automatic sprinkler system shall be provided within
all common areas on all floors such as; storage rooms, equipment
rooms, laundry rooms, assembly areas, stairways, corridors and
exits. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed in accordance
with 903.3.1.1 of the International Fire Code and each floor shall
be zoned with an independent flow device.
2. The automatic sprinkler system installed on each floor of the
building in the common areas shall be of sufficient design to
support the expansion of the automatic sprinkler system to provide
coverage throughout the entire area of the floor.
3. The governing associations or entities of the building shall not
prohibit the expansion of the automatic sprinkler system into
individual residential units.
4. Smoke alarms complying with Section 907.2.11 shall be installed
throughout the building including within the dwelling units.
5. An approved fire alarm system complying with Section 907.5 shall
be installed throughout the building.
6. All fire rated doors in openings within fire rated assemblies
throughout the building shall be provided with self-closing devices
in compliance with Section 716.5.9 of the 2015 International
Building Code.
Section
205.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.080
AO:121
7. Appliances such as ranges or cook tops located within dwelling
units shall be protected by an approved labeled fire suppression
device.
Section M103.1 in Appendix M is amended and a new Section M103.2 is
inserted to read as follows: [Ord. No. 6487, 7-11-2017]
M103.1 Compliance schedule. Except as provided in Section 103.2,
below, building owners shall file a compliance schedule with the Fire
Code Official not later than three hundred sixty-five (365) days after
the first effective date of this code (October 13, 2015). The compliance
schedule shall not exceed twelve (12) years for an automatic sprinkler
system retrofit.
M103.2 Compliance schedule High-rise residential buildings.
Those buildings electing to comply with Section 102.1.1 shall file a
compliance schedule with the Fire Code Official not later than one
hundred eighty (180) days after adoption of this code amendment (July
11, 2017). The compliance schedule shall not exceed six (6) years to
obtain full compliance with the requirements of Section 102.1.1.
Section
205.080
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
205.080
AO:122
ARTICLE III
Explosives Code
Section 205.090. Adoption Of Explosives Code. [Ord. No. 6547,
8-14-2018]
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Clayton, Missouri, being marked and designated as the
Saint Louis County Explosives Code, County Ordinance 18,693, approved
on November 12, 1997, and amendments thereto, is hereby adopted as
the Explosives Code of the City of Clayton, Missouri, for the control and
regulation of explosives and explosive materials as therein provided; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of the
Saint Louis County Explosives Code are hereby referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof, as if more fully set out in this Article, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in this Article.
Section 205.100. Amendments To The Explosives Code. [Ord. No.
6547, 8-14-2018]
The following numbered Sections and Subsections of the Saint Louis County
Explosives Code adopted in Section 205.090 are hereby amended by the
following additions, insertions, deletions and changes. The Section
numbering format of the Saint Louis County Explosives Code is used herein
to enhance the understanding of the code by maintaining a consistent
format throughout the code. Each Section or Subsection set out below is
to be considered as fully a part of the Explosives Code as adopted. The
amended Sections and Subsections shall read as follows:
Section 711.390. Penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation, limited liability company or other
business entity who shall violate any provision of this code, or any
owner or tenant of the building or premises or any other person who
commits, takes part or assists in any violation of this code or maintains
any building, structure or premises in which such violation shall exist
shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and subject to punishment by
a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment
for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. This provision shall not apply to any Section of this
code or to any ordinance in which there is expressly provided a penalty
for its violation, or for any offense where the penalty is fixed by State
Statute.
Section
205.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.100
AO:123
Chapter 210
ANIMAL REGULATIONS
Section
205.100
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
205.100
AO:124
ARTICLE I
Dog Regulations, Rabies Control and Dog Kennels13
Section 210.010. Definitions [CC 1970 §4-23; CC 1947 §§6-40,
6-56.2; Ord. No. 4878 §1, 4-28-1992; Ord. No. 6266 §1, 4-9-2013]
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the respective
meanings ascribed to them:
AFFECTED WITH RABIES — Infected with the rabies virus as determined
by standard laboratory testing.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Health of the City.
DOG — Both male and female dogs unless otherwise specifically stated.
EXPOSED TO RABIES — When bitten by, or fought with, or has come in
close contact with a dog or other animal shown to be infected with the
rabies virus as determined by standard laboratory testing.
MAINTAIN A KENNEL — Owning, keeping or harboring at any one time,
whether at one (1) or more locations within the City, four (4) or more dogs
over the age of four (4) months.
RABIES — Hydrophobia.
VICIOUS DOG —
Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury to or otherwise threaten the safety to
human beings or domestic animals; or
1.
Any dog which because of its vicious propensity is capable of inflicting
serious physical harm or death to humans and which would constitute
a danger to human life or property if it were not kept in the manner
required by this Article; or
2.
Any dog which, without provocation, attacks or bites or has attacked or
bitten a human being or domestic animal; or
3.
Any dog owned, bred or harbored primarily or in part for the purposes
of dog fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting; or
4.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, no dog may be
deemed vicious if a threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person
who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon
the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog or if a person
at the time of such threat, injury or damage was teasing, tormenting,
abusing or assaulting the dog or was threatening or committing an
assault or other bodily harm to the owner, the owner's immediate family
or their invitees.
5.
13.State Law Reference—Rabies control, §§322.010 et. seq., RSMo.
Section
210.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.020
AO:125
Section 210.020. Enforcing Officer — Designating [CC 1970 §4-24;
CC 1947 §6-41]
The Director of Health shall direct the enforcement of this Article and
the various City Officers shall perform the duties herein specified to be
respectively performed by them.
Section 210.030. Enforcing Officer — Interfering With — Right of
Entry [CC 1970 §4-25; CC 1947 §6-51]
It is unlawful for any person to conceal an animal or interfere with the
Director in the performance of his/her legal duties as provided in this
Article. The Director shall have the right of entry to any unenclosed lots
or lands for the purpose of collecting any stray or unlicensed dog or other
animal. The Director shall have the right of entry to any property or
premises within any quarantined area during the period of such quarantine
for the purpose of examining or obtaining any dog suspected of having
rabies or having been exposed to rabies.
Section 210.040. County Dog License Required [CC 1970 §4-26; CC
1947 §6-42]
Every person who owns, controls, manages, possesses or has part interest
in any dog kept at any time during the year in the City or who permits a
dog to come upon, on or in and to remain in or about his/her home, place
of business or other premises in the City shall have purchased for such dog
a St. Louis County dog license as required by the ordinances of St. Louis
County and shall have such license attached to such dog.
Section 210.050. Inoculation of Dog [CC 1970 §4-27; CC 1947
§6-45]
Every person who owns, controls, manages, possesses or has part interest
in any dog, kept any time during the year in the City or who permits a
dog to come upon, on or in and to remain in or about his/her home, place
of business or other premises in the City shall have such dog inoculated
against rabies at least once each year, unless an approved three (3) year
type vaccine is administered, in which case inoculation shall be required at
least once every three (3) years. Said inoculation shall be performed by a
licensed veterinarian.
Section 210.060. Leash — Required [CC 1970 §4-28; CC 1947 §6-46]
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person owning, controlling, possessing
or having the management or care, to any degree, of any dog, whether
licensed as required or not, to permit the dog to run at large or go off the
premises of the owner or keeper thereof, unless it is securely tied or led by
a line or leash of a length of no more than six (6) feet, so as to prevent it
from biting, molesting, being with or approaching any person or animal.
Section
210.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
210.070
AO:126
Section 210.070. Leash — Presumption As To Ownership or Custody
[CC 1970 §4-29; CC 1947 §6-56.7]
In any prosecution charging a violation of Section 210.060, proof that a
dog was running off the premises in violation of said Section, together with
proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time described
in the complaint, the owner or keeper of such dog, shall constitute a prima
facie presumption that said owner or keeper was the person who permitted
said dog to go off the premises.
Section 210.080. Impounding — Dogs At Large [CC 1970 §4-30; CC
1947 §6-47]
It shall be the duty of the Director of Health to take up and impound in a
suitable place, the location of which shall be published by posting a card
or notice in his/her office, any dog found within the City running at large
(not confined on its own premises). The work of catching and impounding
dogs may be let by contract by the Board of Aldermen to the County or to
a private contractor. The Health Department, in such case, shall supervise
the performance of such contract.
Section 210.090. Impounding — Redemption — Penalties [CC 1970
§4-31; CC 1947 §6-48; Ord. No. 3874 §1, 3-8-1977]
Release of any dog apprehended at large in the City may be ordered by the
Director of Health, provided that if said dog has not been inoculated against
rabies within the previous twelve (12) months with an approved one (1)
year type vaccine or within three (3) years with an approved three (3) year
type vaccine, it shall be accomplished before release and the cost of such
inoculation charged to the owner, keeper or responsible party, as the case
may be. No person shall have the right to redemption as herein provided
unless within one (1) week after impounding, in lieu of court appearance,
the owner may pay to the Director of Finance a penalty of five dollars
($5.00) for the first (1st) impoundment, a penalty of ten dollars ($10.00)
for the second (2nd) impoundment of the same or another dog of the same
owner within a one (1) year period. These penalties conditioned on the
dogs being with current inoculation; in the event such dog is not currently
inoculated, the penalties shall be double those above provided.
Section 210.100. Impounding — Disposition of Unclaimed Dog [CC
1970 §4-32; CC 1947 §6-56.1]
Any dog impounded and not claimed by owner or keeper after one (1) week
may be disposed of in such way or manner as may be directed by the
Director of Health.
Section 210.110. Impounding — Dangerous Dog — Destruction in
Emergency [CC 1970 §4-33; CC 1947 §6-50]
Any fierce, vicious or dangerous dog, whether licensed or not, may be
impounded for any length of time deemed necessary by the Director of
Section
210.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.110
AO:127
Health or, in an emergency in the opinion of the Police, such dog may be put
to death in a humane manner.
Section 210.120. Quarantining [CC 1970 §4-34; CC 1947 §6-49]
Owners or keepers of a dog which acts in a suspicious manner suggesting
rabies or is viciously inclined, either outside or within the premises of such
owner or keeper, either on the public street or any private property, shall
upon receipt of written notice from the Director of Health cause to be
quarantined such dog for a period of ten (10) days for rabies observation.
The quarantining of said dog shall be at the cost of the owner in a kennel,
dog hospital, animal protective shelter or other establishment approved by
the Director of Health or any other place where the dog shall be kept in
such manner that neither human beings nor other animals can be contacted
during such period of observation. Dogs so quarantined shall be checked by
a licensed veterinarian and written certification from him/her presented to
the Director of Health before release is ordered, any and all costs shall be
borne by the owner or responsible party.
Section 210.130. Notice of Destruction of Rabid or Rabies Suspect
Animal [CC 1970 §4-35; CC 1947 §6-55]
Any person destroying an animal affected with rabies or suspected of being
affecting with rabies shall immediately notify the Director of Health and
shall surrender the carcass of such animal upon demand. The owner or
custodian of any such destroyed animal shall immediately provide the
Health Department with full particulars thereof, including the time, date,
location, the names and addresses of any person bitten by said animal and
also the name and address of the owner or person having custody of any
animal exposed to the animal destroyed.
Section 210.140. Abandoning Rabies Subject Animal [CC 1970
§4-36; CC 1947 §6-52]
It is unlawful for any person having ownership, control, management or
possession of any animal subject to rabies to abandon such animal in any
locality in the City subject to this Article.
Section 210.150. Animal Bites — Report By Victim — Confinement
[CC 1970 §4-37; CC 1947 §6-53]
It shall be the duty of any person bitten by any animal or the parent or
guardian of any minor child bitten by an animal to report the same to the
Health Department immediately. Such report shall contain the name and
address of the dog's owner and of the victim, the day and time bitten, the
location where bitten and a general description of the animal. The Director
of Health shall immediately take said animal into custody or have the same
confined by the owner thereof for ten (10) days as provided in Section
210.120. If the owner shall not confine such animal in a manner satisfactory
to the Health Department, such animal shall be forthwith surrendered to
Section
210.110
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
210.150
AO:128
the Director of Health or to a person or persons designated by him/her upon
demand.
Section 210.160. Animal Bites — Report of Bites and Rabies
Suspicion By Physician and Veterinarian [CC 1970 §4-38; CC 1947
§6-54]
It shall be the duty of every physician to report immediately to the Health
Department the full name, age and address of any person under his/her care
or observation who has been bitten by an animal affected with rabies or
suspected of being affected with rabies and every veterinarian treating or
having under observation any animal affected with rabies or suspected of
being rabid or suspected of having been exposed to rabies shall report to
the Health Department the license number of such animal and the owner's
name and address.
Section 210.170. Dog Kennel [CC 1970 §§4-40—4-44; CC 1947
§§6-56.2—6-56.6; Ord. No. 3785 §1, 11-25-1975; Ord. No. 3786 §1,
11-25-1975]
A. License Required. No person shall maintain a kennel within the City in
any single-family or multiple-dwelling zoning district nor without a
license therefor as herein provided.
B. License Application—Petition—Granting—Period—Fees. The Board of
Aldermen on application duly made may, by majority vote, issue a
license for maintenance of a kennel, provided the application for such
license is accompanied by a petition in writing assenting to the
maintenance of such kennel at any location specified, signed by at least
two-thirds (?) of the resident property owners in the block where same
is to be maintained. An application not accompanied by such petition
shall be granted only by a two-thirds (?) vote of all members of the
Board of Aldermen. A license shall be issued by the Director of Health
for a period of one (1) year. The annual fee for such commercial kennels
shall be fifty dollars ($50.00), but no individual dog licenses shall be
required for dogs maintained in such kennels.
C. Number Of Dogs Limited. The number of dogs to be kept in any licensed
kennel at any one time shall not exceed fifteen (15).
D. Inspection—Revocation Or Suspension Of License. All licensed kennels
shall be inspected by the Health Department at least once each three
(3) months. If said kennel on any inspection is found not to comply with
the provisions of this Article or to constitute a nuisance, the Director of
Health shall report the facts to the Board of Aldermen and the Board
may revoke such license or suspend the same as it may deem proper.
E. Prohibited In Residential Building. No kennel may be maintained in a
residential building.
Section
210.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.170
AO:129

ARTICLE II
General Animal, Livestock, Birds and Domestic Fowl Regulations
Section 210.180. Definitions [CC 1970 §4-1; Ord. No. 5797 §1,
11-11-2003]
As used in this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section.
ADEQUATE CARE — Normal and prudent attention to the needs of an
animal, including wholesome food, clean water, shelter and health care as
necessary to maintain good health in a specific species of animal.
ADEQUATE CONTROL — To reasonably restrain or govern an animal so that
the animal does not injure itself, any person, any other animal or property.
ANIMAL — Every living vertebrate (mammal) except a human being.
HARBOR — To feed or shelter an animal at the same location for three (3)
or more consecutive days.
LIVESTOCK — An animal raised on a farm or ranch and primarily used or
intended for use in production operations as food or fiber or for commercial
gain.
OWNER — In addition to its ordinary meaning, any person who keeps or
harbors an animal or professes to be owning, keeping, or harboring an
animal.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, joint stock company,
corporation, association, trust, estate or other legal entity.
PESTS — Birds, rabbits or rodents which damage property or have an
adverse effect on the public health, but shall not include any endangered
species listed by the United States Department of the Interior nor any
endangered species listed in the Wildlife Code of Missouri.
PET — An animal that is kept for pleasure rather than utility.
Section 210.190. Animal Abuse14
A. A person is guilty of animal abuse when a person:
1. Intentionally or purposely kills an animal in any manner not
allowed by or expressly exempted from the provisions of Sections
578.005 to 578.023 and 273.030, RSMo.;
2. Purposely or intentionally causes injury or suffering to an animal;
or
3. Having ownership or custody of an animal knowingly fails to
provide adequate care or adequate control.
14.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.200
AO:131
Section 210.200. Animal Neglect and Abandonment [CC 1970 §4-3;
Ord. No. 5797 §1, 11-11-2003]
Section 210.210. Impoundment of Abused/Neglected Animals [CC
1970 §4-4; Ord. No. 5797 §1, 11-11-2003]
A. A person is guilty of animal neglect when he/she has custody or
ownership or both of an animal and fails to provide adequate care or
adequate control which results in substantial harm to the animal.
B. A person is guilty of animal abandonment when he/she knowingly
abandons an animal in any place without making provisions for its
adequate care.
C. Punishment for a first (1st) conviction for animal neglect or
abandonment is by imprisonment for up to fifteen (15) days or a fine not
to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or both. A second (2nd) or
subsequent conviction shall be punishable by imprisonment for a term
not to exceed ninety (90) days or a fine not to exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or both. All fines and penalties for a first (1st)
conviction of animal neglect or abandonment may be waived by the
court provided that the person found guilty of animal neglect or
abandonment shows that adequate, permanent remedies for the
neglect or abandonment have been made. Reasonable costs incurred
for the care and maintenance of neglected or abandoned animals may
not be waived.
D. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Section, the court may
order a person found guilty of animal neglect or abandonment to pay all
reasonable costs and expenses necessary for:
1. The care and maintenance of neglected or abandoned animals
within the person's custody or ownership;
2. The disposal of any dead or diseased animals within the person's
custody or ownership;
3. The reduction of resulting organic debris affecting the immediate
area of the neglect or abandonment; and
4. The avoidance or minimization of any public health risks created by
the neglect or abandonment of the animals.
E. The parent or guardian of a minor child is responsible for the adequate
care of any animal owned by or in the control of or harbored by that
minor child.
A. Any duly authorized public health official, law enforcement official or
Animal Control Officer may impound any animal found outside of the
owned or rented property of the owner or custodian of such animal
when such animal shows evidence of neglect or abuse. Any animal
impounded pursuant to this Section shall be:
Section
210.200
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
210.210
AO:132
Section 210.220. Warrant To Enter Private Property [CC 1970 §4-5;
Ord. No. 5797 §1, 11-11-2003]
1. If the owner can be ascertained and the animal is not diseased or
disabled beyond recovery for any useful purpose, held for recovery
by the owner. The owner shall be notified within five (5) business
days of impoundment by phone or by mail of the animal's location
and recovery procedures. The animal shall be held ten (10)
business days. An animal unclaimed after ten (10) business days
may be put up for adoption or humanely killed;
2. Placed in the care or custody of a veterinarian or the appropriate
animal control authority of an animal shelter. The animal shall not
be disposed of, unless diseased or disabled beyond recovery for any
useful purpose, until after expiration of a minimum of five (5)
business days, during which time the public shall have clear access
to inspect the animal through time periods ordinarily accepted as
usual business hours. After five (5) business days, the animal may
be put up for adoption or humanely killed; or
3. If diseased or disabled beyond recovery for any useful purpose as
determined by a public health official, law enforcement official,
veterinarian or Animal Control Officer, humanely killed.
4. The owner or custodian of an animal impounded pursuant to this
Section shall be liable for reasonable costs for the care and
maintenance of the animal. Any person incurring reasonable costs
for the care and maintenance of such animal shall have a lien
against such animal until the reasonable costs have been paid and
may be put up for adoption or humanely kill any animal if such
costs are not paid within ten (10) days after demand. Any monies
received for an animal adopted pursuant to this Subsection in
excess of costs shall be paid to the owner of such animal.
5. The owner or custodian of any animal killed pursuant to this
Section shall be entitled to recover the actual value of the animal
up to but not to exceed six hundred dollars ($600.00) if the owner
or custodian shows that such killing was unwarranted.
A. Any duly authorized public health official or law enforcement official
may seek a warrant from the appropriate court to enable him/her to
enter private property in order to inspect, care for or impound
neglected or abused animals. All requests for such warrants shall be
accompanied by an affidavit stating the probable cause to believe a
violation of this Article Section has occurred. A person under the
authority of a warrant shall:
1. Be given a disposition hearing before the court through which the
warrant was issued within thirty (30) days of the filing of the
request for the purpose of granting immediate disposition of the
animals impounded.
Section
210.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.220
AO:133
Section 210.230. Molesting or Disturbing Wild Birds — Abatement
of Nuisance Condition [CC 1970 §4-6; Ord. No. 5797 §1, 11-11-2003]
It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, injure or disturb any wild
birds, ducks or geese or the nests, young or brood of any such wild fowl;
provided however, in circumstances where such birds, ducks or geese,
2. Place impounded animals in the care or custody of a veterinarian,
the appropriate animal control authority or an animal shelter. If an
appropriate veterinarian, animal control authority or animal
shelter is not available, the animal shall not be impounded unless it
is diseased or disabled beyond recovery for any useful purpose.
3. Humanely kill any animal impounded if it is determined by a
licensed veterinarian that the animal is diseased or disabled
beyond recovery for any useful purpose.
4. Not be liable for any necessary damage to property while acting
under such warrant.
5. The owner or custodian or any person claiming an interest in any
animal that has been impounded because of neglect or abuse may
prevent disposition of the animal by posting bond or security in an
amount sufficient to provide for the animal's care and keeping for
at least thirty (30) days, inclusive of the date on which the animal
was taken into custody. Notwithstanding the fact that bond may be
posted pursuant to this Subsection, the authority having custody of
the animal may humanely dispose of the animal at the end of the
time for which expenses are covered by the bond or security, unless
there is a court order prohibiting such disposition. Such order shall
provide for a bond or other security in the amount necessary to
protect the authority having custody of the animal from any cost of
the care, keeping or disposal of the animal. The authority taking
custody of an animal shall give notice of the provisions of this
Section by posting a copy of this Section at the place where the
animal was taken into custody or by delivering it to a person
residing on the property.
6. The owner or custodian of any animal humanely killed pursuant to
this Section shall not be entitled to recover any damages related to
nor the actual value of the animal if the animal was found by a
licensed veterinarian to be diseased or disabled or if the owner or
custodian failed to post bond or security of the care, keeping and
disposition of the animal after being notified of impoundment.
B. If a person is adjudicated guilty of the crime of animal neglect or animal
abuse and the court having jurisdiction is satisfied that an animal
owned or controlled by such person would in the future be subject to
such neglect or abuse, such animal shall not be returned to or allowed
to remain with such person, but its disposition shall be determined by
the court.
Section
210.220
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
210.230
AO:134
because of the concentration in number or for other reasons, create a
nuisance or threat to the public health, the Police Department and/or the
Health Department may, consistent with prevailing State and Federal law,
take such actions necessary to mitigate the situation.
Section 210.240. Possession of Large Cats or Other Predatory and
Dangerous Animals
No person may keep any lion, tiger, leopard, ocelot, jaguar, cheetah,
margay, mountain lion, Canada lynx, bobcat, jaguarundi, hyena, wolf, bear,
non-human primate, coyote, any deadly, dangerous, or poisonous reptile, or
any deadly or dangerous reptile over eight (8) feet long, in any place other
than a properly maintained zoological park, circus, scientific, or educational
institution, research laboratory, veterinary hospital, or animal refuge.
Section 210.250. Possession of Livestock — Maintaining A Stable,
Pig Sty, Barn, Corral or Other Animal Pen [CC 1970 §4-8; Ord. No.
5797 §1, 11-11-2003]
Section 210.260. Possession of Domestic Fowl [CC 1970 §4-9; Ord.
No. 5797 §1, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 6291 §1, 9-24-2013; Ord. No.
6394 §1, 10-13-2015]
A. It shall be unlawful for a person to keep any cattle, horses, goats, mules,
sheep, pigs or other types of livestock except in conjunction with a
farming operation or riding stable. No stable, pig sty, barn, corral or
other animal pen where such livestock are boarded or confined shall be
closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line. In no case shall a horse,
pony or other type of livestock be kept on a lot of less than three (3)
acres. However, nothing in this Section shall be construed as to
preclude the transport of livestock through the City, the use of livestock
in a parade or exhibition, as a temporary scientific or teaching display
or other officially sanctioned reason.
B. Every person having charge or control of any stable, shed or pen or any
yard shall be responsible for the cleanliness of the facility or site. All
manure, fecal accumulations and liquid discharges in any pen, cage,
stable, corral, yard, barn, etc., shall be removed and disposed of in such
a manner as to prevent the breeding of flies and creation of offensive,
disagreeable or noxious odors or other nuisance conditions. Further,
nothing in this Section shall be construed so as to prevent the use of
manure deposits upon any private property to enhance the cultivation
of such property.
A. Limitations On Keeping Domestic Fowl. It shall be unlawful for a
person, other than a veterinary hospital or pet shop, to keep domestic
geese, ducks, chickens or turkeys ("domestic fowl") within the City for
commercial or resale purposes. It shall be unlawful for a person to keep
more than ten (10) domestic fowl as pets or for domestic egg
production. No crowing hens or adult male chickens may be kept.
Section
210.230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.260
AO:135
Domestic fowl kept as pets or for domestic egg production must be
adequately confined within the private property boundaries of the
owner's yard sufficient to prevent their escape. Any person desiring to
keep domestic fowl may do so only upon obtaining a permit for same
from the City.
B. Permit Required. No person may keep upon his/her premises any
domestic fowl except as provided in this Section.
1. Any person desiring to keep any domestic fowl within the City shall
file with the City's Planning and Development Services Department
a written application for a permit, accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00).
2. Permits granted under this Section may not be transferred to a new
owner.
3. Approval of the permit will be granted upon successful completion
of an inspection(s). If multiple inspections are required, an
additional fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per inspection shall be
charged. Each permit shall be for a term of three (3) years from the
date thereof, unless sooner revoked as provided herein. A
successive permit for an additional period of three (3) years may be
issued through the same procedures for an initial application.
4. Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, each
property harboring domestic fowl which exists before the effective
date of this Section on September 24, 2013, shall comply with the
provisions of this Section and obtain a permit within one hundred
twenty (120) days after the effective date of this Section. Existing
permit holders shall comply with amendments to this Section
within sixty (60) days of the effective date (October 13, 2015) of the
amendment(s) with the following exception:
a. Pursuant to Section 210.260(A), any existing permit holder
who houses more than ten (10) domestic fowl on their property
may keep the same number of fowl, but may not replace any
fowl that expires or that is otherwise permanently removed
from their property, until the limit of ten (10) is reached.
C. Permit Criteria And Performance Standards. A permit may be issued if
all of the following conditions are satisfied:
1. Domestic fowl may be kept for purely domestic purposes only. No
animals or eggs may be sold to any person not a resident of the
premises where kept.
2. The domestic fowl shall be safely and securely confined within an
enclosed area containing a coop. The coop must have a hard roof,
and the coop and enclosed area must be completely secured from
predators. No more than one (1) coop is allowed per permitted
parcel. The domestic fowl shall not be permitted to run at large in
Section
210.260
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
210.260
AO:136
or upon the public streets, open lots or private properties of the
City, other than that of the owner.
3. The appearance of the coop and enclosure, and the materials used
to construct the coop and enclosure shall resemble backyard coops
which are sold in the commercial marketplace. The coop and
enclosed area shall appear professional in design and
workmanship. It shall be constructed with proportional dimensions.
Plastic tarp roofs, junk and materials not commercially used for
coops and enclosures are not allowed.
4. The coop and enclosed area shall be maintained in a ventilated,
clean, safe and sanitary condition containing adequate space for
humane treatment. The coop and enclosed areas shall be
maintained in good repair and free of noxious odors.
5. The coop and enclosed area shall be designed and maintained at all
times to effectively prohibit accessibility by predators.
6. Coops and enclosed areas shall be located only in the rear yard.
Coops and the material establishing the boundaries of the enclosed
areas shall meet all rear and side yard setback requirements for
accessory structures in accordance with the zoning district in
which the property is located. Coops and enclosed areas shall not
be visible from adjoining properties at ground level or from any
street, public or private, through the proper use of fencing, walls,
berms, or densely planted vegetation, or any combination thereof.
a. If vegetation is used, it shall be planted in a designated buffer
strip at least three (3) feet in width along the side and rear
property lines, and across the side yards to obscure visibility
from the street. Said area shall be so designed and planted as
to be one hundred percent (100%) opaque when viewed
horizontally by a person standing at ground level, at a height
no less than six (6) feet from ground level, at the time of
planting. Existing vegetation, alone or in combination with a
fence or wall, that achieves the vegetative opacity and
minimum height requirements set forth herein, may be
approved by the Planning Director in lieu of the minimum
buffer width standards.
b. An opaque fence or wall no less than six (6) feet in height,
surrounding the rear yard, may also serve to create an
enclosed area for domestic fowl. Fence and wall construction
shall meet all standards pursuant to the City's fence standards
and shall be permitted separately. Fences and walls used in this
manner may be located on the property line.
7. Any manure or waste shall be collected and properly removed from
the premises or tilled into the soil on the premises promptly and
regularly to prevent offensive smells or conditions conducive to
disease.
Section
210.260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.260
AO:137
Section 210.270. Dogs, Fighting, Training To Fight or Injuring For
Amusement or Gain, Penalty — Spectator, Penalty
8. Food for domestic fowl shall be stored in a container which is kept
dry and sanitary and in a rodent-, insect- and leak-proof condition
at all times.
9. No person shall keep domestic fowl in a manner so as to create a
nuisance as defined in Chapter 220, Nuisances, of the City Code.
10. The keeping of domestic fowl pursuant to a permit issued under
this Section shall comply with all ordinances of the City.
11. By applying for a permit under this Section, the property owner
authorizes City officials, at all reasonable times and in a reasonable
manner, to enter upon and inspect the property with respect to
which the permit is applied for to determine whether the keeping of
domestic fowl violates this Section or any other applicable
ordinances.
D. Revocation Of Permits To Keep Domestic Fowl.
1. In addition to any other penalty provided by law for violation of this
Section or any other provision of this Code of Ordinances, if the
holder of a permit allows any nuisance or unsanitary condition to
exist upon the premises, or any violation of this Section, any of the
conditions or performance standards provided herein, or other
applicable laws, to exist after notice of violation from the City, then
such permit for domestic fowl may be disciplined or revoked after
hearing, upon determination by the City Manager or designee that
such domestic fowl is being maintained in an unsanitary condition,
or in violation of this Section, any of the conditions or performance
standards provided herein, or other applicable laws. All domestic
fowl must be disposed of or removed from the City no more than
ten (10) days following receipt of notice of revocation after hearing
from the City.
2. Any applicant or permit holder aggrieved by a decision of, (a) the
Planning and Development Services Department in regard to
issuance of a permit, or (b) the City Manager or designee in regard
to discipline or revocation of a permit may appeal the decision to
the City Manager within five (5) business days of said decision by
filing a written request for reconsideration and appeal setting forth
in a thorough and concise manner the decision being appealed and
all grounds known to the appellant as to wherein and why the
decision is allegedly in error. The City Manager may consider the
appeal on the record of the prior decision or may, at the Manager's
sole discretion, receive additional evidence in such manner as
deemed appropriate in light of the circumstances.
A. Any person who:
Section
210.260
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
210.270
AO:138
Section 210.275. Bullbaiting and Cockfighting — Penalty
Any person who shall keep or use, or in any way be connected with or
interested in the management of, or shall receive money for the admission
of any person to, any place kept or used for the purpose of fighting or
baiting any bull, bear, cock or other creature, except dogs, and any person
who shall encourage, aid or assist or be present thereat, or who shall
permit or suffer any place belonging to him/her or under his/her control
to be so kept or used, shall, on conviction thereof, be guilty of a class A
misdemeanor.
Section 210.280. Animals Running At Large [CC 1970 §4-11; Ord.
No. 5797 §1, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 5903 §1, 10-11-2005]
1. Owns, possesses, keeps, or trains any dog, with the intent that such
dog shall be engaged in an exhibition of fighting with another dog;
2. For amusement or gain, causes any dog to fight with another dog,
or causes any dogs to injure each other; or
3. Permits any act as described in Subparagraphs (1) or (2) of this
Subsection to be done on any premises under his/her charge or
control, or aids or abets any such act is guilty of an ordinance
violation.
B. Any person who is knowingly present, as a spectator, at any place,
building, or structure where preparations are being made for an
exhibition of the fighting of dogs, with the intent to be present at such
preparations, or is knowingly present at such exhibition or at any other
fighting or injuring as described in Subparagraph (2) of Subsection (A)
of this Section, with the intent to be present at such exhibition, fighting,
or injuring is guilty of an ordinance violation.
C. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit:
1. The use of dogs in the management of livestock by the owner of
such livestock or his/her employees or agents or other persons in
lawful custody of such livestock;
2. The use of dogs in hunting; or
3. The training of dogs or the use of equipment in the training of dogs
for any purpose not prohibited by law.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any livestock, dog or
other domestic animal, except cats, to run at large within the City.
B. Every female dog, cat or other animal in heat shall be confined in a
building or secure enclosure in such a manner that such female cannot
come into contact with another animal except for a planned breeding.
C. These restraints do not apply to animals while being used for lawful
hunting, field trials, water retrieving, dog shows, tracking or search and
Section
210.270
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.280
AO:139
Section 210.290. Exemptions To Sections 210.180 Through 210.280
[CC 1970 §4-12; Ord. No. 5797 §1, 11-11-2003]
Section 210.300. Prohibition of Animals At Special Events [CC 1970
§4-13; Ord. No. 5797 §1, 11-11-2003]
rescue in conjunction with official local, State or Federal law
enforcement activities or the Armed Forces of the United States.
A. In accordance with Section 578.007, RSMo., the various provisions of
this Article shall not apply to:
1. Care or treatment performed by a licensed veterinarian within the
provisions of Chapter 340, RSMo.;
2. Bona fide scientific experiments;
3. Hunting, fishing or trapping as allowed by Chapter 252, RSMo.,
including all practices and privileges as allowed under the Missouri
Wildlife Code;
4. Facilities and publicly funded zoological parks currently in
compliance with the Federal "Animal Welfare Act" as amended;
5. Rodeo practices currently accepted by the Professional Rodeo
Cowboys Association;
6. The lawful, humane killing of an animal by the owner thereof, the
agent of such owner or by a veterinarian at the request of the
owner thereof;
7. The lawful, humane killing of an animal by an Animal Control
Officer, the operator of an animal shelter, veterinarian or law
enforcement or health official;
8. With respect to farm animals, normal or accepted practices of
animal husbandry;
9. The killing of an animal by any person at any time if such animal is
outside of the owned or rented property of the owner or custodian
of such animal and the animal is injuring any person or farm
animal, but shall not include Police or guard dogs while working;
10. The killing of house or garden pests;
11. Field trials, training and hunting practices as accepted by the
Professional Houndsmen of Missouri.
A. The entry of animals to any special event held within the jurisdictional
limits of the City where, in the judgment of the Chief of Police, the entry
of such animal or animals poses a hazard to public safety or health is
hereby prohibited.
Section
210.280
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
210.300
AO:140
Section 210.310. Removing Fecal Matter [Ord. No. 5879 §1(4-15),
5-24-2005]
Section 210.320. Possession of Removal Equipment [Ord. No. 5879
§1(4-16), 5-24-2005]
It shall be unlawful for the owner or handler of any animal to fail to have
in their possession the equipment necessary to remove their animal's fecal
matter when accompanied by said animal on public property or public
easement or private property of another.
Section 210.330. Violation and Penalties For Sections 210.310 and
210.320 [Ord. No. 5879 §1(4-17), 5-24-2005]
B. Support dogs, such as Seeing Eye dogs, assist dogs for the hearing
impaired, Police dogs and other specially trained assist or performing
animals shall be exempt from the provisions contained in Subsection
(A).
C. The event(s) where animals are to be prohibited shall be clearly posted
as such, with appropriate signage placed at each entrance or
adequately spaced around the event's perimeter.
D. Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of the provisions of this
Section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
E. As used in this Section, the term "special event" shall mean a specified
or designated public occurrence, affair or event at which more than two
hundred (200) persons are reasonably expected by the organizer or
sponsor thereof to be in attendance.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or handler of any animal to fail to
remove fecal matter deposited by his/her animal on public property or
public easement or private property of another, before the owner leaves
the immediate area where the fecal matter was deposited.
B. It shall be unlawful for an owner to allow the accumulation of animal
feces or manure in any open area, run, cage or yard wherein animals
are kept and to fail to remove or dispose of feces or manure at least
once every twenty-four (24) hours.
A. Any person found guilty of violating Sections 210.310 or 210.320 shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished:
1. By a fine of not less than twenty dollars ($20.00) nor more than fifty
dollars ($50.00) for the first (1st) offense; or
2. For the second (2nd) and subsequent offenses occurring within one
(1) year, a fine of not less than thirty dollars ($30.00) nor more than
one hundred dollars ($100.00).
Section
210.300
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.330
AO:141
3. The minimum fines provided for by this Section are mandatory
minimums and shall not be suspended or deferred except in cases
in which the court determines that the defendant is indigent and
unable to pay any fine.
Section
210.330
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
210.330
AO:142
ARTICLE III
Dangerous Animals
Section 210.340. Generally [CC 1970 §4-50; Ord. No. 5798 §2,
11-11-2003; Ord. No. 6305 §1, 1-28-2014]
A. Classification. The Chief of Police or his/her designated representative
shall classify any animal with the following characteristics as a
dangerous animal for purposes of this Section and Section 210.350 of
this Code:
1. Any animal which has inflicted a severe or fatal injury on a human
on public or private property. The term "severe injury" means any
physical injury resulting directly from an animal's bite, which
results in broken bones or lacerations requiring stitches or
hospitalization. The victim receiving severe injuries, as defined
above, must provide the Police Chief with a signed physician's
statement documenting the injury and the treatment qualifying
such as a severe injury or sign an authorization for the release of
such statement.
2. Any animal which has attacked or bitten a human being or domestic
animal, without provocation, on public or private property other
than the property of the owner.
3. Any animal which, while on the owner's property, has attacked or
bitten, without provocation, a human being other than the owner or
a member of the owner's family who normally resides at the place
where the animal is kept, or domestic animal.
4. Any animal which, while off the owner's property, has killed a
domestic animal, livestock or poultry without provocation.
5. Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose
of fighting or any animal trained for fighting.
6. Any animal which, when unprovoked, chases or approaches a
person upon the streets, sidewalks or any public grounds or private
property, other than the property of the owner, in a menacing
fashion or apparent attitude of attack, regardless of whether or not
a person is injured by said animal.
7. Any animal with a known history, propensity, tendency or
disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise
threaten the safety of human beings or domestic animals.
8. In addition, in any administrative or judicial proceeding relating to
the provisions of this Section, there shall be a rebuttable
presumption that any animal which has been found to be dangerous
in any administrative or judicial process in any other jurisdiction is
a dangerous animal and may only be owned or maintained within
the City in strict compliance with all provisions of this Section.
Section
210.340
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.340
AO:143
B. Notice. Within five (5) working days after classifying an animal as a
dangerous animal, the Chief of Police or his/her designated
representative shall notify the animal's owner of such classification, in
writing. The notice shall identify the requirements and conditions for
maintaining a dangerous animal as set forth in this Section and Section
210.350. If the owner cannot be located, the animal may be
immediately impounded, and notice shall be posted at the owner's last
known address.
C. Appeal And Hearing. If the circumstances surrounding the
classification as a dangerous animal under any of the definitions listed
in Subsection (A) of this Section are in dispute or if the animal owner
contests the classification, then the owner has the option of submitting,
within five (5) working days of notice of said classification, a written
request to the Chief of Police for a hearing to contest the dangerous
animal classification.
1. The City Manager shall, within ten (10) working days after receipt
of a bona fide written request, designate a hearing officer to
conduct the hearing and render a decision.
2. Pending the outcome of such a hearing, the animal must be
confined in such a manner so as not to be a threat to any person.
The confinement may be on the owner's premises or with a licensed
veterinarian.
3. The hearing officer shall determine whether to classify the animal
to be a dangerous animal based upon evidence and testimony
presented at the time of the hearing, in addition to witnesses,
animal control personnel, Police or any other person possessing
information pertinent to such determination. The hearing shall be
informal and strict rules of evidence shall not apply. The owner may
be represented by counsel, present oral and written evidence and
cross- examine witnesses.
4. The hearing officer shall issue a decision after the close of the
hearing and notify the owner in writing of the decision. The owner
or possessor of the animal classified to be a dangerous animal shall
be required to maintain the animal as herein provided in this Code.
5. Any person aggrieved by the determination of the hearing officer
may appeal the decision to the Circuit Court of St. Louis County
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 536, RSMo.; provided,
however, that any appeal must be filed with the Circuit Court within
five (5) days of the date of the hearing officer's decision.
D. Exemptions To Dangerous Animal Classification.
1. No animal may be classified a dangerous animal if the threat, injury
or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was
committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises
occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal or was teasing,
Section
210.340
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
210.340
AO:144
Section 210.350. Owners' Responsibilities [CC 1970 §4-51; Ord. No.
5798 §2, 11-11-2003]
tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or has, in the past,
been observed or reported to have teased, tormented, abused or
assaulted the animal or was committing or attempting to commit a
crime.
2. The Chief of Police may, because of extenuating circumstances,
determine from the investigation of an incident that an animal is
not dangerous. However, the owner being responsible for said
animal shall be warned of the animal's tendencies and shall take
appropriate action to prevent subsequent incidents. This, however,
does not exempt the owner from being cited for other animal
control ordinance violations.
3. Animals owned by governmental or law enforcement agencies
when being used in the services of those agencies are exempt.
E. Actions To Be Taken For Dangerous Animals Causing Severe Or Fatal
Injuries.
1. An animal responsible for an unprovoked severe or fatal attack
shall be humanely destroyed.
2. An animal responsible for a provoked severe or fatal attack should
be classified and maintained as a dangerous animal pursuant to
other provisions of this Chapter.
A. From and after March 1, 2004, owners or keepers of an animal that has
been declared a dangerous animal may maintain the dangerous animal
only subject to the following limitations, requirements and conditions:
1. Registration. Not later than March 10, 2004, or immediately upon
the acquisition of a dangerous animal thereafter, every owner or
keeper of a dangerous animal in the City shall register said animal
with the Chief of Police of the City on the dangerous animal
registry. Failure to so register shall constitute a violation of this
Section. Notice of this requirement shall be given by posting a copy
of this Section in City Hall.
2. Rabies quarantine impoundment. Any dangerous animal which
bites or scratches a human or any animal which is determined to be
dangerous because of such biting or scratching of a human, shall
be impounded for a ten (10) day rabies quarantine in accordance
with the other provisions of this Chapter.
3. Collar. Any dangerous animal shall wear at all times a bright
orange collar with a large brightly colored metal tag attached to
the collar so the animal can readily be identified as a dangerous
animal.
Section
210.340
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.350
AO:145
4. Loose, unconfined or missing dangerous animal. The owner or
keeper shall notify the Police Department immediately if a
dangerous animal is loose, unconfined or missing, has attacked
another animal or has attacked a human being.
5. Reporting requirements. The owner or keeper shall notify the
Police Department within twenty-four (24) hours of the following
events:
a. Death or transfer of ownership. If a dangerous animal has been
sold, given away or otherwise transferred in ownership or
possession, the owner or keeper shall provide the Police
Department with the name, address and telephone number of
the new owner or keeper and, if the animal is kept within the
City limits of Clayton, the new owner or keeper must comply
with the requirements of this Chapter. If a dangerous animal
has died, the owner shall notify the Police Department of that
fact so the animal can be removed from the dangerous animal
registry.
b. Birth. All offspring born of dangerous animals within the City
must be removed from the City within three (3) months of their
birth.
c. New address. Should the owner or keeper move from one
address within the corporate City limits to another address
within the corporate City limits, the owner or keeper shall
provide notice of the new address where the dangerous animal
is being kept.
6. Confinement.
a. All dangerous animals must be securely confined indoors or in
a securely enclosed and locked pen, kennel or other structure,
except when leashed and muzzled as provided herein. The pen,
kennel or other structure must be suitable to prevent the entry
of young children and designed to prevent the animal from
escaping. Such pen, kennel or other structure must have
minimum dimensions of five (5) feet by ten (10) feet and must
have secure sides and secure top attached to all sides. The pen,
kennel or other structure must be locked with a key or
combination lock when dangerous animals are confined within.
The pen, kennel or other structure must have a secured bottom
or floor attached to all sides; however, if it has no bottom
secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded in the
ground no less than twelve (12) inches. The enclosure must
also provide protection from the elements for the animal.
b. The enclosure, when occupied by a dangerous animal, shall not
be occupied by any other animal. If the dangerous animal is a
female with offspring under three (3) months of age, the
offspring may occupy the same enclosure as the mother.
Section
210.350
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
210.350
AO:146
c. All structures erected to house dangerous animals must
comply with all zoning and building regulations of the City. All
such structures must be adequately lifted and ventilated and
kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
d. No dangerous animal may be kept on a porch, patio or in any
part of a house or structure that would allow the animal to exit
such building on its own volition. In addition, no such animal
may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are
open or when screen windows or screen doors are the only
obstacle preventing the animal from exiting the structure.
7. Signs. The owner or keeper shall display a sign on his/her premises
that there is a dangerous animal on the property and which bears a
symbol warning children of the presence of a dangerous animal.
This sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the
roadway from which the property is entered. In addition, a similar
sign is required to be posted on the kennel or pen or fenced yard of
such animal.
8. Leash and muzzle. A dangerous animal may be off the owner's
premises if it is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or
leash not exceeding six (6) feet in length and under the control of a
responsible person. The muzzle must not cause injury to the animal
or interfere with its vision or respiration but must prevent it from
biting any person or animal.
9. Insurance. The owner or keeper of a dangerous animal shall
present to the Police Department proof that the owner or keeper
has procured liability insurance in a single incident amount of at
least two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) for bodily injury
to or death of any person or persons or for damage to property
owned by any persons which may result from the ownership,
keeping or maintenance of such animal covering the twelve (12)
month period during which licensing is sought. An effective
insurance policy with the coverage and in the amounts specified
herein must be maintained by the owner or keeper at all times. This
policy shall contain a provision requiring the City of Clayton
receive ten (10) days' written notice by the insurance company
prior to any cancellation, termination or expiration of the policy.
10. Photographs. All owners or keepers of dangerous animals must,
within ten (10) days of such classification, provide the Police
Department with two (2) color photographs (one (1) showing the
left profile and the other showing the right profile) of the animal,
clearly showing the color, distinguishing markings and
approximate size of the animal.
11. Compliance, violations and penalties.
a. It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of a dangerous
animal within the City of Clayton to fail to comply with
Section
210.350
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.350
AO:147
requirements and conditions set forth in this Section. Any
animal found to be in violation of this Section may be, in
addition to other penalties provided by the Municipal Code,
subject to immediate seizure and impoundment for a minimum
of ten (10) days or the time necessary for the owner or keeper
to show compliance with this Section, whichever is shorter.
b. Any person found guilty of violation of any provision of this
Section shall be punished as provided in Section 100.110 of
this Code. In addition to any penalty as provided above, the
court shall order the registration of the subject dangerous
animal revoked and the animal removed from the City. Should
the defendant refuse to remove the animal from the City, the
Municipal Court Judge may find the defendant owner in
contempt and order the immediate confiscation and
impoundment of the animal. Each day that a violation of this
Section continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In
addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who violates
this Section shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food,
handling, veterinary care and testimony, necessitated by the
enforcement of this Section.
Section
210.350
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
210.350
AO:148
Chapter 215
OFFENSES
Section
210.350
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.350
AO:149

ARTICLE I
General Provisions15
Section 215.005. Definitions [CC 1970 §17-19.1; Ord. No. 5671 §1,
1-8-2002]
In this Chapter, unless the context requires a different definition, the
following shall apply:
AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE — Has the meaning specified in Section 556.056,
RSMo.
BURDEN OF INJECTING THE ISSUE — Has the meaning specified in
Section 556.051, RSMo.
COMMERCIAL FILM AND PHOTOGRAPHIC PRINT PROCESSOR — Any
person who develops exposed photographic film into negatives, slides or
prints or who makes prints from negatives or slides for compensation. The
term "commercial film and photographic print processor" shall include all
employees of such persons but shall not include a person who develops film
or makes prints for a public agency.
CONFINEMENT —
CONSENT — Consent or lack of consent may be expressed or implied.
Assent does not constitute consent if:
A person is in confinement when he/she is held in a place of
confinement pursuant to arrest or order of a court and remains in
confinement until:
a. A court orders his/her release;
He/she is released on bail, bond or recognizance, personal or
otherwise; or
b.
A public servant having the legal power and duty to confine him/
her authorizes his/her release without guard and without condition
that he/she return to confinement.
c.
1.
A person is not in confinement if:
a. He/she is on probation or parole, temporary or otherwise; or
He/she is under sentence to serve a term of confinement which
is not continuous, or is serving a sentence under a work-release
program, and in either such case is not being held in a place of
confinement or is not being held under guard by a person having
the legal power and duty to transport him/her to or from a place of
confinement.
b.
2.
15.Cross Reference—As to domestic and family violence, art. XIV of this chapter.
Section
215.005
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.005
AO:151
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — A drug, substance, or immediate precursor
in schedule I through V as defined in Chapter 195, RSMo.[Ord. No. 6466
§ 1, 1-10-2017]
COURSE OF CONDUCT — A pattern of conduct composed of two (2) or
more acts, which may include communication by any means, over a period
of time, however short, evidencing a continuity of purpose. Constitutionally
protected activity is not included within the meaning of course of conduct.
Such constitutionally protected activity includes picketing or other
organized protests.[Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
CRIMINAL NEGLIGENCE — A person acts with criminal negligence when
he/she fails to be aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that
circumstances exist or a result will follow and such failure constitutes a
gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person would
exercise in such a situation.
CUSTODY — A person is in custody when he/she has been arrested but has
not been delivered to a place of confinement.
DANGEROUS FELONY — The felonies of arson in the first degree, assault in
the first degree, attempted forcible rape if physical injury results, attempted
forcible sodomy if physical injury results, forcible rape, forcible sodomy,
kidnapping, murder in the second degree, assault of a Law Enforcement
Officer in the first degree, domestic assault in the first degree, elder abuse
in the first degree, robbery in the first degree, statutory rape in the first
degree when the victim is a child less than twelve (12) years of age at
the time of the commission of the act giving rise to the offense, statutory
sodomy in the first degree when the victim is a child less than twelve (12)
years of age at the time of the commission of the act giving rise to the
offense, and abuse of a child pursuant to Subdivision (2) of Subsection (3)
of Section 568.060, RSMo., and child kidnapping.
DANGEROUS INSTRUMENT — Any instrument, article or substance which,
under the circumstances in which it is used, is readily capable of causing
death or other serious physical injury.
DEADLY WEAPON — Any firearm, loaded or unloaded, or any weapon from
which a shot, readily capable of producing death or serious physical injury,
may be discharged or a switchblade knife, dagger, billy, blackjack or metal
knuckles.
It is given by a person who lacks the mental capacity to authorize the
conduct charged to constitute the offense and such mental incapacity is
manifest or known to the actor;
1.
It is given by a person who by reason of youth, mental disease or defect,
or intoxication is manifestly unable or known by the actor to be unable
to make a reasonable judgment as to the nature or harmfulness of the
conduct charged to constitute the offense; or
2.
3. It is induced by force, duress or deception.
Section
215.005
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.005
AO:152
DISABILITY — A mental, physical, or developmental impairment that
substantially limits one (1) or more major life activities or the ability to
provide adequately for one's care or protection, whether the impairment
is congenital or acquired by accident, injury or disease, where such
impairment is verified by medical findings.[Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
ELDERLY PERSON — A person sixty (60) years of age or older.[Ord. No.
6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
EMOTIONAL DISTRESS — Something markedly greater than the level of
uneasiness, nervousness, unhappiness, or the like which are commonly
experienced in day-to-day living.[Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
FELONY — Has the meaning specified in Section 556.016, RSMo.
FORCIBLE COMPULSION — Means either:
INCAPACITATED — That physical or mental condition, temporary or
permanent, in which a person is unconscious, unable to appraise the nature
of his/her conduct, or unable to communicate unwillingness to an act. A
person is not "incapacitated" with respect to an act committed upon him/
her if he/she became unconscious, unable to appraise the nature of his/her
conduct, or unable to communicate unwillingness to an act after consenting
to the act.
INFRACTION — Has the meaning specified in Section 556.021, RSMo.
INHABITABLE STRUCTURE — Has the meaning specified in Section
569.010, RSMo.
INTOXICATED — Under the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance, or
drug, or any combination thereof.[Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
KNOWINGLY — A person acts knowingly or with knowledge, with respect to
his/her conduct or to surrounding circumstances, when he/she is aware of
the nature of his/her conduct or that those circumstances exist; or a person
acts knowingly or with knowledge with respect to a result of his/her conduct
when he/she is aware that his/her conduct is practically certain to cause
that result.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any public servant having both the
power and duty to make arrests for violations of the laws of this State, and
Federal Law Enforcement Officers authorized to carry firearms and to make
arrests for violations of the laws of the United States.
MISDEMEANOR — Has the meaning specified in Section 556.016, RSMo.
OF ANOTHER — As to property, property that any person or entity other
than the actor, has a possessory or proprietary interest therein, other than
1. Physical force that overcomes reasonable resistance; or
A threat, express or implied, that places a person in reasonable fear
of death, serious physical injury, or kidnapping of himself/herself or
another person.
2.
Section
215.005
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.005
AO:153
only a security interest even if legal title is in the creditor by contract or
arrangement.[Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
OFFENSE — Any felony, misdemeanor or infraction.
PHYSICAL INJURY — Physical pain, illness or any impairment of a physical
condition.
PLACE OF CONFINEMENT — Any building or facility and the grounds
thereof wherein a court is legally authorized to order that a person charged
with or convicted of a crime be held.
POSSESS OR POSSESSED — Having actual or constructive possession of
an object with knowledge of its presence. A person has actual possession if
he/she has the object on his/her person or within easy reach and convenient
control. A person has constructive possession if he/she has the power and
the intention at a given time to exercise dominion or control over the
object either directly or through another person or persons. Possession may
also be sole or joint. If one (1) person alone has possession of an object,
possession is sole. If two (2) or more persons share possession of an object,
possession is joint.
PROPERTY — Anything of value, whether real or personal, tangible or
intangible, in possession or in action.[Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
PUBLIC SERVANT — Any person employed in any way by a government
of this State who is compensated by the government by reason of his/her
employment, any person appointed to a position with any government of
this State, or any person elected to a position with any government of this
State. It includes, but is not limited to, legislators, jurors, members of the
judiciary and Law Enforcement Officers. It does not include witnesses.
PURPOSELY — A person acts purposely or with purpose, with respect to
his/her conduct or to a result thereof, when it is his/her conscious desire to
engage in that conduct or cause that result.
RECKLESSLY — A person acts recklessly or is reckless, when he/she
consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that
circumstances exist or that a result will follow and such disregard
constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable
person would exercise in the situation.
RITUAL OR CEREMONY — An act or series of acts performed by two (2) or
more persons as part of an established or prescribed pattern of activity.
SERIOUS EMOTIONAL INJURY — An injury that creates a substantial risk
of temporary or permanent medical or psychological damage manifested
by impairment of a behavioral, cognitive or physical condition. "Serious
emotional injury" shall be established by testimony of qualified experts upon
the reasonable expectation of probable harm to a reasonable degree of
medical or psychological certainty.
SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY — Physical injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes serious disfigurement or protracted loss or
impairment of the function of any part of the body.
Section
215.005
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.005
AO:154
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Acts of human masturbation; deviate sexual
intercourse; sexual intercourse; or physical contact with a person's clothed
or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or the breast of a female in an
act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL CONTACT — Any touching of the genitals or anus of any person, or
the breast of any female person, or any such touching through the clothing
for the purpose of arousing or gratifying sexual desire of any person.
SEXUAL PERFORMANCE — Any performance, or part thereof, which
includes sexual conduct by a child who is less than seventeen (17) years of
age.
TAMPER — To interfere with improperly, meddle with, displace, make
unwanted alterations, or deprive owner or possessor of something
temporarily.[Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
VEHICLE — A self-propelled mechanical device designed to carry a person
or persons, excluding vessels or aircraft.[Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
VESSEL — Any boat or craft propelled by a motor or by machinery, whether
or not such motor or machinery is a principal source of propulsion used or
capable of being used as a means of transportation on water, or any boat or
craft more than twelve (12) feet in length which is powered by sail alone or
by a combination of sail and machinery, and used or capable of being used
as a means of transportation on water, but not any boat or craft having, as
the only means of propulsion, a paddle or oars or pedaling.[Ord. No. 6466
§ 1, 1-10-2017]
VOLUNTARY ACT — Has the meaning specified in Section 562.011, RSMo.
Section
215.005
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.005
AO:155

ARTICLE II
Offenses Against The Person
Section 215.010. Assault
Section 215.015. Domestic Assault16
A. A person commits the offense of assault if:
1. The person attempts to cause or recklessly causes physical injury
to another person;
2. With criminal negligence the person causes physical injury to
another person by means of a deadly weapon;
3. The person purposely places another person in apprehension of
immediate physical injury;
4. The person recklessly engages in conduct which creates a grave
risk of death or serious physical injury to another person;
5. The person knowingly causes physical contact with another person
knowing the other person will regard the contact as offensive or
provocative; or
6. The person knowingly causes physical contact with an
incapacitated person, as defined in Section 475.010, RSMo., which
a reasonable person, who is not incapacitated, would consider
offensive or provocative.
7. The person knowingly attempts to cause or causes the isolation of a
person with a disability by unreasonably and substantially
restricting or limiting his or her access to other persons,
telecommunication devices or transportation for the purpose of
isolation. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
A. A person commits the offense of domestic assault if the act involves a
family or household member or an adult who is or has been in a
continuing social relationship of a romantic or intimate nature with the
actor as defined in Section 455.010, RSMo.; and
1. The person attempts to cause or recklessly causes physical injury
to such family or household member;
2. With criminal negligence the person causes physical injury to such
family or household member by means of a deadly weapon or
dangerous instrument;
3. The person purposely places such family or household member in
apprehension of immediate physical injury by any means;
16.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.015
AO:157
Section 215.020. Assault Of A Law Enforcement Officer, Corrections
Officer, Emergency Personnel, Highway Worker, Utility Worker,
Cable Worker, Probation And Parole Officer, Or Police Animal. [Ord.
No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-201717]
4. The person recklessly engages in conduct which creates a grave
risk of death or serious physical injury to such family or household
member;
5. The person knowingly causes physical contact with such family or
household member knowing the other person will regard the
contact as offensive; or
6. The person knowingly attempts to cause or causes the isolation of
such family or household member by unreasonably and
substantially restricting or limiting such family or household
member's access to other persons, telecommunication devices or
transportation for the purpose of isolation. (RSMo. §565.074)
A. A person commits the offense of assault of a Law Enforcement Officer,
Corrections Officer, Emergency Personnel, highway worker in a
construction zone or work zone, utility worker, cable worker, or
Probation and Parole Officer if:
1. Such person recklessly causes physical injury to a Law
Enforcement Officer, Corrections Officer, Emergency Personnel,
highway worker in a construction zone or work zone, utility worker,
cable worker, or Probation and Parole Officer;
2. Such person purposely places a Law Enforcement Officer,
Corrections Officer, Emergency Personnel, highway worker in a
construction zone or work zone, utility worker, cable worker, or
Probation and Parole Officer in apprehension of immediate physical
injury; or
3. Such person knowingly causes or attempts to cause physical
contact with a Law Enforcement Officer, Corrections Officer,
Emergency Personnel, highway worker in a construction zone or
work zone, utility worker, cable worker, or Probation and Parole
Officer without the consent of the Law Enforcement Officer,
Corrections Officer, Emergency Personnel, highway worker in a
construction zone or work zone, utility worker, cable worker, or
Probation and Parole Officer.
B. As used in this Section, "emergency personnel" means any paid or
volunteer firefighter, emergency room or trauma center personnel, or
17.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 6466 also changed the title of this Section from "Assault Of A Law
Enforcement Officer" to "Assault Of A Law Enforcement Officer, Corrections Officer,
Emergency Personnel, Highway Worker, Utility Worker, Cable Worker, Probation And
Parole Officer, Or Police Animal."
Section
215.015
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.020
AO:158
Section 215.022. Threatening Communications. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1,
1-10-2017]
emergency medical technician as defined in Subdivisions (15), (16),
(17) and (18) of Section 190.100, RSMo.
C. As used in this Section, the term "Corrections Officer" includes any
jailor or Corrections Officer of the State or any political subdivision of
the State.
D. As used in this Section, the term "highway worker," "construction zone"
or "work zone" shall have the same meaning as such terms are defined
in Section 304.580, RSMo.
E. As used in this Section, the term "utility worker" means any employee
while in the performance of their job duties, including any person
employed under contract, of a utility that provides gas, heat, electricity,
water, steam, telecommunications services, or sewer services, whether
privately, municipally, or cooperatively owned.
F. As used in this Section, the term "cable worker" means any employee
including any person employed under contract, of a cable operator, as
such term is defined in Section 67.2677, RSMo.
G. A person commits the offense of assault on a police animal if he or she
knowingly kills or disables, knowingly attempts to kill or disable, or
knowingly causes or attempts to cause serious physical injury, to a
police animal when that animal is involved in law enforcement
investigation, apprehension, tracking, or search, or the animal is in the
custody or under the control of a Law Enforcement Officer or fire or
rescue personnel.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly send or deliver or cause
or intentionally allow to be sent or delivered any letter, e-mail, text
message or other Internet or electronic communication or other
writing, printing, circular or card or device, with or without a name
subscribed thereto or signed with a fictitious name or any mark,
threatening to accuse any other person of a crime or offense for any
purpose other than to cause the other person to cease ongoing illegal
activity or threatening to kill, maim or wound any other person or
threatening to commit a crime or offense or do any injury to the person,
property, credit or reputation of another, whether or not any money or
property is demanded or extorted thereby.
B. A person commits the offense of unlawful posting of certain information
over the Internet if he or she knowingly posts the name, home address,
Social Security number, or telephone number of any person on the
Internet intending to cause substantial bodily harm or death, or
threatening to cause substantial bodily harm or death to such person.
C. For purposes of this Section, an offense committed by means of writing,
telephonic communication or electronic communication shall be
Section
215.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.022
AO:159
Section 215.030. False Imprisonment18
A person commits the offense of false imprisonment if he/she knowingly
restrains another unlawfully and without consent so as to interfere
substantially with his/her liberty.
Section 215.035. Endangering The Welfare of A Child19
Section 215.040. Leaving A Child Unattended in A Motor Vehicle20
deemed to have occurred at the place from which the communication
was made or sent and at the place where the communication was first
heard or read by the recipient.
A. A person commits the offense of endangering the welfare of a child if:
1. He/she with criminal negligence acts in a manner that creates a
substantial risk to the life, body or health of a child less than
seventeen (17) years old;
2. He/she knowingly encourages, aids or causes a child less than
seventeen (17) years old to engage in any conduct which causes or
tends to cause the child to come within the provisions of Paragraph
(d) of Subdivision (2) of Subsection (1) or Subdivision (3) of
Subsection (1) of Section 211.031, RSMo.;
3. Being a parent, guardian or other person legally charged with the
care or custody of a child less than seventeen (17) years old, he/she
recklessly fails or refuses to exercise reasonable diligence in the
care or control of such child to prevent him/her from coming within
the provisions of Paragraph (c) of Subdivision (1) of Subsection (1)
or Paragraph (d) of Subdivision (2) of Subsection (1) or Subdivision
(3) of Subsection (1) of Section 211.031, RSMo.;
4. He/she knowingly encourages, aids or causes a child less than
seventeen (17) years of age to enter into any room, building or
other structure which is a public nuisance as defined in Section
195.130, RSMo.; or
5. He/she operates a vehicle in violation of Subdivision (2) or (3) of
Subsection (1) of Section 565.024, RSMo., or Subdivision (4) of
Subsection (1) of Section 565.060, RSMo., or Sections 342.010 of
this Code, while a child less than seventeen (17) years old is
present in the vehicle.
B. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to mean the welfare of a child
is endangered for the sole reason that he/she is being provided nonmedical
remedial treatment recognized and permitted under the laws
of this State.
18.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
19.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.022
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.040
AO:160
Section 215.045. Invasion of Privacy [CC 1970 §17-41; Ord. No.
5778 §1, 9-9-2003; Ord. No. 6535, 5-8-2018]
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have these
prescribed meanings:
COLLISION — The act of a motor vehicle coming into contact with an
object or a person.
INJURY — Physical harm to the body of a person.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any automobile, truck, truck-tractor, or any
motorbus or motor-propelled vehicle not exclusively operated or driven
on fixed rails or tracks.
UNATTENDED — Not accompanied by an individual fourteen (14) years
of age or older.
B. A person commits the offense of leaving a child unattended in a motor
vehicle if such person knowingly leaves a child ten (10) years of age or
less unattended in a motor vehicle and such child injures another
person by causing a motor vehicle collision or by causing the motor
vehicle to injure a pedestrian.
A. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
FULL OR PARTIAL NUDITY — The showing of all or any part of the
human genitals or pubic area or buttock; or any part of the nipple of the
breast of any female person, with less than a fully opaque covering.
PHOTOGRAPHS OR FILMS — The making of any photographs, motion
picture film, videotape, digital image or any other recording or
transmission of the image of a person.
PLACE WHERE A PERSON WOULD HAVE REASONABLE
EXPECTATION OF PRIVACY — Any place where a reasonable person
would believe that a person could disrobe in privacy, without being
concerned that the person's undressing was being viewed
surreptitiously, photographed or filmed by another.
VIEWS — The looking upon of another person, with the unaided eye or
with any device designed or intended to improve visual acuity, for the
purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of any person.
B. It shall be unlawful and a person shall commit the offense of invasion of
privacy if such person:
1. Knowingly photographs or films another person, without the
person's knowledge and consent, while the person being
photographed or filmed is in a state of full or partial nudity and is in
a place where one would have a reasonable expectation of privacy
20.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.045
AO:161
Section 215.050. Identity Theft [Ord. No. 5840 §1(17-83),
9-14-2004]
and the person subsequently distributes the photograph, digital
image or film to another or transmits the image contained in the
photograph, digital image or film in a manner that allows access to
that image via a computer; or
2. Knowingly disseminates or permits the dissemination by any
means, to another person, of a videotape, photograph, digital
image or film obtained in violation of paragraphs (1), (2) or (4) of
this Subsection; or
3. Knowingly views, photographs or films another person, without
that person's knowledge and consent, while the person being
viewed, photographed or filmed is in a state of full or partial nudity
and is in a place where one would have a reasonable expectation of
privacy; or
4. Knowingly uses a concealed camcorder or photographic or digital
camera of any type to secretly videotape, photograph or record by
electronic means another person under or through the clothing
worn by that other person for the purpose of viewing the body of or
the undergarments worn by that other person without that person's
consent.
C. The provisions of Subsection (B) of this Section shall not apply to:
1. Viewing, photographing or filming by Law Enforcement Officers
during a lawful criminal investigation; or
2. Viewing, photographing or filming by Law Enforcement Officers or
by personnel of the Department of Corrections or of a local jail or
correctional facility for security purposes or during investigation of
alleged misconduct by a person in the custody of the Department of
Corrections or the local jail or correctional facility.
A. A person commits the offense of identity theft if he/she knowingly and
with the intent to deceive or defraud obtains, possesses, transfers, uses
or attempts to obtain, possess, transfer or use one (1) or more means of
identification not lawfully issued for his/her use. Any person accused of
identity theft may be prosecuted in the Municipal Court provided:
1. The offense was committed wholly or partly within the City;
2. The victim resides in the City; or
3. The property obtained or attempted to be obtained was located in
the City.
B. The term "means of identification" as used in this Code includes, but is
not limited to, the following:
Section
215.045
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.050
AO:162
1. Social Security numbers;
2. Driver's license numbers;
3. Checking account numbers;
4. Savings account numbers;
5. Credit card numbers;
6. Debit card numbers;
7. Personal identification (PIN) code;
8. Electronic identification numbers;
9. Digital signatures;
10. Any other numbers or information that can be used to access a
person's financial resources;
11. Biometric data;
12. Fingerprints;
13. Passwords;
14. Parent's legal surname prior to marriage;
15. Passports; or
16. Birth certificates.
C. Any person convicted of committing an offense established by this
Section shall be subject to punishment as follows:
1. If the offense does not result in the theft or appropriation of credit,
money, goods, services or other property, the person shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), by
imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days or both.
2. If the offense results in the theft or appropriation of credit, money,
goods, services or other property, the person shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), by
imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days or both.
D. In addition to the punishment under Subsection (C) of this Section, the
court may order that the defendant make restitution to any victim of the
offense. Restitution may include payment for any costs, including
attorney fees, incurred by the victim:
1. In clearing the credit history or credit rating of the victim; and
2. In connection with any civil or administrative proceeding to satisfy
any debt, lien or other obligation of the victim arising from the
actions of the defendant.
Section
215.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.050
AO:163
Section 215.055. Trafficking in Stolen Identities [Ord. No. 5840
§1(17-84), 9-14-2004]
E. This Section shall not apply to the following activities:
1. A person obtains the identity of another person to misrepresent his/
her age for the sole purpose of obtaining alcoholic beverages,
tobacco, going to a gaming establishment or another privilege
denied to minors;
2. A person obtains means of identification or information in the
course of a bona fide consumer or commercial transaction;
3. A person exercises, in good faith, a security interest or right of
offset by a creditor or financial institution;
4. A person complies, in good faith, with any warrant, court order,
levy, garnishment, attachment or other judicial or administrative
order, decree or directive, when any party is required to do so;
5. A person otherwise authorized by law to engage in the conduct that
is the subject of the prosecution.
F. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing or limiting
the right of an identity theft victim to recover civil damages and
attorneys' fees as allowed by Section 570.223, RSMo.
A. A person commits the offense of trafficking in stolen identities when
such person manufactures, sells, transfers, purchases or possesses with
intent to sell or transfer means of identification or identifying
information for the purpose of committing identity theft.
B. Unauthorized possession of means of identification of five (5) or more
separate persons shall be evidence that the identities are possessed
with intent to manufacture, sell or transfer means of identification or
identifying information for the purpose of committing identity theft. In
determining possession of five (5) or more identification documents of
the same person or possession of identifying information of five (5) or
more separate persons for the purposes of evidence pursuant to this
Subsection, the following do not apply:
1. The possession of his/her own identification documents;
2. The possession of the identification documents of a person who has
consented to the person at issue possessing his/her identification
documents.
C. Any person convicted of committing an offense established by this
Section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days or both.
D. This Section shall not apply to the following activities:
Section
215.050
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.055
AO:164
1. A person obtains the identity of another person to misrepresent his/
her age for the sole purpose of obtaining alcoholic beverages,
tobacco, going to a gaming establishment or another privilege
denied to minors;
2. A person obtains means of identification or information in the
course of a bona fide consumer or commercial transaction;
3. A person exercises, in good faith, a security interest or right of
offset by a creditor or financial institution;
4. A person complies, in good faith, with any warrant, court order,
levy, garnishment, attachment or other judicial or administrative
order, decree or directive, when any party is required to do so.
Section
215.055
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.055
AO:165

ARTICLE III
Offenses Concerning Administration of Justice
Section 215.060. Concealing An Offense21
Section 215.070. Hindering Prosecution22
Section 215.080. Refusal To Identify As A Witness
A person commits the offense of refusal to identify as a witness if, knowing
he/she has witnessed any portion of a crime, or of any other incident
resulting in physical injury or substantial property damage, upon demand
by a Law Enforcement Officer engaged in the performance of his/her official
duties, he/she refuses to report or gives a false report of his/her name and
present address to such officer.
A. A person commits the offense of concealing an offense if:
1. He/she confers or agrees to confer any pecuniary benefit or other
consideration to any person in consideration of that person's
concealing of any offense, refraining from initiating or aiding in the
prosecution of an offense, or withholding any evidence thereof; or
2. He/she accepts or agrees to accept any pecuniary benefit or other
consideration in consideration of his/her concealing any offense,
refraining from initiating or aiding in the prosecution of an offense,
or withholding any evidence thereof.
A. A person commits the offense of hindering prosecution if for the
purpose of preventing the apprehension, prosecution, conviction or
punishment of another for conduct constituting a crime he/she:
1. Harbors or conceals such person;
2. Warns such person of impending discovery or apprehension, except
this does not apply to a warning given in connection with an effort
to bring another into compliance with the law;
3. Provides such person with money, transportation, weapon, disguise
or other means to aid him/her in avoiding discovery or
apprehension; or
4. Prevents or obstructs, by means of force, deception or intimidation,
anyone from performing an act that might aid in the discovery or
apprehension of such person.
21.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
22.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.085
AO:167
Section 215.085. Subpoena — Failing To Comply [CC 1970 §17-20;
CC 1947 §12-49]
Every person who shall have been personally served with a subpoena issued
by any board or officer of the City having the power and authority to
issue such subpoena, commanding the attendance of such person or the
production of any books, papers or documents, who shall fail or refuse
without reasonable and legal excuse to attend at the time and place therein
specified or who shall fail or refuse without reasonable and legal excuse to
produce the books, papers and documents therein specified or who being
present shall fail or refuse without reasonable and legal excuse to testify
fully as to his/her knowledge concerning the matters and things then being
lawfully investigated by such board of officer shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
Section 215.090. Disturbing A Judicial Proceeding
A person commits the offense of disturbing a judicial proceeding if, with
purpose to intimidate a judge, attorney, juror, party or witness and thereby
to influence a judicial proceeding, he/she disrupts or disturbs a judicial
proceeding by participating in an assembly and calling aloud, shouting,
or holding or displaying a placard or sign containing written or printed
matter concerning the conduct of the judicial proceeding or the character
of a judge, attorney, juror, party or witness engaged in such proceeding,
or calling for or demanding any specified action or determination by such
judge, attorney, juror, party or witness in connection with such proceeding.
Section 215.100. Tampering With A Witness — Tampering With A
Victim23
A. A person commits the offense of tampering with a witness if, with
purpose to induce a witness or a prospective witness to disobey a
subpoena or other legal process, or to absent himself/herself or avoid
subpoena or other legal process, or to withhold evidence, information
or documents, or to testify falsely, he/she:
1. Threatens or causes harm to any person or property;
2. Uses force, threats or deception;
3. Offers, confers or agrees to confer any benefit, direct or indirect,
upon such witness; or
4. Conveys any of the foregoing to another in furtherance of a
conspiracy.
B. A person commits the offense of "victim tampering" if, with purpose to
do so, he/she prevents or dissuades or attempts to prevent or dissuade
any person who has been a victim of any crime or a person who is acting
on behalf of any such victim from:
23.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.085
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.100
AO:168
Section 215.110. Improper Communication
A person commits the offense of improper communication if he/she
communicates, directly or indirectly, with any juror, special master, referee
or arbitrator in a judicial proceeding, other than as part of the proceedings
in a case, for the purpose of influencing the official action of such person.
Section 215.120. False Impersonation
1. Making any report of such victimization to any Peace Officer or
State, local or Federal Law Enforcement Officer or prosecuting
agency or to any judge;
2. Causing a complaint, indictment or information to be sought and
prosecuted or assisting in the prosecution thereof; or
3. Arresting or causing or seeking the arrest of any person in
connection with such victimization.
A. A person commits the offense of false impersonation if such person:
1. Falsely represents himself/herself to be a public servant with
purpose to induce another to submit to his/her pretended official
authority or to rely upon his/her pretended official acts, and
a. Performs an act in that pretended capacity; or
b. Causes another to act in reliance upon his/her pretended
official authority.
2. Falsely represents himself/herself to be a person licensed to
practice or engage in any profession for which a license is required
by the laws of this State with purpose to induce another to rely
upon such representation, and
a. Performs an act in that pretended capacity; or
b. Causes another to act in reliance upon such representation.
3. Upon being arrested, falsely represents himself/herself, to a Law
Enforcement Officer, with the first and last name, date of birth or
Social Security number, or a substantial number of identifying
factors or characteristics as that of another person that results in
the filing of a report or record of arrest or conviction for an
infraction, misdemeanor or felony that contains the first and last
name, date of birth and Social Security number, or a substantial
number of identifying factors or characteristics to that of such
other person as to cause such other person to be identified as the
actual person arrested or convicted.
B. If a violation of Subsection (A)(3) hereof is discovered prior to any
conviction of the person actually arrested for an underlying charge,
then the prosecuting attorney, bringing any action on the underlying
Section
215.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.120
AO:169
Section 215.130. False Reports
Section 215.140. Resisting or Interfering With Arrest, Detention or
Stop24
charge shall notify the court thereof, and the court shall order the
false-identifying factors ascribed to the person actually arrested as are
contained in the arrest and court records amended to correctly and
accurately identify the defendant and shall expunge the incorrect and
inaccurate identifying factors from the arrest and court records.
C. Any person who is the victim of a false impersonation and whose
identity has been falsely reported in arrest or conviction records may
move for expungement and correction of said records under the
procedures set forth in Section 610.123, RSMo. Upon a showing that a
substantial number of identifying factors of the victim was falsely
ascribed to the person actually arrested or convicted, the court shall
order the false identifying factors ascribed to the person actually
arrested as are contained in the arrest and court records amended to
correctly and accurately identify the defendant and shall expunge the
incorrect and inaccurate factors from the arrest and court records.
A. A person commits the offense of making a false report if he/she
knowingly:
1. Gives false information to any person for the purpose of implicating
another person in a crime or offense;
2. Makes a false report to a Law Enforcement Officer that a crime or
offense has occurred or is about to occur; or
3. Makes a false report or causes a false report to be made to a Law
Enforcement Officer, security officer, Fire Department or other
organization, official or volunteer which deals with emergencies
involving danger to life or property that a fire or other incident
calling for an emergency response has occurred or is about to
occur.
B. It is a defense to a prosecution under Subsection (A) of this Section that
the actor retracted the false statement or report before the Law
Enforcement Officer or any other person took substantial action in
reliance thereon.
C. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of retraction
under Subsection (B) of this Section.
A. A person commits the offense of resisting or interfering with arrest,
detention or stop if, knowing that a Law Enforcement Officer is making
an arrest or attempting to lawfully detain or stop an individual or
vehicle, or the person reasonably should know that a Law Enforcement
24.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.120
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.140
AO:170
Section 215.150. Escape Or Attempted Escape From Custody Or
Confinement.25 [Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-201726]
A person commits the offense of escape from custody or confinement or
attempted escape from custody or confinement if, while being held in
custody after arrest or confinement after sentencing for any offense, he
or she escapes or attempts to escape from such custody or confinement,
including but not limited to by means of intentionally removing, altering,
tampering, or damaging electronic monitoring equipment which a court has
required such person to wear.
Section 215.155. Interference With Legal Process
Officer is making an arrest or attempting to lawfully detain or lawfully
stop an individual or vehicle, for the purpose of preventing the officer
from effecting the arrest, stop or detention, the person:
1. Resists the arrest, stop or detention of such person by using or
threatening the use of violence or physical force or by fleeing from
such officer; or
2. Interferes with the arrest, stop or detention of another person by
using or threatening the use of violence, physical force or physical
interference.
B. This Section applies to arrests, stops or detentions with or without
warrants and to arrests, stops or detentions for any crime, infraction or
ordinance violation.
C. A person is presumed to be fleeing a vehicle stop if that person
continues to operate a motor vehicle after that person has seen or
should have seen clearly visible emergency lights or has heard or
should have heard an audible signal emanating from the law
enforcement vehicle pursuing that person.
D. It is no defense to a prosecution under Subsection (A) of this Section
that the Law Enforcement Officer was acting unlawfully in making the
arrest. However, nothing in this Section shall be construed to bar civil
suits for unlawful arrest.
A. A person commits the offense of interference with legal process if,
knowing any person is authorized by law to serve process, for the
purpose of preventing such person from effecting the service of any
process, he/she interferes with or obstructs such person.
B. "Process" includes any writ, summons, subpoena, warrant other than an
arrest warrant, or other process or order of a court.
25.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
26.Editor’s Note: Ord. No. 6466 also changed the title of this Section from “Escape or
Attempted Escape From Custody” to “Escape Or Attempted Escape From Custody Or
Confinement.”
Section
215.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.155
AO:171
Section 215.156. Breaching Barricade or Police Line [Ord. No. 6378
§1, 6-9-2015]
It shall be unlawful for any person to breach or go over, under or around any
barricade, cordon, visible line or other sign of demarcation or prohibition
against unauthorized entry, or to enter any area enclosed or set off against
unauthorized access or entry by any barricade, cordon or visible line, unless
authorized to do so by a law enforcement officer having responsibility for
the area.
Section 215.157. Misuse of The 911 Emergency Telephone Service
[CC 1970 §17-40; Ord. No. 5686 §1, 4-9-2002]
C. Interference with legal process is an ordinance violation.
A. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
EMERGENCY — Any incident involving danger to life or property that
calls for an emergency response dispatch of Police, fire, EMS or other
public safety organization.
MISUSE OF 911 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE — Calling "911"
for non-emergency situations causing dispatchers, operators or
equipment to be in use for such non-emergency situation.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to misuse the 911 emergency
telephone service after receiving a written warning regarding prior
misuse of the 911 system from Police or emergency personnel.
Section
215.155
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.157
AO:172
ARTICLE IV
Offenses Concerning Public Safety
Section 215.160. Abandonment of Airtight or Semi-Airtight
Containers
Section 215.170. Littering [Ord. No. 5879 §3(17-42), 5-24-2005]
A. A person commits the offense of abandonment of airtight icebox if he/
she abandons, discards or knowingly permits to remain on premises
under his/her control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned
or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight
container which has a capacity of one and one-half (1½) cubic feet or
more and an opening of fifty (50) square inches or more and which has a
door or lid equipped with hinge, latch or other fastening device capable
of securing such door or lid without rendering such equipment
harmless to human life by removing such hinges, latches or other
hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein.
B. Subsection (A) of this Section does not apply to an icebox, refrigerator
or other airtight or semi-airtight container located in that part of a
building occupied by a dealer, warehouseman or repairman.
C. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue under
Subsection (B) of this Section.
A. Definitions. As used in this Article, the following terms shall have these
prescribed meanings:
LITTER — Any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse,
garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand,
gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic and glass containers, broken
glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded
materials of every kind and description.
PROPERTY — Public or private property.
B. It Shall Be Unlawful To Litter. A person commits the crime of littering if
he/she dumps, deposits, throws, leaves, causes or permits the dumping,
depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter or allows unsecured
materials to drop or shift off of vehicle loads onto any property in this
City or any waters in this City unless:
1. The property is designated by the State or by any of its agencies or
political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter and such person
is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property;
and
2. The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such
property; or
Section
215.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.170
AO:173
Section 215.180. Littering Via Carcasses
3. The person is the owner of such property, has obtained consent of
the owner or is acting under the personal direction of the owner, all
in a manner consistent with the public welfare.
C. Evidence Of Littering.
1. Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any
motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of
this Section, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of
the conveyance has violated this Section.
2. Except as provided in Subdivision (1) of Subsection (C) above,
whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on
property in violation of this Section is discovered to contain any
article including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or
other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such
a manner to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such
person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has
violated this Section.
D. Penalties. In addition to the penalties set out in the General Penalty
Section of the City Code, the court may:
1. Order the violator to reimburse the City for the reasonable cost of
removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the
City;
2. Order the violator to pick up and remove any and all litter from any
public property, private right-of-way for a distance not to exceed
one (1) mile or, with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in
lawful possession of private property, any such private property
upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he/
she has deposited litter, including any litter he/she has deposited
and any litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of
execution of sentence.
A. If any person or persons shall put any dead animal, carcass or part
thereof, the offal or any other filth into any well, spring, brook, branch,
creek, pond or lake, every person so offending shall, on conviction
thereof, be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
B. If any person shall remove or cause to be removed and placed in or near
any public road or highway, or upon premises not his/her own, or in any
river, stream or watercourse any dead animal, carcass or part thereof,
or other nuisance to the annoyance of the citizens of this City, or any of
them, every person so offending shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
for every offense not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and if such nuisance be not
Section
215.170
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.180
AO:174
Section 215.190. Tampering With Water Supply. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1,
1-10-201727]
Section 215.200. Abandoning Motor Vehicle or Trailer
removed within three (3) days thereafter, it shall be deemed a second
(2nd) offense against the provisions of this Section.
A. A person commits the offense of tampering with a water supply if he or
she purposely:
1. Poisons, defiles or in any way corrupts the water of a well, spring,
brook, stream, creek, pond, lake, or reservoir used for domestic or
municipal purposes; or
2. Diverts, dams up and holds back from its natural course and flow
any spring, brook, stream, creek or other water supply for domestic
or municipal purposes, after said water supply shall have once been
taken for use by any person or persons, corporation, town or city
for their use; or
3. Places or causes to be placed the carcass or offal of any dead
animal into any well, spring, brook, stream, creek, pond, or lake.
B. Those found guilty of tampering with a water supply shall be adjudged
guilty of an ordinance violation and punished by a fine not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by
imprisonment in the City or County Jail not exceeding ninety (90) days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment, and shall be liable to the party
injured for three (3) times the actual damage sustained, to be recovered
by suit at law.
A. A person commits the offense of abandoning a motor vehicle or trailer if
he/she abandons any motor vehicle or trailer on the right-of-way of any
public road or State highway or on or in any of the waters in this State
or on the banks of any stream or on any land or water owned, operated
or leased by the State, any board, department, agency or commission
thereof or any political subdivision thereof or on any land or water
owned, operated or leased by the Federal Government or on any private
real property owned by another without his/her consent.
B. For purposes of this Section, the last owner of record of a motor vehicle
or trailer found abandoned and not shown to be transferred pursuant to
Sections 301.196 and 301.197, RSMo., shall be deemed prima facie to
have been the owner of such motor vehicle or trailer at the time it was
abandoned and to have been the person who abandoned the motor
vehicle or trailer or caused or procured its abandonment. The
registered owner of the abandoned motor vehicle or trailer shall not be
subject to the penalties provided by this Section if the motor vehicle or
27.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 6466 also changed the title of this Section from "Corrupting or
Diverting Water Supply" to "Tampering With Water Supply."
Section
215.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.200
AO:175
Section 215.204. Fireworks — Prohibited — Exceptions [Ord. No.
6153 §1, 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
trailer was in the care, custody or control of another person at the time
of the violation. In such instance, the owner shall submit such evidence
in an affidavit permitted by the court setting forth the name, address,
and other pertinent information of the person who leased, rented, or
otherwise had care, custody or control of the motor vehicle or trailer
at the time of the alleged violation. The affidavit submitted pursuant to
this Subsection shall be admissible in a court proceeding adjudicating
the alleged violation and shall raise a rebuttable presumption that the
person identified in the affidavit was in actual control of the motor
vehicle or trailer. In such case, the court has the authority to terminate
the prosecution of the summons issued to the owner and issue a
summons to the person identified in the affidavit as the operator. If the
motor vehicle or trailer is alleged to have been stolen, the owner of the
motor vehicle or trailer shall submit proof that a Police report was filed
in a timely manner indicating that the vehicle was stolen at the time of
the alleged violation.
C. Any person convicted pursuant to this Section shall be civilly liable for
all reasonable towing, storage, and administrative costs associated with
the abandonment of the motor vehicle or trailer. Any reasonable towing,
storage and administrative costs in excess of the value of the
abandoned motor vehicle or trailer that exist at the time the motor
vehicle is transferred pursuant to Section 304.156, RSMo., shall remain
the liability of the person convicted pursuant to this Section so long as
the towing company, as defined in Chapter 304, RSMo., provided the
title owner and lienholders, as ascertained by the Department of
Revenue records, a notice within the timeframe and in the form as
described in Subsection (1) of Section 304.156, RSMo.
A. No person shall sell, use, manufacture, display or possess fireworks, as
hereinafter defined, within the City at any time. This Section shall not
prohibit the sale by any wholesaler, dealer or jobber within the City at
wholesale if the fireworks are shipped and delivered directly to
consignees outside the limits of the City.
B. The term "fireworks," as used in this Section, is any composition or
device for producing a visible, audible or both visible and audible effect
by combustion, deflagration or detonation and that meets the definition
of consumer, proximate or display fireworks as set forth by 49 CFR Part
171 to end, United States Department of Transportation hazardous
materials regulations. The term "fireworks" shall not include sparklers,
colored flares, or blank cartridges for theatrical purposes or signal
purposes in spoke events or such articles for use of the militia, Police or
army.
C. The discharge of toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in
which paper caps containing twenty-five hundredths (0.25) grains or
Section
215.200
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.204
AO:176
Section 215.205. Aircraft — Restrictions On Use. [Ord. No. 6466
§ 1, 1-10-2017]
less of explosive mixture and the sale and use of same shall not
constitute a violation of this Section.
D. The prohibition of this Section shall not apply to any public
demonstrations or displays of fireworks. However, any such public
demonstrations or displays of fireworks may be conducted only after
application has been made in writing to the Fire Chief and a permit has
been issued for such demonstration or display by the Fire Chief.
A. No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, over the City any
aircraft which is flying in a manner commonly known as stunt flying, or
at an unreasonably low altitude, or in any other manner that may be a
hazard or dangerous to persons or property within the City.
B. No person shall broadcast by loud speakers or in any other manner,
loud, disturbing or unnecessary noises from any aircraft or cause, aid or
abet the operation of any aircraft over the City from which is emanated
by means aforesaid any such noises.
C. No person shall operate, or cause or to be operated, any aircraft for
commercial sound advertising purposes in or over the City.
Section
215.204
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.205
AO:177

ARTICLE V
Offenses Concerning Public Peace
Section 215.210. Peace Disturbance
Section 215.215. Private Peace Disturbance
A. A person commits the offense of peace disturbance if:
1. He/she unreasonably and knowingly disturbs or alarms another
person or persons by:
a. Loud noise;
b. Offensive language addressed in a face-to-face manner to a
specific individual and uttered under circumstances which are
likely to produce an immediate violent response from a
reasonable recipient;
c. Threatening to commit a felonious act against any person
under circumstances which are likely to cause a reasonable
person to fear that such threat may be carried out;
d. Fighting;
e. Creating a noxious and offensive odor; or
f. Urinating or defecating in public.
2. He/she is in a public place or on private property of another without
consent and purposely causes inconvenience to another person or
persons by unreasonably and physically obstructing:
a. Vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or
b. The free ingress or egress to or from a public or private place.
3. Willfully interrupts, disrupts or disturbs any lawful meeting or
assembly. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
B. For purposes of this Section, an offense committed by means of writing,
telephonic communication or electronic communication shall be
deemed to have occurred at the place from which the communication
was made or sent and at the place where the communication was first
heard or read by the recipient. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
A. A person commits the offense of private peace disturbance if he/she is
on private property and unreasonably and purposely causes alarm to
another person or persons on the same premises by:
1. Threatening to commit a crime or offense against any person; or
2. Fighting.
Section
215.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.215
AO:179
Section 215.220. Peace Disturbance Definitions
For the purposes of Sections 215.210 and 215.215, the following words shall
have the meanings set out herein:
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any place which at the time is not open to the
public. It includes property which is owned publicly or privately.
PROPERTY OF ANOTHER — Any property in which the actor does not have
a possessory interest.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place which at the time is open to the public. It
includes property which is owned publicly or privately.
If a building or structure is divided into separately occupied units, such
units are separate premises.
Section 215.223. Disturbance of Funeral and Burial Services28 [Ord.
No. 6250 §1, 12-11-2012]
B. For purposes of this Section, an offense committed by means of writing,
telephonic communication or electronic communication shall be
deemed to have occurred at the place from which the communication
was made or sent and at the place where the communication was first
heard or read by the recipient. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
A. Every citizen may freely speak, write and publish the person's
sentiments on all subjects, being responsible for the abuse of the right,
but no person shall knowingly picket or engage in other protest
activities, nor shall any association or corporation knowingly cause
picketing or other protest activities to occur, within three hundred
(300) feet of any residence, cemetery, funeral home, church,
synagogue, or other establishment or location during or within one (1)
hour before or one (1) hour after any actual funeral or burial service at
that place.
B. As used in this Section, "other protest activities" means any action that
is disruptive or undertaken to disrupt or disturb a funeral or burial
service.
C. As used in this Section, "funeral" and "burial" services mean the
ceremonies and memorial services held in conjunction with the burial
or cremation of the dead, but this Section does not apply to processions
while they are in transit beyond any three hundred (300) foot zone that
is established under Subsection (A) above.
28.Editor's Note—Ord. no. 6087 §1, adopted September 8, 2009, repealed section 215.223
"funeral protests prohibited, when—funeral defined" in its entirety. Subsequently, ord. no.
6250 §1, enacted December 11, 2012, replaced this section with "disturbance of funeral
and burial services".
Section
215.215
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.225
AO:180
Section 215.225. Unlawful Assembly
A person commits the offense of unlawful assembly if he/she knowingly
assembles with six (6) or more other persons and agrees with such persons
to violate any of the criminal laws of this State or of the United States with
force or violence.
Section 215.230. Rioting29
A person commits the offense of rioting if he/she knowingly assembles with
six (6) or more other persons and agrees with such persons to violate any of
the criminal laws of this State or of the United States with force or violence
and thereafter, while still so assembled, does violate any of said laws with
force or violence.
Section 215.233. Refusal To Disperse
A person commits the offense of refusal to disperse if, being present at the
scene of an unlawful assembly or at the scene of a riot, he/she knowingly
fails or refuses to obey the lawful command of a Law Enforcement Officer
to depart from the scene of such unlawful assembly or riot.
Section 215.235. Disturbances — Disturbing Religious Worship [CC
1970 §17-10; CC 1947 §12-3]
Any person who shall, in this City, disquiet or disturb any congregation or
assembly met for religious worship by making a noise or by rude or indecent
behavior or profane discourses within the place of worship or so near the
same as to disturb the order or solemnity of the meeting shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.
Section 215.237. Disturbances — Disturbing Lawful Assembly —
Refusal To Disperse [CC 1970 §17-11; CC 1947 §12-4]
Any person who shall, in this City, disturb any lawful assembly of people
by rude and indecent behavior or be found loitering at the corners of the
streets or in the vicinity of any place of amusement, restaurant or hotel or
thoroughfare and refuse to disperse or vacate such place when requested
to do so by a Police Officer shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Section 215.239. Failure To Comply With Order Of A Police Officer.
[Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Fail to comply with the lawful order or request of a Police Officer in
the discharge of the officer's official duties where such failure
interfered with, obstructed or hindered the officer in the
performance of such duties; or
29.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.225
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.239
AO:181
2. Fail to identify himself or herself by name upon request when
lawfully detained by a Police Officer, provided, however, that the
person may not be compelled to answer any other inquiry of the
Police Officer; or
3. In any matter within the jurisdiction of any Law Enforcement
Officer of this City, knowingly: falsifies, conceals or covers up by
any trick, scheme or device, a material fact; makes any materially
false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or representation; or makes
or uses any false writing or document knowing the same to contain
any materially false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or entry.
Section
215.239
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.239
AO:182
ARTICLE VI
Offenses Concerning Weapons and Firearms
Section 215.240. Definitions30 [Ord. No. 6421 §1, 4-12-2016]
The following words, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings set
out herein:
ANTIQUE, CURIO OR RELIC FIREARM — Any firearm so defined by the
National Gun Control Act, 18 U.S.C. Title 26, Section 5845, and the United
States Treasury/Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, 27 CFR Section
178.11:
BLACKJACK — Any instrument that is designed or adapted for the purpose
of stunning or inflicting physical injury by striking a person, and which is
readily capable of lethal use.
BLASTING AGENT — Any material or mixture, consisting of fuel and
oxidizer that is intended for blasting, but not otherwise defined as an
explosive under this Section, provided that the finished product, as mixed
for use of shipment, cannot be detonated by means of a numbered 8 test
blasting cap when unconfined.
CONCEALABLE FIREARM — Any firearm with a barrel less than sixteen
(16) inches in length, measured from the face of the bolt or standing breech.
DEFACE — To alter or destroy the manufacturer's or importer's serial
number or any other distinguishing number or identification mark.
DETONATOR — Any device containing a detonating charge that is used for
initiating detonation in an explosive, including, but not limited to, electric
blasting caps of instantaneous and delay types, non-electric blasting caps
for use with safety fuse or shock tube and detonating cord delay connectors.
EXPLOSIVE WEAPON — Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas bomb
or similar device designed or adapted for the purpose of inflicting death,
serious physical injury or substantial property damage; or any device
designed or adapted for delivering or shooting such a weapon. For the
purposes of this Article, the term "explosive" shall mean any chemical
compound mixture or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to
Antique firearm is any firearm not designed or redesigned for using
rim fire or conventional center fire ignition with fixed ammunition
and manufactured in or before 1898, said ammunition not being
manufactured any longer; this includes any matchlock, wheel lock,
flintlock, percussion cap or similar type ignition system, or replica
thereof.
1.
Curio or relic firearm is any firearm deriving value as a collectible
weapon due to its unique design, ignition system, operation or at least
fifty (50) years old, associated with a historical event, renown
personage or major war.
2.
30.Note: Similar Statutory provisions, §571.010, RSMo.
Section
215.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.240
AO:183
function by explosion, including, but not limited to, dynamite and other high
explosives, pellet powder, initiating explosives, detonators, safety fuses,
squibs, detonating cords, igniter cords, and igniters or blasting agents.
FIREARM — Any weapon that is designed or adapted to expel a projectile
by the action of an explosive.
FIREARM SILENCER — Any instrument, attachment or appliance that is
designed or adapted to muffle the noise made by the firing of any firearm.
GAS GUN — Any gas ejection device, weapon, cartridge, container or
contrivance, other than a gas bomb, that is designed or adapted for the
purpose of ejecting any poison gas that will cause death or serious physical
injury, but not any device that ejects a repellant or temporary incapacitating
substance.
INTOXICATED — Substantially impaired mental or physical capacity
resulting from introduction of any substance into the body.
KNIFE — Any dagger, dirk, stiletto, or bladed hand instrument that is
readily capable of inflicting serious physical injury or death by cutting or
stabbing a person. For purposes of this Article, "knife" does not include any
ordinary pocketknife with no blade more than four (4) inches in length.
KNUCKLES — Any instrument that consists of finger rings or guards made
of a hard substance that is designed or adapted for the purpose of inflicting
serious physical injury or death by striking a person with a fist enclosed in
the knuckles.
MACHINE GUN — Any firearm that is capable of firing more than one (1)
shot automatically, without manual reloading, by a single function of the
trigger.
PROJECTILE WEAPON — Any bow, crossbow, pellet gun, slingshot or other
weapon that is not a firearm, which is capable of expelling a projectile that
could inflict serious physical injury or death by striking or piercing a person.
RIFLE — Any firearm designed or adapted to be fired from the shoulder
and to use the energy of the explosive in a fixed metallic cartridge to fire a
projectile through a rifled bore by a single function of the trigger.
SHORT BARREL — A barrel length of less than sixteen (16) inches for a rifle
and eighteen (18) inches for a shotgun, both measured from the face of the
bolt or standing breech, or an overall rifle or shotgun length of less than
twenty-six (26) inches.
SHOTGUN — Any firearm designed or adapted to be fired from the shoulder
and to use the energy of the explosive in a fixed shotgun shell to fire a
number of shot or a single projectile through a smooth bore barrel by a
single function of the trigger.
SPRING GUN — Any fused, timed or non-manually controlled trap or device
designed or adapted to set off an explosion for the purpose of inflicting
serious physical injury or death.
Section
215.240
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.240
AO:184
SWITCHBLADE KNIFE — Any knife which has a blade that folds or closes
into the handle or sheath, and
Section 215.250. Weapons — Carrying Concealed — Other Unlawful
Use31 [Ord. No. 6421 §1, 4-12-2016]
That opens automatically by pressure applied to a button or other
device located on the handle; or
1.
That opens or releases from the handle or sheath by the force of gravity
or by the application of centrifugal force.
2.
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons if he/she
knowingly:
1. Carries concealed upon or about his/her person a knife, a firearm, a
blackjack or any other weapon readily capable of lethal use;
2. Sets a spring gun;
3. Discharges or shoots a firearm into a dwelling house, a railroad
train, boat, aircraft, or motor vehicle as defined in Section 302.010,
or any building or structure used for the assembling of people;
4. Exhibits, in the presence of one (1) or more persons, any weapon
readily capable of lethal use in an angry or threatening manner;
5. Possesses a firearm or projectile weapon readily capable of lethal
use on his/her person, while intoxicated, and handles or otherwise
uses such firearm or projectile weapon in either a negligent or
unlawful manner or discharges such firearm or projectile weapon
unless acting in self-defense;
6. Discharges a firearm within one hundred (100) yards of any
occupied schoolhouse, courthouse, or church building;
7. Discharges or shoots a firearm at a mark, at any object, or at
random, on, along or across a public highway or discharges or
shoots a firearm into any outbuilding;
8. Carries a firearm or any other weapon readily capable of lethal use
into any church or place where people have assembled for worship,
or into any election precinct on any election day, or into any
building owned or occupied by any agency of the Federal
government, State government, or political Subsection thereof;
9. Discharges or shoots a firearm at or from a motor vehicle, as
defined in Section 301.010. RSMo., discharges or shoots a firearm
at any person, or at any other motor vehicle, or at any building or
31.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law; Similar
Statutory provisions, §571.030, RSMo.
Section
215.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.250
AO:185
habitable structure, unless the person was lawfully acting in selfdefense;
10. Carries a firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, or any other
weapon readily capable of lethal use into any school, onto any
school bus, or onto the premises of any function or activity
sponsored or sanctioned by school officials or the District School
Board;
11. Possesses a firearm while also knowingly in possession of a
controlled substance that is sufficient for a felony violation of
Section 195.202, RSMo.
B. Subsections (1), (8), and (10) of Subsection (A) of this Section shall not
apply to the persons described in this Subsection, regardless of
whether such uses are reasonably associated with or are necessary to
the fulfillment of such person's official duties except as otherwise
provided in this Subsection. Subparagraphs (3), (4), (6), (7) and (9) of
Subsection (A) of this Section shall not apply to or affect any of the
following persons, when such uses are reasonably associated with or
are necessary to the fulfillment of such person's official duties, except
as otherwise provided in this Subsection:
1. All State, County and Municipal Peace Officers who have completed
the training required by the Police Officer Standards and Training
Commission pursuant to Sections 590.030 to 590.050, RSMo., and
possessing the duty and power of arrest for violation of the general
criminal laws of the State or for violation of ordinances of Counties
or Municipalities of the State, whether such officers are on or off
duty, and whether such officers are within or outside of the law
enforcement agency's jurisdiction, or all qualified retired Peace
Officers, as defined in Subsection (12) of Section 571.030, RSMo.,
and who carry the identification defined in Subsection (13) of
Section 571.030, RSMo., or any person summoned by such officers
to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while actually
engaged in assisting such officer;
2. Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries,
jails and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or
convicted of crime;
3. Members of the Armed Forces or National Guard while performing
their official duty;
4. Those persons vested by Article V, Section 1 of the Constitution of
Missouri with the judicial power of the State and those persons
vested by Article III of the Constitution of the United States with
the judicial power of the United States, the members of the Federal
judiciary;
5. Any person whose bona fide duty is to execute process, civil or
criminal;
Section
215.250
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.250
AO:186
6. Any Federal Probation Officer or Federal Flight Deck Officer as
defined under the Federal Flight Deck Officer Program, 49 U.S.C.
Section 44921 regardless of whether such officers are on duty, or
within the law enforcement agency's jurisdiction;
7. Any State Probation or Parole Officer, including supervisors and
members of the Board of Probation and Parole;
8. Any corporate security advisor meeting the definition and fulfilling
the requirements of the regulations established by the Department
of Public Safety under Section 590.750, RSMo.;
9. Any coroner, deputy coroner, medical examiner or assistant
medical examiner;
10. Any municipal prosecuting attorney or assistant prosecuting
attorney, circuit attorney or assistant circuit attorney; municipal,
association or circuit judge; or any person appointed by a court to
be a special prosecutor who has completed the firearms safety
training course required under Subsection 2 of Section 571.111,
RSMo.; [Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
11. Any member of a fire department or fire protection district who is
employed on a full-time basis as a fire investigator and who has a
valid concealed carry endorsement issued prior to August 28, 2013,
or a valid concealed carry permit under Section 571.111, RSMo.,
when such uses are reasonably associated with or are necessary to
the fulfillment of such person's official duties; and
12. Upon the written approval of the governing body of a fire
department or fire protection district, any paid fire department or
fire protection district member who is employed on a full-time basis
and who has a valid concealed carry endorsement issued prior to
August 28, 2013, or a valid concealed carry permit, when such uses
are reasonably associated with or are necessary to the fulfillment of
such person's official duties. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
C. Subparagraphs (1), (5), (8) and (10) of Subsection (A) of this Section do
not apply when the actor is transporting such weapons in a nonfunctioning
state or in an unloaded state when ammunition is not
readily accessible or when such weapons are not readily accessible.
Subparagraph (1) of Subsection (A) of this Section does not apply to any
person nineteen (19) years of age or older or eighteen (18) years of age
or older and a member of the United States Armed Forces, or honorably
discharged from the United States Armed Forces, transporting a
concealable firearm in the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle,
so long as such concealable firearm is otherwise lawfully possessed, nor
when the actor is also in possession of an exposed firearm or projectile
weapon for the lawful pursuit of game, or is in his/her dwelling unit or
upon premises over which the actor has possession, authority or
control, or is traveling in a continuous journey peaceably through this
Section
215.250
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.250
AO:187
Section 215.255. Possession, Manufacture, Transport, Repair,
Sale of Certain Weapons32 [Ord. No. 6421 §1, 4-12-2016]
State. Subparagraph (10) of Subsection (A) of this Section does not
apply if the firearm is otherwise lawfully possessed by a person while
traversing school premises for the purposes of transporting a student to
or from school, or possessed by an adult for the purposes of facilitation
of a school-sanctioned firearm-related event or club event.
D. Subparagraphs (1), (8) and (10) of Subsection (A) of this Section shall
not apply to any person who has a valid concealed carry endorsement
issued pursuant to Sections 571.101 to 571.121, RSMo. before August
28, 2013, or a valid permit or endorsement to carry concealed firearms
issued by another State or political Subsection of another State.
E. Subparagraphs (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9) and (10) of Subsection (A) of
this Section shall not apply to persons who are engaged in a lawful act
of defense pursuant to Section 563.031, RSMo.
F. Nothing in this Section shall make it unlawful for a student to actually
participate in school-sanctioned gun safety courses, student military or
ROTC courses, or other school-sponsored or club-sponsored firearmrelated
events, provided the student does not carry a firearm or other
weapon readily capable of lethal use into any school, onto any school
bus, or onto the premises of any other function or activity sponsored or
sanctioned by school officials or the district school board.
A. Except as provided in Subsection (B) of this Section, it shall be unlawful
for any person to knowingly possess, manufacture, transport, repair or
sell:
1. An explosive weapon;
2. An explosive, incendiary or poison substance or material with the
purpose to possess, manufacture or sell an explosive weapon;
3. A gas gun;
4. A bullet or projectile which explodes or detonates upon impact
because of an independent explosive charge after having been shot
from a firearm;
5. Knuckles; or
6. Any of the following in violation of Federal law:
a. A machine gun;
b. A short-barreled rifle or shotgun;
c. A firearm silencer;
32.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law; Similar
Statutory provisions, §571.020, RSMo.
Section
215.250
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.255
AO:188
Section 215.260. Defacing Firearm33 [Ord. No. 6421 §1, 4-12-2016]
A person commits the offense of defacing a firearm if he/she knowingly
defaces any firearm.
Section 215.265. Possession of a Defaced Firearm.34 [Ord. No. 6421
§1, 4-12-2016]
A person commits the offense of defacing a firearm if he/she knowingly
possess firearm which is defaced.
Section 215.270. Unlawful Transfer of Weapons35 [Ord. No. 6421 §1,
4-12-2016]
d. A switchblade knife.
B. A person does not commit an offense under this Section if his/her
conduct involved any of the items in Subdivisions (1) to (5) of
Subsection (A), the item was possessed in conformity with any
applicable Federal law, and the conduct:
1. Was incident to the performance of official duty by the Armed
Forces, National Guard, a governmental law enforcement agency
or a penal institution; or
2. Was incident to engaging in a lawful commercial or business
transaction with an organization enumerated in Subparagraph (1)
of this Subsection; or
3. Was incident to using an explosive weapon in a manner reasonably
related to a lawful industrial or commercial enterprise; or
4. Was incident to displaying the weapon in a public museum or
exhibition; or
5. Was incident to using the weapon in a manner reasonably related to
a lawful dramatic performance.
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful transfer of weapons if he/she:
1. Knowingly sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers a firearm or
ammunition for a firearm to any person who, under the provisions
of Section 571.070, RSMo., is not lawfully entitled to possess such
because such person has been convicted of a felony under the laws
of this State, or of a crime under the laws of any State or of the
United States which, if committed within this State, would be a
felony; or such person is a fugitive from justice, is habitually in an
33.Note: Similar Statutory provisions, §571.045, RSMo.
34.Note: Similar Statutory provisions, §571.050, RSMo.
35.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law; Similar
Statutory provisions, §§571.060, 571.070, RSMo.
Section
215.255
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.270
AO:189
Section 215.275. Possession of Firearm Unlawful For Certain
Persons36 [Ord. No. 6421 §1, 4-12-2016]
Section 215.280. Carrying Concealed Firearms Prohibited —
Penalty For Violation37 [Ord. No. 6421 §1, 4-12-2016]
intoxicated or drugged condition, or is currently adjudged mentally
incompetent;
2. Knowingly sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers a blackjack to
a person less than eighteen (18) years old without the consent of
the child's custodial parent or guardian or recklessly, as defined in
Section 562.016, RSMo., sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers
any firearm to a person less than eighteen (18) years old without
the consent of the child's custodial parent or guardian; provided
that this does not prohibit the delivery of such weapons to any
Peace Officer or member of the Armed Forces or National Guard
while performing his/her official duty; or
3. Recklessly, as defined in Section 562.016, RSMo., sells, leases,
loans, gives away or delivers a firearm or ammunition for a firearm
to a person who is intoxicated.
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of a firearm if he/
she has any firearm in his/her possession and:
1. He/she has been convicted of a felony under the laws of any State
or of a crime under the laws of any State or the United States
which, if committed within this State, would be a felony; or
2. He/she is a fugitive from justice, is habitually in an intoxicated or
drugged condition, or is currently adjudged mentally incompetent.
A. It shall be a violation of this Section, punishable as hereinafter
provided, for any person to carry any concealed firearm into:
1. Any Police, Sheriff or Highway Patrol office or station without the
consent of the Chief Law Enforcement Officer in charge of that
office or station. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the
premises of the office or station shall not be a criminal offense so
long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished
while the vehicle is on the premises.
2. Within twenty-five (25) feet of any polling place on any election day.
Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of the polling
place shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not
removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the
premises.
36.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law; Similar
Statutory provisions, §571.070, RSMo.
37.Note: Similar Statutory provisions, §571.107, RSMo.
Section
215.270
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.280
AO:190
3. The facility of any adult or juvenile detention or correctional
institution, prison or jail. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the
premises of any adult, juvenile detention or correctional institution,
prison or jail shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is
not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on
the premises.
4. Any courthouse solely occupied by the Circuit, Appellate or
Supreme Court, or any courtrooms, administrative offices, libraries
or other rooms of any such court whether or not such court solely
occupies the building in question. This Subdivision shall also
include, but not be limited to, any juvenile, family, drug or other
court offices, any room or office wherein any of the courts or offices
listed in this Subdivision are temporarily conducting any business
within the jurisdiction of such courts or offices, and such other
locations in such manner as may be specified by Supreme Court
Rule pursuant to Subdivision (6) of this Subsection. Nothing in this
Subdivision shall preclude those persons listed in Subsection (B)(1)
of Section 215.250 while within their jurisdiction and on duty, those
persons listed in Subsections (B)(2), (3) and (10) of Section
215.250, or such other persons who serve in a law enforcement
capacity for a court as may be specified by Supreme Court Rule
pursuant to Subdivision (6) of this Subsection from carrying a
concealed firearm within any of the areas described in this
Subdivision. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of
any of the areas listed in this Subdivision shall not be a criminal
offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or
brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
5. Any meeting of the Board of Aldermen, except that nothing in this
Subsection shall preclude a member of the Board holding a valid
concealed carry permit or endorsement from carrying a concealed
firearm at a meeting of the Board of Aldermen. Possession of a
firearm in a vehicle on the premises shall not be a criminal offense
so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or
brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
6. Any building owned, leased or controlled by the City of Clayton
identified by signs posted at the entrance to the building. This
Subsection shall not apply to any building used for public housing
by private persons, highways or rest areas, firing ranges, and
private dwellings owned, leased, or controlled by the City of
Clayton. Persons violating this Subsection may be denied entrance
to the building, ordered to leave the building and, if employees of
the City, be subjected to disciplinary measures for violation.
7. Any establishment licensed to dispense intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating
beer for consumption on the premises, which portion is
primarily devoted to that purpose, without the consent of the owner
or manager. The provisions of this Subdivision shall not apply to the
licensee of said establishment. The provisions of this Subdivision
Section
215.280
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.280
AO:191
shall not apply to any bona fide restaurant open to the general
public having dining facilities for not less than fifty (50) persons
and that receives at least fifty-one percent (51%) of its gross annual
income from the dining facilities by the sale of food. This
Subdivision does not prohibit the possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of the establishment and shall not be
a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from
the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
Nothing in this Subdivision authorizes any individual who has been
issued a concealed carry endorsement to possess any firearm while
intoxicated.
8. Any area of an airport to which access is controlled by the
inspection of persons and property. Possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of the airport shall not be a violation so
long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished
while the vehicle is on the premises.
9. Any place where the carrying of a firearm is prohibited by Federal
law.
10. Any higher education institution or elementary or secondary school
facility without the consent of the governing body of the higher
education institution or a school official or the District School
Board, unless the person with the concealed carry endorsement or
permit is a teacher or administrator of an elementary or secondary
school who has been designated by his/her school district as a
school protection officer and is carrying a firearm in a school within
that district, in which case no consent is required. Possession of a
firearm in a vehicle on the premises of any higher education
institution or elementary or secondary school facility shall not be a
criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the
vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
11. Any portion of a building used as a child care facility without the
consent of the manager. Nothing in this Subdivision shall prevent
the operator of a child care facility in a family home from owning or
possessing a firearm or a driver's license or non-driver's license
containing a concealed carry endorsement.
12. Any riverboat gambling operation accessible by the public without
the consent of the owner or manager pursuant to rules
promulgated by the Gaming Commission. Possession of a firearm in
a vehicle on the premises of a riverboat gambling operation shall
not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from
the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
13. Any gated area of an amusement park. Possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of the amusement park shall not be a
criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the
vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
Section
215.280
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.280
AO:192
14. Any church or other place of religious worship without the consent
of the minister or person or persons representing the religious
organization that exercises control over the place of religious
worship. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises shall
not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from
the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
15. Any private property whose owner has posted the premises as
being off-limits to concealed firearms by means of one (1) or more
signs displayed in a conspicuous place of a minimum size of eleven
(11) inches by fourteen (14) inches with the writing thereon in
letters of not less than one (1) inch. The owner, business or
commercial lessee, manager of a private business enterprise, or
any other organization, entity or person may prohibit persons
holding a concealed carry endorsement from carrying concealed
firearms on the premises and may prohibit employees, not
authorized by the employer, holding a concealed carry
endorsement from carrying concealed firearms on the property of
the employer. If the building or the premises are open to the public,
the employer of the business enterprise shall post signs on or about
the premises if carrying a concealed firearm is prohibited.
Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises shall not be a
criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the
vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. An
employer may prohibit employees or other persons holding a
concealed carry endorsement from carrying a concealed firearm in
vehicles owned by the employer.
16. Any sports arena or stadium with a seating capacity of five
thousand (5,000) or more. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on
the premises shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is
not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on
the premises.
17. Any hospital accessible by the public. Possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of a hospital shall not be a criminal offense
so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or
brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of Subsection (A) of this
Section shall be punished as follows: [Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
1. Carrying of a concealed firearm in a location specified in
Subdivisions (1) to (17) of Subsection (A) of this Section by any
individual who holds a Missouri lifetime or extended concealed
carry permit shall not be a criminal act but may subject the person
to denial to the premises or removal from the premises. If such
person refuses to leave the premises and a Peace Officer is
summoned, such person may be issued a citation for an amount not
to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense. If a
second citation for a similar violation occurs within a six-month
Section
215.280
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.280
AO:193
Section 215.285. Dangerous Projectiles.38 [Ord. No. 6421 §1,
4-12-2016; Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-201739]
period, such person shall be fined an amount not to exceed two
hundred dollars ($200.00). If a third citation for a similar violation
is issued within one (1) year of the first citation, such person shall
be fined an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00)
and shall have his or her Missouri lifetime or extended concealed
carry permit revoked and such person shall not be eligible for
a Missouri lifetime or extended concealed carry permit or a
concealed carry permit issued under Sections 571.101 to 571.121,
RSMo., for a period of three (3) years. Upon conviction of charges
arising from a citation issued under this Subsection, the court shall
notify the Sheriff of the County which issued the Missouri lifetime
or extended concealed carry permit. The Sheriff shall suspend or
revoke the Missouri lifetime or extended concealed carry permit.
2. If the violator does not hold a current valid concealed carry
endorsement issued pursuant to State law, upon conviction of a
charge of violating this Section the defendant shall be punished as
provided in Section 100.110 of this Code of Ordinances.
3. Employees of the City of Clayton may, in addition to any other
punishment hereby, be subject to disciplinary action.
C. It shall be a violation of this Section, punishable by a citation for an
amount not to exceed thirty-five dollars ($35.00), for any person issued
a concealed carry endorsement pursuant to State law to fail to carry the
concealed carry endorsement at all times the person is carrying a
concealed firearm, or to fail to display the concealed carry endorsement
upon the request of any Peace Officer.
A. Because such conduct is dangerous to the inhabitants of the City due to
the population of the City, no person shall throw, release, discharge or
in any way propel any dangerous projectiles as defined herein upon or
at any property, at any person or group of persons or at any type of
animal(s).
B. For the purpose of this Section, dangerous projectiles are identified, but
not limited to projectiles shot out of:
1. Pellet rifles.
2. BB guns.
3. Slingshot or wrist rockets.
4. Bow and arrows or crossbows.
38.Note: Similar Statutory provisions, §571.155, RSMo.
39.Editor’s Note: Ord. No. 6466 also changed the title of this Section from “Discharging Air
Gun, Etc.” to “Dangerous Projectiles.”
Section
215.280
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.285
AO:194
Section 215.286. "Turkey Shoots" and Other Charitable Events
[Ord. No. 6421 §1, 4-12-2016]
The discharge of firearms in connection with any turkey shoots or other
charitable event may be authorized by the Board of Aldermen.
5. Blow guns.
6. Any manufactured or homemade gas or vapor ignited gun (i.e.,
paint gun, tube gun, potato gun, foil gun, etc.) or other pneumatic
gun.
Provided, however, the foregoing provisions do not prohibit the
use of pneumatic guns at approved shooting ranges.
Section
215.285
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.286
AO:195

ARTICLE VII
Offenses Concerning Property40
Section 215.290. Tampering41
Section 215.292. Computer Tampering. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1,
1-10-2017]
A. A person commits the offense of tampering if he/she:
1. Tampers with property of another for the purpose of causing
substantial inconvenience to that person or to another;
2. Unlawfully rides in or upon another's automobile, airplane,
motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle;
3. Tampers or makes connection with property of a utility; or
4. Tampers with, or causes to be tampered with, any meter or other
property of an electric, gas, steam or water utility, the effect of
which tampering is either:
a. To prevent the proper measuring of electric, gas, steam or
water service; or
b. To permit the diversion of any electric, gas, steam or water
service.
B. In any prosecution under paragraph (4) of Subsection (A), proof that a
meter or any other property of a utility has been tampered with, and the
person or persons accused received the use or direct benefit of the
electric, gas, steam or water service with one (1) or more of the effects
described in paragraph (4) of Subsection (A), shall be sufficient to
support an inference which the trial court may submit to the trier of fact
from which the trier of fact may conclude that there has been a
violation of such Subsection by the person or persons who use or
receive the direct benefit of the electric, gas, steam or water service.
A. Definitions. The following terms shall mean:
ACCESS (RELATIVE TO COMPUTERS) — To instruct, communicate
with, store data in, retrieve or extract data from, or otherwise make
any use of any resources of, a computer, computer system, or computer
network.
COMPUTER — The box that houses the central processing unit (cpu),
along with any internal storage devices, such as internal hard drives,
and internal communication devices, such as internal modems capable
of sending or receiving electronic mail or fax cards, along with any
40.State Law References—Stealing, §560.156, RSMo.; frauds, cheats, swindlers, §564.460,
RSMo.
41.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.290
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.292
AO:197
other hardware stored or housed internally. Thus, computer refers
to hardware, software and data contained in the main unit. Printers,
external modems attached by cable to the main unit, monitors, and
other external attachments will be referred to collectively as
peripherals and discussed individually when appropriate. When the
computer and all peripherals are referred to as a package, the term
"computer system" is used. Information refers to all the information on
a computer system including both software applications and data.
COMPUTER EQUIPMENT — Computers, terminals, data storage
devices, and all other computer hardware associated with a computer
system or network.
COMPUTER HARDWARE — All equipment which can collect, analyze,
create, display, convert, store, conceal or transmit electronic, magnetic,
optical or similar computer impulses or data. Hardware includes, but is
not limited to, any data processing devices, such as central processing
units, memory typewriters and self-contained laptop or notebook
computers; internal and peripheral storage devices, transistor-like
binary devices and other memory storage devices, such as floppy disks,
removable disks, compact disks, digital video disks, magnetic tape,
hard drive, optical disks and digital memory; local area networks, such
as two (2) or more computers connected together to a central computer
server via cable or modem; peripheral input or output devices, such
as keyboards, printers, scanners, plotters, video display monitors and
optical readers; and related communication devices, such as modems,
cables and connections, recording equipment, RAM or ROM units,
acoustic couplers, automatic dialers, speed dialers, programmable
telephone dialing or signaling devices and electronic tone-generating
devices; as well as any devices, mechanisms or parts that can be used to
restrict access to computer hardware, such as physical keys and locks.
COMPUTER NETWORK — Two (2) or more interconnected computers
or computer systems.
COMPUTER PROGRAM — A set of instructions, statements, or related
data that directs or is intended to direct a computer to perform certain
functions.
COMPUTER SOFTWARE — Digital information which can be
interpreted by a computer and any of its related components to direct
the way they work. Software is stored in electronic, magnetic, optical
or other digital form. The term commonly includes programs to run
operating systems and applications, such as word processing, graphic,
or spreadsheet programs, utilities, compilers, interpreters and
communications programs.
COMPUTER SYSTEM — A set of related, connected or unconnected,
computer equipment, data, or software.
COMPUTER-RELATED DOCUMENTATION — Written, recorded,
printed or electronically stored material which explains or illustrates
Section
215.292
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.292
AO:198
how to configure or use computer hardware, software or other related
items.
DAMAGE — When used in relation to a computer system or network,
means any alteration, deletion, or destruction of any part of the
computer system or network.
DATA — A representation of information, facts, knowledge, concepts,
or instructions prepared in a formalized or other manner and intended
for use in a computer or computer network. Data may be in any form
including, but not limited to, printouts, microfiche, magnetic storage
media, punched cards and as may be stored in the memory of a
computer.
SERVICES — When used in relation to a computer system or network,
means use of a computer, computer system, or computer network and
includes, but is not limited to, computer time, data processing, and
storage or retrieval functions.
TAMPER — To interfere with improperly, meddle with, displace, make
unwanted alterations, or deprive owner or possessor of something
temporarily.
B. Tampering With Computer Data. A person commits the offense of
tampering with computer data if he or she knowingly and without
authorization or without reasonable grounds to believe that he or she
has such authorization:
1. Modifies or destroys data or programs residing or existing internal
to a computer, computer system, or computer network; or
2. Modifies or destroys data or programs or supporting
documentation residing or existing external to a computer,
computer system, or computer network; or
3. Discloses or takes data, programs or supporting documentation,
residing or existing internal or external to a computer, computer
system, or computer network; or
4. Discloses or takes a password, identifying code, personal
identification number, or other confidential information about a
computer system or network that is intended to or does control
access to the computer system or network; or
5. Accesses a computer, a computer system, or a computer network,
and intentionally examines information about another person; or
6. Receives, retains, uses, or discloses any data he or she knows or
believes was obtained in violation of this Section.
C. Tampering With Computer Equipment. A person commits the offense of
tampering with computer equipment if he or she knowingly and without
authorization or without reasonable grounds to believe that he or she
has such authorization:
Section
215.292
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.292
AO:199
Section 215.295. Property Damage42 [Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
Section 215.300. Claim of Right
Section 215.305. Trespass and Damage To Property — Trespass or
Refusal To Leave Property [CC 1970 §17-26; CC 1947 §12-53; Ord.
No. 5787 §1, 10-14-2003]
1. Modifies, destroys, damages, or takes equipment or data storage
devices used or intended to be used in a computer, computer
system, or computer network.
2. Modifies, destroys, damages, or takes any computer, computer
system, or computer network.
D. Tampering With Computer Users. A person commits the offense of
tampering with computer users if he or she knowingly and without
authorization or without reasonable grounds to believe that he or she
has such authorization:
1. Accesses or causes to be accessed any computer, computer system,
or computer network; or
2. Denies or causes the denial of computer system services to an
authorized user of such computer system services.
A. A person commits the offense of property damage if:
1. He/she knowingly vandalizes, defaces or otherwise damages
property of another; or
2. He/she damages property for the purpose of defrauding an insurer.
A. A person does not commit an offense by damaging, tampering with,
operating, riding in or upon or making connection with property of
another if he/she does so under a claim of right and has reasonable
grounds to believe he/she has such a right.
B. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of claim of
right.
A. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
Section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ENTER UNLAWFULLY OR REMAIN UNLAWFULLY — A person enters
unlawfully or remains unlawfully in or upon premises when he/she is
not licensed or privileged to do so. A person who, regardless of his/
her purpose, enters or remains in or upon premises which are at the
time open to the public does so with license and privilege unless he/she
defies a lawful order not to enter or remain, personally communicated
42.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.292
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.305
AO:200
Section 215.310. Trespass and Damage To Property — Parking
Vehicle without Consent [CC 1970 §17-27; CC 1947 §12-53]
Any person parking a motor vehicle on a parking lot or on any private way
or street without the consent of the owner of such parking lot or private way
or street or without the consent of the operator of such parking lot shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Section 215.315. Trespass Of A School Bus. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1,
1-10-2017]
to him/her by the owner of such premises or by other authorized
person. A license or privilege to enter or remain in a building which is
only partly open to the public is not a license or privilege to enter or
remain in that part of the building which is not open to the public.
INHABITABLE STRUCTURE — Inhabitable structure includes a ship,
trailer, sleeping car, airplane or other vehicle or structure:
OF ANOTHER — Property is that of another if any natural person,
corporation, partnership, association, governmental subdivision or
instrumentality, other than the actor, has a possessory or proprietary
interest therein. If a building or structure is divided into separately
occupied units, any unit not occupied by the actor is an inhabitable
structure of another.
1. Where any person lives or carries on business or other calling;
Where people assemble for purposes of business, government,
education, religion, entertainment or public transportation; or
2.
Which is used for overnight accommodation of persons. Any such
vehicle or structure is inhabitable regardless of whether a person
is actually present.
3.
B. A person commits the crime of trespass if he/she knowingly enters
unlawfully or knowingly remains unlawfully in a building or inhabitable
structure or upon real property.
C. A person does not commit the crime of trespass by entering or
remaining upon real property unless the real property is fenced or
otherwise enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders or as to
which notice against trespass is given by:
1. Actual communication to the actor; or
2. Posting in a manner reasonably likely to come to the attention of
intruders.
D. Any person who commits the offense of trespassing shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.
Section
215.305
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.315
AO:201
Section 215.320. Reckless Burning or Exploding
A person commits the offense of reckless burning or exploding when he/
she knowingly starts a fire or causes an explosion and thereby recklessly
damages or destroys a building or an inhabitable structure of another.
Section 215.325. Negligent Burning Or Exploding. [Ord. No. 6466
§ 1, 1-10-2017]
Section 215.330. Stealing43 [Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
A. A person commits the offense of trespass of a school bus if he or she
knowingly and unlawfully enters any part of or unlawfully operates any
school bus. For the purposes of this Subsection, the terms "unlawfully
enters" and "unlawfully operates" refer to any entry or operation of a
school bus which is not:
1. Approved of and established in a school district's written policy on
access to school buses; or
2. Authorized by specific written approval of the school board.
A. A person commits the offense of negligent burning or exploding if he or
she with criminal negligence causes damage to property, woodlands, or
grasslands of another by:
1. Starting a fire or causing an explosion; or
2. Allowing a fire burning on lands in his or her possession or control
onto the property of another.
A. A person commits the offense of stealing if he/she appropriates
property or services of another with the purpose to deprive him/her
thereof, either without his/her consent or by means of deceit or
coercion.
B. Evidence of the following is admissible in any prosecution pursuant to
this Section on the issue of the requisite knowledge or belief of the
alleged stealer that:
1. He/she failed or refused to pay for property or services of a hotel,
restaurant, inn or boarding house;
2. He/she gave in payment for property or services of a hotel,
restaurant, inn or boarding house a check or negotiable paper on
which payment was refused;
3. He/she left the hotel, restaurant, inn or boarding house with the
intent to not pay for property or services;
43.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.315
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.330
AO:202
Section 215.335. Vehicle — Driving Without Consent, Etc. [CC 1970
§17-29; CC 1947 §12-55]
Any person who shall, in the City, steal, tamper with, take or drive away
from any garage, parking lot, space or location any vehicle not his/her own
thereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Section 215.340. Theft of Motor Fuel
Section 215.345. Burglary Tools [CC 1970 §17-6; CC 1947 §12-10]
Any person who makes, mends, designs or sets up or who has in his/
her custody or concealed about his/her person any tool, false key, lock
pick, bit, nippers fuse, force screw, punch, drill, jimmy or any material,
implement, instrument or other mechanical device whatsoever adopted,
designed or commonly used for breaking into any vault, safe, warehouse,
4. He/she surreptitiously removed or attempted to remove his/her
baggage from a hotel, inn or boarding house; or
5. He/she, with intent to cheat or defraud a retailer, possesses, uses,
utters, transfers, makes, alters, counterfeits or reproduces a retail
sales receipt, price tag or universal price code label or possesses,
with intent to cheat or defraud, the device that manufactures
fraudulent receipts or universal price code labels.
C. A person shall not be deemed to have stolen video service if the video
company provides unsolicited services or fails to change or disconnect
service within ten (10) days after receiving written notice to do so by its
customer.
D. A person does not commit an offense under this Section if, at the time of
the appropriation, he or she:
1. Acted in the honest belief that he or she had the right to do so; or
2. Acted in the honest belief that the owner, if present, would have
consented to the appropriation.
A. No person shall drive a motor vehicle so as to cause it to leave the
premises of an establishment at which motor fuel offered for retail sale
was dispensed into the fuel tank of such motor vehicle unless payment
or authorized charge for motor fuel dispensed has been made.
B. A person found guilty or pleading guilty to stealing pursuant to Section
215.330 for the theft of motor fuel as described in Subsection (A) shall
have his/her driver's license suspended by the court beginning on the
date of the court's order of conviction. The person shall submit all of
his/her operator's and chauffeur's licenses to the court upon conviction
and the court shall forward all such driver's licenses and the order of
suspension of driving privileges to the Department of Revenue for
administration of such order.
Section
215.330
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.345
AO:203
motor vehicle, store, shop, office, dwelling house or door, window or shutter
of any building shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Section 215.350. Receiving Stolen Property44
Section 215.355. Financial Exploitation of The Elderly and
Disabled45
A. A person commits the offense of receiving stolen property if, for the
purpose of depriving the owner of a lawful interest therein, he/she
receives, retains or disposes of property of another knowing that it has
been stolen or believing that it has been stolen.
B. Evidence of the following is admissible in any criminal prosecution
pursuant to this Section to prove the requisite knowledge or belief of
the alleged receiver that:
1. He/she was found in possession or control of other property stolen
on separate occasions from two (2) or more persons;
2. He/she received other stolen property in another transaction within
the year preceding the transaction charged;
3. He/she acquired the stolen property for a consideration which he/
she knew was far below its reasonable value; or
4. He/she obtained control over stolen property knowing the property
to have been stolen or under such circumstances as would
reasonably induce a person to believe the property was stolen.
A. A person commits the offense of financial exploitation of an elderly or
disabled person if such person knowingly and by deception,
intimidation or force obtains control over the elderly or disabled
person's property with the intent to permanently deprive the elderly or
disabled person of the use, benefit or possession of his/her property
thereby benefiting such person or detrimentally affecting the elderly or
disabled person. Financial exploitation of an elderly or disabled person
is a misdemeanor if the value of the property is less than fifty dollars
($50.00).
B. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have these
prescribed meanings:
DECEPTION — A misrepresentation or concealment of material fact
relating to the terms of a contract or agreement entered into with the
elderly or disabled person or to the existing or pre-existing condition of
any of the property involved in such contract or agreement or the use or
employment of any misrepresentation, false pretense or false promise
44.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
45.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.345
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.355
AO:204
Section 215.360. Fraudulent Use of A Credit or Debit Device46
in order to induce, encourage or solicit the elderly or disabled person
to enter into a contract or agreement.
"Deception" includes:
DISABLED PERSON — A person with a mental, physical or
developmental disability that substantially impairs the person's ability
to provide adequately for the person's care or protection.
ELDERLY PERSON — A person sixty (60) years of age or older.
INTIMIDATION — A threat of physical or emotional harm to an elderly
or disabled person, or the communication to an elderly or disabled
person that he/she will be deprived of food and nutrition, shelter,
prescribed medication, or medical care and treatment.
Creating or confirming another person's impression which is false
and which the offender does not believe to be true.
1.
Failure to correct a false impression which the offender previously
has created or confirmed.
2.
Preventing another person from acquiring information pertinent to
the disposition of the property involved.
3.
Selling or otherwise transferring or encumbering property, failing
to disclose a lien, adverse claim or other legal impediment to the
enjoyment of the property, whether such impediment is or is not
valid or is or is not a matter of official record.
4.
Promising performance which the offender does not intend to
perform or knows will not be performed. Failure to perform
standing alone is not sufficient evidence to prove that the offender
did not intend to perform.
5.
C. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit the remedies
available to the victim pursuant to any State law relating to domestic
violence.
D. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to impose criminal liability on
a person who has made a good faith effort to assist the elderly or
disabled person in the management of his/her property, but through no
fault of his/her own has been unable to provide such assistance.
E. Nothing in this Section shall limit the ability to engage in bona fide
estate planning, to transfer property, and to otherwise seek to reduce
estate and inheritance taxes; provided that such actions do not
adversely impact the standard of living to which the elderly or disabled
person has become accustomed at the time of such actions.
F. It shall not be a defense to financial exploitation of an elderly or
disabled person that the accused reasonably believed that the victim
was not an elderly or disabled person.
Section
215.355
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.360
AO:205
Section 215.361. Fraudulently Stopping Payment Of An Instrument.
[Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
A person commits the offense of fraudulently stopping payment of an
instrument if her or she, with the purpose to defraud, stops payment on
a check, draft, or debit device used in payment for the receipt of goods
or services. It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this Section
if a person stops payment on a check, draft or debit device and fails to
make good the check, draft or debit device transaction, or fails to return or
make and comply with reasonable arrangements to return the property for
which the check, draft or debit device was used in the same or substantially
the same condition as when received within ten (10) days after notice
in writing from the payee that the check, draft or debit device has not
been paid because of a stop payment order by the issuer to the drawee.
"Notice in writing" under this Section means notice deposited as certified
or registered mail in the United State mail and addressed to the issuer as it
appears on the dishonored check, draft or debit device transaction or to his
or her last known address, containing a statement that failure to make good
the check, draft or debit device transaction within ten (10) days of receipt
of the notice may subject the issuer to prosecution hereunder.
Section 215.362. Fraudulent Procurement Of A Credit Or Debit
Device. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
A. A person commits the offense of fraudulent use of a credit device or
debit device if the person uses a credit device or debit device for the
purpose of obtaining services or property knowing that:
1. The device is stolen, fictitious or forged;
2. The device has been revoked or canceled;
3. For any other reason his/her use of the device is unauthorized; or
4. Uses a credit device or debit device for the purpose of paying
property taxes and knowingly cancels said charges or payment
without just cause. It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of
this Section if a person cancels said charges or payment after
obtaining a property tax receipt to obtain license tags from the
Missouri Department of Revenue.
A. A person commits the offense of fraudulent procurement of a credit or
debit device if he or she:
1. Knowingly makes or causes to be made, directly or indirectly, a
false statement regarding another person for the purpose of
procuring the issuance of a credit or debit device, or
2. Knowingly obtains a means of identification of another person
without the authorization of that person and uses that means of
46.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.360
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.362
AO:206
Section 215.365. Deceptive Business Practice
Section 215.370. Posting Bills, Etc. [CC 1970 §17-18; CC 1947
§7-30; Ord. No. 3853 §1, 10-26-1976; Ord. No. 4187 §1, 4-28-1981;
Ord. No. 4828 §1, 9-24-1991; Ord. No. 4835 §1, 10-22-1991]
It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, paste, post, place or affix any
advertisement, bill, placard, poster, sign or device of any kind upon any
vehicle, tree, pole, post, hydrant, bridge or any structure or ground upon
any private or public street, sidewalk, alley, parkway, park, tree, lawn or
other public place in the City; provided however, nothing herein shall apply
to any notice required by law or ordinance to be posted or to any official
sign or notice by public officers. Provided further, nothing herein shall apply
to any decorative banners, flags, holiday decorations or similar devices
erected by a governmental jurisdiction to enhance an area or promote
commerce or civic events.
identification to obtain, or attempt to obtain, credit, goods or
services in the name of the other person without the consent of that
person.
A. A person commits the offense of deceptive business practice if in the
course of engaging in a business, occupation or profession he/she
recklessly:
1. Uses or possesses for use a false weight or measure or any other
device for falsely determining or recording any quality or quantity;
2. Sells, offers or exposes for sale or delivers less than the
represented quantity of any commodity or service;
3. Takes or attempts to take more than the represented quantity of
any commodity or service when as buyer he/she furnishes the
weight or measure;
4. Sells, offers or exposes for sale adulterated or mislabeled
commodities;
5. Makes a false or misleading written statement for the purpose of
obtaining property or credit;
6. Promotes the sale of property or services by false or misleading
statement in any advertisement, or [Ord. No. 6466 § 1,
1-10-2017]
7. Advertises in any manner the sale of property or services with the
purpose not to sell such property or service: at the price which he
or she offered them, in a quantity sufficient to meet the reasonably
expected public demand unless the quantity is specifically stated in
the advertisement, or at all. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
Section
215.362
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.373
AO:207
Section 215.373. Handbills On Public or Private Property [Ord. No.
5879 §2(13-7.2), 5-24-2005]
No person shall tack, stick, paste or fasten in any manner any handbill
or flier containing commercial advertising of a written, printed or pictorial
nature upon any public property within the limits of the City or on any
motor vehicle, dwelling or other structure within the City without the
consent of the owner or occupant thereof. Such violation constitutes a
public nuisance. When a public nuisance as described herein exists, the
enforcement procedures set forth in Section 220.020 shall be used.
Section 215.375. Alteration or Removal of Item Numbers With
Intent To Deprive Lawful Owner47
Section 215.380. Stealing Rented Personal Property.4849
A. A person commits the offense of alteration or removal of item numbers
if he/she with the purpose of depriving the owner of a lawful interest
therein:
1. Destroys, removes, covers, conceals, alters, defaces or causes to be
destroyed, removed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced the
manufacturer's original serial number or other distinguishing
owner-applied number or mark on any item which bears a serial
number attached by the manufacturer or distinguishing number or
mark applied by the owner of the item for any reason whatsoever;
2. Sells, offers for sale, pawns or uses as security for a loan any item
on which the manufacturer's original serial number or other
distinguishing owner-applied number or mark has been destroyed,
removed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced; or
3. Buys, receives as security for a loan or in pawn, or in any manner
receives or has in his/her possession any item on which the
manufacturer's original serial number or other distinguishing
owner-applied number or mark has been destroyed, removed,
covered, concealed, altered or defaced.
A. A person commits the offense of failing to return leased or rented
property if, with the intent to deprive the owner thereof, he/she
purposefully fails to return leased or rented personal property to the
place and within the time specified in an agreement in writing providing
for the leasing or renting of such personal property. In addition, any
person who has leased or rented personal property of another, who
conceals the property from the owner or who otherwise sells, pawns,
loans, abandons or gives away the leased or rented property is guilty of
47.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
48.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
49.Editor’s Note: Ord. No. 6466 also changed the title of this Section from “Failure To Return
Rented Personal Property – Enforcement – Procedure – Penalty – Venue” to “Stealing
Rented Personal Property.”
Section
215.373
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.380
AO:208
the offense of failing to return leased or rented property. The provisions
of this Section shall apply to all forms of leasing and rental agreements
including, but not limited to, contracts which provide the consumer
options to buy the leased or rented personal property, lease-purchase
agreements and rent-to-own contracts. For the purpose of determining
if a violation of this Section has occurred, leasing contracts which
provide options to buy the merchandise are owned by the owner of the
property until such time as the owner endorses the sale and transfer of
ownership of the leased property to the lessee.
B. It shall be prima facie evidence of the offense of failing to return leased
or rented property when a person who has leased or rented personal
property of another willfully fails to return or make arrangements
acceptable with the lessor to return the personal property to its owner
at the owner's place of business within ten (10) days after proper notice
following the expiration of the lease or rental agreement, except that if
the motor vehicle has not been returned within seventy-two (72) hours
after the expiration of the lease or rental agreement, such failure to
return the motor vehicle shall be prima facie evidence of the intent of
the offense of failing to return leased or rented property. Where the
leased or rented property is a motor vehicle, if the motor vehicle has not
been returned within seventy-two (72) hours after the expiration of the
lease or rental agreement, the lessor may notify the local law
enforcement agency of the failure of the lessee to return such motor
vehicle, and the local law enforcement agency shall cause such motor
vehicle to be put into any appropriate State and local computer system
listing stolen motor vehicles. Any Law Enforcement Officer which stops
such a motor vehicle may seize the motor vehicle and notify the lessor
that he/she may recover such motor vehicle after it is photographed and
its vehicle identification number is recorded for evidentiary purposes.
Where the leased or rented property is not a motor vehicle, if such
property has not been returned within the ten (10) day period
prescribed in this Subsection, the owner of the property shall report the
failure to return the property to the local law enforcement agency, and
such law enforcement agency may within five (5) days notify the person
who leased or rented the property that such person is in violation of this
Section, and that failure to immediately return the property may
subject such person to arrest for the violation.
C. This Section shall not apply if such personal property is a vehicle and
such return is made more difficult or expensive by a defect in such
vehicle which renders such vehicle inoperable if the lessee shall notify
the lessor of the location of such vehicle and such defect before the
expiration of the lease or rental agreement or within ten (10) days after
proper notice.
D. Proper notice by the lessor shall consist of a written demand addressed
and mailed by certified or registered mail to the lessee at the address
given at the time of making the lease or rental agreement. The notice
Section
215.380
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.380
AO:209
Section 215.385. Passing Bad Checks50
shall contain a statement that the failure to return the property may
subject the lessee to criminal prosecution.
E. Any person who has leased or rented personal property of another who
destroys such property so as to avoid returning it to the owner shall be
guilty of property damage pursuant to Section 215.295 in addition to
being in violation of this Section.
F. Venue shall lie in the County where the personal property was originally
rented or leased.
A. A person commits the offense of passing a bad check when:
1. With purpose to defraud, the person makes, issues or passes a
check or other similar sight order or any other form of presentment
involving the transmission of account information for the payment
of money knowing that it will not be paid by the drawee or that
there is no such drawee; or
2. The person makes, issues or passes a check or other similar sight
order or any other form of presentment involving the transmission
of account information for the payment of money, knowing that
there are insufficient funds in or on deposit with that account for
the payment of such check, sight order or other form of
presentment involving the transmission of account information in
full and all other checks, sight orders or other forms of
presentment involving the transmission of account information
upon such funds then outstanding, or that there is no such account
or no drawee and fails to pay the check or sight order or other form
of presentment involving the transmission of account information
within ten (10) days after receiving actual notice in writing that it
has not been paid because of insufficient funds or credit with the
drawee or because there is no such drawee.
B. As used in Subparagraph (2) of Subsection (A) of this Section, "actual
notice in writing" means notice of the non-payment which is actually
received by the defendant. Such notice may include the service of
summons or warrant upon the defendant for the initiation of the
prosecution of the check or checks which are the subject matter of the
prosecution if the summons or warrant contains information of the ten
(10) day period during which the instrument may be paid and that
payment of the instrument within such ten (10) day period will result in
dismissal of the charges. The requirement of notice shall also be
satisfied for written communications which are tendered to the
defendant and which the defendant refuses to accept.
50.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.380
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.390
AO:210
Section 215.390. Shoplifting — Detention of Suspect By Merchant
— Liability Presumption
Section 215.400. (Reserved)51
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following definitions shall apply:
MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT — Any mercantile place of business
in, at or from which goods, wares and merchandise are sold, offered for
sale or delivered from and sold at retail or wholesale.
MERCHANDISE — All goods, wares and merchandise offered for sale
or displayed by a merchant.
MERCHANT — Any corporation, partnership, association or person
who is engaged in the business of selling goods, wares and merchandise
in a mercantile establishment.
WRONGFUL TAKING — Includes stealing of merchandise or money and
any other wrongful appropriation of merchandise or money.
B. Any merchant, his/her agent or employee, who has reasonable grounds
or probable cause to believe that a person has committed or is
committing a wrongful taking of merchandise or money from a
mercantile establishment, may detain such person in a reasonable
manner and for a reasonable length of time for the purpose of
investigating whether there has been a wrongful taking of such
merchandise or money. Any such reasonable detention shall not
constitute an unlawful arrest or detention, nor shall it render the
merchant, his/her agent or employee criminally or civilly liable to the
person so detained.
C. Any person willfully concealing unpurchased merchandise of any
mercantile establishment, either on the premises or outside the
premises of such establishment, shall be presumed to have so
concealed such merchandise with the intention of committing a
wrongful taking of such merchandise within the meaning of Subsection
(A), and the finding of such unpurchased merchandise concealed upon
the person or among the belongings of such person shall be evidence of
reasonable grounds and probable cause for the detention in a
reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time of such person
by a merchant, his/her agent or employee in order that recovery of such
merchandise may be effected, and any such reasonable detention shall
not be deemed to be unlawful nor render such merchant, his/her agent
or employee criminally or civilly liable.
51.Editor’s Note: Former Section 215.400, Value of Property Determinant of Violation, which
derived from CC 1970 § 17-79; CC 1947 § 12-60(b); Ord. No. 4018 § 1, 4-24-1979; Ord. No.
5459 § 1, 9-8-1998; Ord. No. 5727 § 1, 10-22-2002 was repealed 1-10-2017 by Ord. No.
6466.
Section
215.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.410
AO:211
Section 215.410. Detention of Suspected Violator — Authorized [CC
1970 §17-80; CC 1947 §12-60(d)]
Any merchant, his/her agent or employee, who has reasonable grounds or
probable cause to believe that a person has committed or is committing a
wrongful taking of merchandise or money from a mercantile establishment,
may detain such person in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length
of time for the purpose of investigating whether there has been a wrongful
taking of such merchandise or money. Any such reasonable detention shall
not constitute an unlawful arrest or detention, nor shall it render the
merchant, his/her agent or employee criminally or civilly liable to the person
so detained.
Section 215.415. Detention of Suspected Violator — Person
Concealing Property [CC 1970 §17-81; CC 1947 §12-60(e)]
Any person willfully concealing unpurchased merchandise of any mercantile
establishment, either on the premises or outside the premises of such
establishment, shall be presumed to have so concealed such merchandise
with the intention of committing a wrongful taking of such merchandise
within the meaning of this Article and the finding of such unpurchased
merchandise shall be evidence of reasonable grounds and probable cause
for the detention in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of
time of such person by a merchant, his/her agent or employee in order that
recovery of such merchandise may be effected and any such reasonable
detention shall not be deemed to be unlawful nor render such merchant,
his/her agent or employee criminally or civilly liable.
Section 215.420. Scavenging of Recyclable Materials [CC 1970
§17-82; Ord. No. 4779 §1, 8-14-1990]
It shall be unlawful for any person to take, steal, contaminate or disturb any
of the recyclable materials set out for collection or any container used for
the storage and collection of such recyclable materials. For the purposes
of this Section, "recyclable materials" are glass, plastic, paper, aluminum,
cardboard and any other materials which may be designated for recycling
by the City.
Section
215.410
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.420
AO:212
ARTICLE VIII
Offenses Concerning Prostitution and Morals
Section 215.430. Article Definitions
As used in this Article, the following terms mean:
PATRONIZING PROSTITUTION — A person patronizes prostitution if:
PROSTITUTION — A person commits prostitution if he/she engages or
offers or agrees to engage in sexual conduct with another person in return
for something of value to be received by the person or by a third (3rd)
person.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Occurs when there is:
SOMETHING OF VALUE — Money or property or any token, object or
article exchangeable for money or property.
Section 215.440. Prostitution52 [Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
A person commits the offense of prostitution if the person engages in or
offers or agrees to engage in sexual conduct with another person in return
for something of value to be received by any person.
Pursuant to a prior understanding, he/she gives something of value to
another person as compensation for that person or a third (3rd) person
having engaged in sexual conduct with him/her or with another;
1.
He/she gives or agrees to give something of value to another person on
an understanding that in return therefor that person or a third (3rd)
person will engage in sexual conduct with him/her or with another; or
2.
He/she solicits or requests another person to engage in sexual conduct
with him/her or with another, or to secure a third (3rd) person to
engage in sexual conduct with him/her or with another, in return for
something of value.
3.
SEXUAL INTERCOURSE — Any penetration, however slight, of the
female sex organ by the male sex organ, whether or not an emission
results.
1.
DEVIATE SEXUAL INTERCOURSE — Any sexual act involving the
genitals of one (1) person and the mouth, hand, tongue or anus of
another person.
2.
SEXUAL CONTACT — Any touching, manual or otherwise, of the anus
or genitals of one (1) person by another done for the purpose of
arousing or gratifying sexual desire of either party.
3.
52.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.430
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.450
AO:213
Section 215.450. Patronizing Prostitution53 [Ord. No. 6466 § 1,
1-10-2017]
Section 215.455. Promoting Prostitution. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1,
1-10-2017]
Section 215.460. Prostitution, Patronizing And Promoting
Prostitution — Sex Of Parties No Defense, When. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1,
1-10-201754]
A. A person commits the offense of patronizing prostitution if he or she:
1. Pursuant to a prior understanding, gives something of value to
another person as compensation for having engaged in sexual
conduct with any person; or
2. Gives or agrees to give something of value to another person with
the understanding that such person or another person will engage
in sexual conduct with any person; or
3. Solicits or requests another person to engage in sexual conduct
with any person for something of value.
B. It shall not be an affirmative defense that the defendant believed that
the person he or she patronized for prostitution was eighteen (18) years
of age or older.
A. A person commits the offense of promoting prostitution if he or she
knowingly:
1. Causes or aids a person to commit or engage in a violation of
Section 215.440;
2. Procures or solicits patrons for a violator of Section 215.440;
3. Provides persons or premises for use by a violator of Section
215.440;
4. Operates or assists in the operation of a house or business or
enterprise used by or involving violations of Section 215.440;
5. Accepts or receives or agrees to accept or receive something of
value pursuant to an agreement or understanding with any person
whereby he or she participates or is to participate in proceeds of
violation of Section 215.440; or
6. Engages in any conduct designed to institute, aid or facilitate an
act or enterprise involving violation of Section 215.440.
53.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
54.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 6466 also changed the title of this Section from "Prostitution and
Patronizing Prostitution — Sex of Parties No Defense, When" to "Prostitution, Patronizing
and Promoting Prostitution — Sex of Parties No Defense, When."
Section
215.450
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.460
AO:214
Section 215.465. Prostitution Houses Deemed Public Nuisances.
[Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
A. In any prosecution for prostitution or patronizing a prostitute, the sex of
the two (2) parties or prospective parties to the sexual conduct engaged
in, contemplated or solicited is immaterial, and it is no defense that:
1. Both persons were of the same sex; or
2. The person who received, agreed to receive or solicited something
of value was a male and the person who gave or agreed or offered
to give something of value was a female.
A. Any room, building or other structure regularly used for sexual contact
for pay as defined in Section 215.430 or any unlawful prostitution
activity prohibited by this Article is a public nuisance.
B. The City Prosecuting Attorney may, in addition to all other sanctions,
prosecute a suit in equity to enjoin the nuisance as provided in Section
567.080, RSMo.
Section
215.460
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.465
AO:215

ARTICLE IX
Sexual Offenses
Section 215.470. Article Definitions
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth
herein:
DEVIATE SEXUAL INTERCOURSE — Any act involving the genitals of one
person and the hand, mouth, tongue, or anus of another person or a sexual
act involving the penetration, however slight, of the male or female sex
organ or the anus by a finger, instrument or object done for the purpose of
arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of any person or for the purpose of
terrorizing the victim.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Sexual intercourse, deviate sexual intercourse or
sexual contact.
SEXUAL CONTACT — Any touching of another person with the genitals or
any touching of the genitals or anus of another person, or the breast of a
female person, or such touching through the clothing, for the purpose of
arousing or gratifying sexual desire of any person.
SEXUAL INTERCOURSE — Any penetration, however slight, of the female
sex organ by the male sex organ, whether or not an emission results.
Section 215.475. Indecent Exposure (Sexual Misconduct)
Section 215.476. Invasion Of Personal Privacy. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1,
1-10-2017; Ord. No. 6535, 5-8-201855]
A. A person commits the offense of indecent exposure (sexual misconduct)
if such person:
1. Exposes his/her genitals under circumstances in which he/she
knows that his/her conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm;
2. Has sexual contact in the presence of a third (3rd) person or
persons under circumstances in which he/she knows that such
conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm; or
3. Has sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse in a public
place in the presence of a third (3rd) person.
4. Coerces or induces a child less than fifteen (15) years of age to
expose the child's genitals for the purpose of arousing or gratifying
the sexual desire of any person including the child, or coerces or
induces a female child less than fifteen (15) years of age to expose
her breasts in person or through the Internet or other visual
transmission for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual
desire of any person including the child. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1,
1-10-2017]
Section
215.470
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.476
AO:217
Section 215.480. Sexual Misconduct — First Degree56
A person commits the offense of sexual misconduct in the first degree if
such person purposely subjects another person to sexual contact without
that person's consent.
Section 215.485. Certain Offenders Not To Be Present Within Five
Hundred (500) Feet Of School Property, Exception-Permission
Required For Parents Or Guardians Who Are Offenders, Procedure.
[Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
A. No person, not on his or her own property, shall look, peer or peep into,
or use any device or equipment to look, peer or peep into, or be found
loitering around or within view of, any window of a private dwelling
house or any portion of real estate enclosed by opaque structures or
fences sufficient to give the occupant a reasonable expectation of
privacy.
B. No person shall knowingly view, photograph, film, videotape, record,
produce or use any device or equipment to view, photograph, film,
videotape, record, produce or otherwise create an image of another
person, without that person's consent, while such other person is in a
state of full or partial of nudity as defined in this Code and is in a place
where one would have a reasonable expectation that they could disrobe
in privacy without being concerned that their undressing was being
viewed, photographed or filmed by another.
C. No person shall knowingly photograph, film, videotape, record, produce
or use any device or equipment to view, photograph, film, videotape,
record, produce or otherwise create an image of another person under
or through the clothing worn by that other person for the purpose of
viewing the body of or the undergarments worn by that other person
without that person's consent.
A. Any person who has been found guilty of:
1. Since 2006 violating any of the provisions of Chapter 566, RSMo.,
or the provisions of Section 568.020, RSMo., Incest; Section
568.045, RSMo., Endangering The Welfare Of A Child In The First
Degree; Subsection (2) of Section 568.080, RSMo., as it existed
prior to January 1, 2017, or Section 573.200, RSMo., Use Of A Child
In A Sexual Performance; Section 568.090, RSMo., as it existed
prior to January 1, 2017, or Section 573.205, RSMo., Promoting A
Sexual Performance By A Child; Section 573.023, RSMo., Sexual
Exploitation Of A Minor; Section 573.025, RSMo., Promoting Child
Pornography; Section 573.040, RSMo., Furnishing Pornographic
Material To Minors; or
55.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 6535 also changed the title of this Section to include the word
"Personal" in front of "Privacy."
56.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.476
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.485
AO:218
Section 215.486. Certain Offenders Not To Reside Within One
Thousand (1,000) Feet Of A School Or Child-Care Facility. [Ord. No.
6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
2. Since 2008 any offense in any other jurisdiction which, if
committed in this State, would be a violation listed in this Section;
shall not be present in or loiter within five hundred (500) feet
of any school building, on real property comprising any school,
or in any conveyance owned, leased or contracted by a school to
transport students to or from school or a school-related activity
when persons under the age of eighteen (18) years are present
in the building, on the grounds, or in the conveyance, unless the
offender is a parent, legal guardian, or custodian of a student
present in the building and has met the conditions set forth in
Subsection (B) of this Section.
B. No parent, legal guardian, or custodian who has pleaded guilty or nolo
contendere to, or been convicted of, or been found guilty of violating
any of the offenses listed in Subsection (A) of this Section shall be
present in any school building, on real property comprising any school,
or in any conveyance owned, leased, or contracted by a school to
transport students to or from school or a school related activity when
persons under the age of eighteen (18) are present in the building, on
the grounds or in the conveyance unless the parent, legal guardian, or
custodian has permission to be present from the Superintendent or
School Board or in the case of a private school from the Principal. In the
case of a public school, if permission is granted, the Superintendent or
School Board President must inform the Principal of the school where
the sex offender will be present. Permission may be granted by the
Superintendent, School Board, or in the case of a private school from
the Principal for more than one (1) event at a time, such as a series of
events, however, the parent, legal guardian, or custodian must obtain
permission for any other event he or she wishes to attend for which he
or she has not yet had permission granted.
A. Any person who has been found guilty of:
1. Since 2004 violating any of the provisions of Chapter 566, RSMo.,
or the provisions of Section 568.020, RSMo., Incest; Section
568.045, RSMo., Endangering The Welfare Of A Child In The First
Degree; Subsection (2) of Section 568.080, RSMo., as it existed
prior to January 1, 2017, or Section 573.200, RSMo., Use Of A Child
In A Sexual Performance; Section 568.090, RSMo., as it existed
prior to January 1, 2017, or Section 573.205, RSMo., Promoting A
Sexual Performance By A Child; Section 573.023, RSMo., Sexual
Exploitation Of A Minor; Section 573.025, RSMo., Promoting Child
Pornography In The First Degree; Section 573.035, RSMo.,
Promoting Child Pornography In The Second Degree; Section
Section
215.485
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.486
AO:219
Section 215.487. Certain Offenders Not To Physically Be Present Or
Loiter Within Five Hundred Feet Of A Child Care Facility —
Violation — Penalty. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
573.037, RSMo., Possession Of Child Pornography; or Section
573.040, RSMo., Furnishing Pornographic Material To Minors; or
2. Since 2008 any offense in any other jurisdiction which, if
committed in this State, would be a violation listed in this Section;
shall not reside within one thousand (1,000) feet of any public
school as defined in Section 160.011, RSMo., or any private school
giving instruction in a grade or grades not higher than the twelfth
(12th) grade, or any child-care facility that is licensed under
Chapter 215, RSMo., or any child-care facility as defined in
Section 215.201, RSMo., that is exempt from State licensure but
subject to State regulation under Section 215.252, RSMo., and
holds itself out to be a childcare facility, where the school or
facility is in existence at the time the individual begins to reside at
the location.
B. If such person has already established a residence and a public school,
a private school, or child-care facility is subsequently built or placed
within one thousand (1,000) feet of such person's residence, then such
person shall, within one (1) week of the opening of such public school,
private school, or child-care facility, notify the County Sheriff where
such public school, private school, or child-care facility is located that
he or she is now residing within one thousand (1,000) feet of such
public school, private school, or child-care facility and shall provide
verifiable proof to the Sheriff that he or she resided there prior to the
opening of such public school, private school, or child-care facility.
C. For purposes of this Section, "resides" means sleeps in a residence,
which may include more than one (1) location and may be mobile or
transitory.
A. Any person who, since 2009, has been found guilty of:
1. Violating any of the provisions of Chapter 566, RSMo., or the
provisions of Section 568.020, RSMo., Incest; Section 568.045,
RSMo., Endangering The Welfare Of A Child In The First Degree;
Subsection (2) of Section 568.080, RSMo., as it existed prior to
January 1, 2017, or Section 573.200 RSMo., Use Of A Child In A
Sexual Performance; Section 568.090, RSMo., as it existed prior to
January 1, 2017, or Section 573.205, RSMo., Promoting A Sexual
Performance By A Child; Section 573.023, RSMo., Sexual
Exploitation Of A Minor; Section 573.025, RSMo., Promoting Child
Pornography In The First Degree; Section 573.035, RSMo.,
Promoting Child Pornography In The Second Degree; Section
573.037, RSMo., Possession Of Child Pornography; or Section
573.040, RSMo., Furnishing Pornographic Material To Minors; or
Section
215.486
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.487
AO:220
Section 215.488. Additional Restrictions On Certain Offenders.
[Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
2. Any offense in any other jurisdiction which, if committed in this
State, would be a violation listed in this Section; shall not
knowingly be physically present in or loiter within five hundred
(500) feet of or to approach, contact, or communicate with any
child under eighteen (18) years of age in any child care facility
building, on the real property comprising any child care facility
when persons under the age of eighteen (18) years are present in
the building, on the grounds, or in the conveyance, unless the
offender is a parent, legal guardian, or custodian of a student
present in the building or on the grounds.
B. For purposes of this Section, "child care facility" shall include any child
care facility licensed under Chapter 215, RSMo., or any child care
facility that is exempt from State licensure but subject to State
regulation under Section 215.252, RSMo., and holds itself out to be a
child care facility.
A. Certain Offenders Not To Be Present Or Loiter Within Five Hundred
(500) Feet Of A Public Park Or Swimming Pool.
1. Any person who, since 2009, has been found guilty of:
a. Violating any of the provisions of Chapter 566, RSMo., or the
provisions of Section 568.020, RSMo., Incest; Section 568.045,
RSMo., Endangering the Welfare of a Child in the First Degree;
Subsection (2) of Section 568.080, RSMo., as it existed prior to
January 1, 2017, or Section 573.200, RSMo., Use of a Child in a
Sexual Performance; Section 568.090, RSMo., as it existed
prior to January 1, 2017, or Section 573.205, RSMo.,
Promoting a Sexual Performance by a Child; Section 573.023,
RSMo., Sexual Exploitation of a Minor; Section 573.025,
RSMo., Promoting Child Pornography; or Section 573.040,
RSMo., Furnishing Pornographic Material to Minors; or
b. Any offense in any other jurisdiction which, if committed in this
State, would be a violation listed in this Section; shall not
knowingly be present in or loiter within five hundred (500) feet
of any real property comprising any public park with
playground equipment or a public swimming pool.
B. Enticement Of A Child.
1. No person twenty-one (21) years of age or older shall persuade,
solicit, coax, entice, or lure, whether by words, actions or through
communication via the Internet or any electronic communication,
any person who is less than fifteen (15) years of age for the purpose
of engaging in sexual conduct.
Section
215.487
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.488
AO:221
Section 215.489. Registered Sexual Offender, Halloween-Related
Activities. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
2. It is not a defense to a prosecution for a violation of this Subsection
that the other person was a Peace Officer masquerading as a minor.
C. Age Misrepresentation. No person shall knowingly misrepresent his or
her age with the intent to use the Internet or any electronic
communication to solicit engagement in sexual conduct involving a
minor.
D. Certain Offenders Not To Serve As Athletic Coaches, Managers Or
Trainers.
1. Any person who, since 2009, has been found guilty of:
a. Violating any of the provisions of Chapter 566, RSMo., or the
provisions of Section 568.020, RSMo., Incest; Section 568.045,
RSMo., Endangering the Welfare of a Child in the First Degree;
Subsection (2) of Section 568.080, RSMo., as it existed prior to
January 1, 2017, or Section 573.200, RSMo., Use of a Child in a
Sexual Performance; Section 568.090, RSMo., as it existed
prior to January 1, 2017, or Section 573.205, RSMo.,
Promoting a Sexual Performance by a Child; Section 573.023,
RSMo., Sexual Exploitation of a Minor; Section 573.025,
RSMo., Promoting Child Pornography; or Section 573.040,
RSMo., Furnishing Pornographic Material to Minors; or
b. Any offense in any other jurisdiction which, if committed in this
State, would be a violation listed in this Section; shall not serve
as an athletic coach, manager or athletic trainer for any sports
team in which a child less than seventeen (17) years of age is a
member.
A. Any person first required to register as a sexual offender under
Sections 589.400 to 589.425, RSMo., since 2008 shall be required on
October thirty-first (31st) of each year to:
1. Avoid all Halloween-related contact with children;
2. Remain inside his or her residence between the hours of 5:00 P.M.
and 10:30 P.M. unless required to be elsewhere for just cause,
including, but not limited to employment or medical emergencies;
3. Post a sign at his or her residence stating "No candy or treats at
this residence"; and
4. Leave all outside residential lighting off during the evening hours
after 5:00 P.M.
Section
215.488
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.489
AO:222
ARTICLE X
Offenses Concerning Pornography
Section 215.490. Definitions
When used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings set
out herein:
EXPLICIT SEXUAL MATERIAL — Any pictorial or three-dimensional
material depicting human masturbation, deviate sexual intercourse, sexual
intercourse, direct physical stimulation or unclothed genitals,
sadomasochistic abuse, or emphasizing the depiction of post pubertal
human genitals, but excluding works of art or of anthropological
significance.[Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
FURNISH — To issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer,
circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or otherwise provide.
INDECENT — Language or material that depicts or describes, in terms
patently offensive as measured by contemporary community standards,
sexual or excretory activities or organs.[Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
MATERIAL — Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing,
photograph, motion picture film, videotape or videotape production, or
pictorial representation, or any recording or transcription, or any
mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction, or stored computer data,
or anything which is or may be used as a means of communication.
"Material" includes undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates,
stored computer data, and other latent representational objects.
MINOR — Any person under the age of eighteen (18).
NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human genitals, pubic
area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or the female breast with less than a fully
opaque fabric covering of any part of the nipple or areola. Body paint shall
not qualify as fabric.[Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
OBSCENE — Any material or performance is obscene if, taken as a whole:
PERFORMANCE — Any play, motion picture film, videotape, dance or
exhibition performed before an audience of one (1) or more.
PORNOGRAPHIC FOR MINORS — Any material or performance is
pornographic for minors if the following apply:
Applying contemporary community standards, its predominant appeal
is to prurient interest in sex;
1.
The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find the material depicts or describes sexual conduct in a
patently offensive way; and
2.
A reasonable person would find the material lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value.
3.
Section
215.490
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.490
AO:223
PROMOTE — To manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail, deliver, transfer,
transmute, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or
advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same, by any means including a
computer.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Flagellation or torture by or upon a person
as an act of sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Actual or simulated, normal or perverted acts of
human masturbation; deviate sexual intercourse; sexual intercourse; or
physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area,
buttocks, or the breast of a female in an act of apparent sexual stimulation
or gratification; or any sadomasochistic abuse or acts including animals or
any latent objects in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Section 215.500. Promoting Pornography For Minors or Obscenity57
The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find that the material or performance, taken as a whole, has a
tendency to cater or appeal to a prurient interest of minors;
1.
The material or performance depicts or describes nudity, sexual
conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse in a way which is
patently offensive to the average person applying contemporary adult
community standards with respect to what is suitable for minors; and
2.
The material or performance, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value for minors.
3.
A. A person commits the offense of promoting pornography for minors or
obscenity if, knowing its content or character, he/she:
1. Promotes or possesses with the purpose to promote any obscene
materials for pecuniary gain;
2. Produces, presents, directs or participates in any obscene
performance for pecuniary gain;
3. Promotes or possesses with the purpose to promote any material
pornographic for minors for pecuniary gain;
4. Produces, presents, directs or participates in any performance
pornographic for minors for pecuniary gain; or
5. Promotes, possesses with the purpose to promote, produces,
presents, directs or participates in any performance that is
pornographic for minors via computer, electronic transfer, Internet
or computer network if the person made the matter available to a
specific individual known by the defendant to be a minor.
57.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.490
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.505
AO:224
Section 215.505. Failure To Report Child Pornography. [Ord. No.
6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
A person commits the offense of failure to report child pornography if he
or she, being a commercial film or photographic print processor, computer
provider, installer or repair person, or any internet service provider who
has knowledge of or observes, within the scope of the person's professional
capacity or employment, any film, photograph, videotape, negative, slide,
or computer-generated image or picture depicting a person under eighteen
(18) years of age engaged in an act of sexual conduct, fails to report such
instance to the City Police Department as soon as practicably possible.
Section 215.510. Furnishing Pornographic Materials To Minors
Section 215.513. Public Display Of Explicit Sexual Material. [Ord.
No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
A. A person commits the offense of furnishing pornographic material to
minors if, knowing its content and character, he/she:
1. Furnishes any material pornographic for minors knowing that the
person to whom it is furnished is a minor or acting in reckless
disregard of the likelihood that such person is a minor;
2. Produces, presents, directs or participates in any performance
pornographic for minors that is furnished to a minor knowing that
any person viewing such performance is a minor or acting in
reckless disregard of the likelihood that a minor is viewing the
performance; or
3. Furnishes, produces, presents, directs, participates in any
performance or otherwise makes available material that is
pornographic for minors via computer, electronic transfer, Internet
or computer network if the person made the matter available to a
specific individual known by the defendant to be a minor.
A. A person commits the offense of public display of explicit sexual
material if he or she recklessly:
1. Exposes, places, exhibits, or in any fashion, displays explicit sexual
material in any location, whether public or private, and in such a
manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character
distinguished by normal unaided vision as viewed from a street,
highway, public sidewalk, or the property of others, or from any
portion of the person's store, the exhibitor's store or property when
items and materials other than this material are offered for sale or
rent to the public; or
2. Fails to take prompt action to remove such a display from property
in his or her possession after learning of its existence.
Section
215.505
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.515
AO:225
Section 215.515. Evidence In Obscenity And Pornography Cases.
[Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
Section 215.517. Obscene Or Indecent Commercial Messaging.
[Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
A person commits the offense of obscene or indecent commercial messaging
if he or she, by means of a telephone communication for commercial
purposes, makes directly or by means of an electronic recording device, any
comment, request, suggestion, or proposal which is obscene or indecent, or
knowingly permits any telephone or telephone facility connected to a local
exchange telephone under such person's control to be used for obscene or
indecent commercial messaging, in either case regardless of whether such
person placed or initiated the telephone communication. This Section is not
applicable to a telecommunications company as defined in Section 386.020,
RSMo., over whose facilities the prohibited communication is made by
someone else.
A. In any prosecution under this Article evidence shall be admissible to
show:
1. What the predominant appeal of the material or performance would
be for ordinary adults or minors;
2. The literary, artistic, political or scientific value of the material or
performance;
3. The degree of public acceptance in this State and in the local
community;
4. The appeal to prurient interest in advertising or other promotion of
the material or performance;
5. The purpose of the author, creator, promoter, furnisher or publisher
of the material or performance.
B. Testimony of the author, creator, promoter, furnisher, publisher or
expert testimony, relating to factors entering into the determination of
the issues of obscenity or child pornography, shall be admissible.
C. In any prosecution under this Article, when it becomes necessary to
determine a person's age, the court may make such determination by
any authorized method.
Section
215.515
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.517
AO:226
ARTICLE XI
Offenses Concerning Alcohol and Drugs
Section 215.520. Possession of Marijuana58
Except as authorized by Sections 195.005 to 195.425, RSMo., it is unlawful
for any person to possess or have under his/her control marijuana as defined
in Section 195.010, RSMo.
Section 215.525. Prohibited Acts; Controlled Or Imitation
Controlled Substances. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
It is an offense for any person to distribute, deliver, or sell, or possess or
manufacture with intent to distribute, deliver or sell, drug paraphernalia
knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that
it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance or imitation controlled substance in
violation of Chapter 195 or Chapter 579, RSMo.
Section 215.530. Possession or Control of A Controlled Substance59
[Ord. No. 6247 §1, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
A person commits the offense of possession of a controlled substance if
he or she knowingly possesses or delivers a controlled substance, except
as authorized by Chapter 195 or Chapter 579, RSMo. In any complaint,
information, action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of this
Section, it shall not be necessary to include any exception, excuse, proviso
or exemption contained in this Code or Chapter 195 or Chapter 579, RSMo.,
and the burden of proof of any such exception, excuse, proviso or exemption
shall be upon the defendant.
Section 215.535. Limitations On The Retail Sale Of
Methamphetamine Precursor Drugs. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful sale, distribution, or purchase
of over-the-counter methamphetamine precursor drugs if he or she
knowingly:
1. Sells, distributes, dispenses, or otherwise provides any number of
packages of any drug product containing detectable amounts of
ephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or pseudoephedrine, or any of
their salts, optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers, in a total
amount greater than nine (9) grams to the same individual within a
thirty-day period, unless the amount is dispensed, sold, or
distributed pursuant to a valid prescription; or
58.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
59.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.520
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.535
AO:227
2. Purchases, receives, or otherwise acquires within a thirty-day
period, other than pursuant to a lawful transaction by a pharmacy
with its suppliers, any number of packages of any drug product
containing any detectable amount of ephedrine,
phenylpropanolamine, or pseudoephedrine, or any of their salts or
optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers in a total amount greater
than nine (9) grams, without regard to the number of transactions,
unless the amount is purchased, received, or acquired pursuant to
a valid prescription; or
3. Purchases, receives, or otherwise acquires within a twenty-fourhour
period, other than pursuant to a lawful transaction by a
pharmacy with its suppliers, any number of packages of any drug
product containing any detectable amount of ephedrine,
phenylpropanolamine, or pseudoephedrine, or any of their salts or
optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers in a total amount greater
than three and six-tenths (3.6) grams, without regard to the
number of transactions, unless the amount is purchased, received,
or acquired pursuant to a valid prescription; or
4. Dispenses or offers drug products that are not excluded from
Schedule V in Subsection 17 or 18 of Section 195.017, RSMo., and
that contain detectable amounts of ephedrine,
phenylpropanolamine, or pseudoephedrine, or any of their salts,
optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers, without ensuring that
such products are located behind a pharmacy counter where the
public is not permitted and that such products are dispensed by a
registered pharmacist or pharmacy technician under Subsection 11
of Section 195.017, RSMo.; or
5. Holds a retail sales license issued under Chapter 144, RSMo., and
knowingly sells or dispenses packages that do not conform to the
packaging requirements of Section 195.418, RSMo., except that
any person who violates the packaging requirements of Section
195.418, RSMo., and is considered the general owner or operator
of the outlet where ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or
phenylpropanolamine products are available for sale shall not be
penalized if he or she documents that an employee training
program was in place to provide the employee who made the
unlawful retail sale with information on the State and Federal
regulations regarding ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or
phenylpropanolamine.
B. A pharmacist, intern pharmacist, or registered pharmacy technician
commits the offense of unlawful sale, distribution, or purchase of overthe-
counter methamphetamine precursor drugs if he or she knowingly:
1. Sells, distributes, dispenses, or otherwise provides any number of
packages of any drug product containing detectable amounts of
ephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or pseudoephedrine, or any of
their salts or optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers, in a total
Section
215.535
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.535
AO:228
Section 215.540. Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia60 [Ord. No.
6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of drug paraphernalia
if he or she knowingly uses or possesses with intent to use drug
paraphernalia as defined by Chapter 195, RSMo., to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance as defined by or an imitation controlled substance as defined by
Chapter 195, RSMo., in violation of Chapter 195 or Chapter 579, RSMo.
amount greater than three and six-tenth (3.6) grams to the same
individual within a twenty-four-hour period, unless the amount is
dispensed, sold, or distributed pursuant to a valid prescription; or
2. Sells, distributes, dispenses or otherwise provides to an individual
under eighteen (18) years of age without a valid prescription any
number of packages of any drug product containing any detectable
quantity of pseudoephedrine, its salts, isomers, or salts of optical
isomers, or ephedrine, its salts or optical isomers, or salts of optical
isomers.
C. A person commits the offense of unlawful marketing of ephedrine or
pseudoephedrine if he or she knowingly markets, sells, distributes,
advertises, or labels any drug product containing ephedrine, its salts,
optical isomers and salts of optical isomers, or pseudoephedrine, its
salts, optical isomers and salts of optical isomers, for indication of
stimulation, mental alertness, weight loss, appetite control, energy or
other indications not approved under the pertinent Federal over-thecounter
drug Final Monograph or Tentative Final Monograph or
approved new drug application.
D. A person commits the offense of possession of methamphetamine
precursors if he or she knowingly possesses one (1) or more chemicals
listed in Subsection 2 of Section 195.400, RSMo., reagents, solvents, or
any other chemicals proven to be precursor ingredients of
methamphetamine or amphetamine, as established by expert testimony,
with the intent to manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, or otherwise alter that chemical to create a controlled
substance or a controlled substance analogue in violation of Chapter
579, RSMo., or Chapter 195, RSMo. Possession of more than twentyfour
(24) grams of ephedrine or pseudoephedrine shall be prima facie
evidence of intent to violate this Subsection. This Subsection shall not
apply to any practitioner or to any product possessed in the course of a
legitimate business.
60.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.535
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.550
AO:229
Section 215.550. Inhalation Or Inducing Others To Inhale Solvent
Fumes To Cause Certain Reactions, Prohibited — Exceptions. [Ord.
No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
No person shall intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any solvent,
particularly toluol, amyl nitrite, butyl nitrite, cyclohexyl nitrite, ethyl nitrite,
pentyl nitrite and propyl nitrite and their isoanalogues or induce any other
person to do so for the purpose of causing a condition of, or inducing
symptoms of, intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement,
irrational behavior, exhilaration, paralysis, stupefaction, or dulling of senses
or nervous system, or for the purpose of, in any manner, changing,
distorting or disturbing the audio, visual or mental processes; except that
this Section shall not apply to the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical
or dental purposes.
Section 215.560. Inducing, Or Possession With Intent To Induce,
Symptoms By Use Of Solvents, Prohibited. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1,
1-10-2017]
A. As used in this Section "alcohol beverage vaporizer" means any device
which, by means of heat, a vibrating element, or any method, is capable
of producing a breathable mixture containing one (1) or more alcoholic
beverages to be dispensed for inhalation into the lungs via the nose or
mouth, or both.
B. No person shall intentionally or willfully induce the symptoms of
intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational
behavior, exhilaration, paralysis, stupefaction, or dulling of the senses
or nervous system, distortion of audio, visual or mental processes by
the use or abuse of any of the following substances:
1. Solvents, particularly toluol;
2. Ethyl alcohol;
3. Amyl nitrite and its iso-analogues;
4. Butyl nitrite and its iso-analogues;
5. Cyclohexyl nitrite and its iso-analogues;
6. Ethyl nitrite and its iso-analogues;
7. Pentyl nitrite and its iso-analogues; and
8. Propyl nitrite and its iso-analogues.
C. This Section shall not apply to substances that have been approved by
the United States Food and Drug Administration as therapeutic drug
products or are contained in approved over-the-counter drug products
or administered lawfully pursuant to the order of an authorized medical
practitioner.
Section
215.550
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.560
AO:230
Section 215.570. Possession or Purchase of Solvents To Aid Others
in Violations, Prohibited — Violations of Sections 215.550 To
215.560 — Penalty
Section 215.575. Alcoholic Beverages In Public Parks, Commercial
Parking Lots, Public Recreation Fields, Consumption Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
Section 215.576. Pedestrian Drinking. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1,
1-10-2017]
No pedestrian may drink any beer, wine or spirituous or malt liquors in
or on any public street, sidewalk, alley, highway or thoroughfare, or on
any parking lot open to the public except in conjunction with a street fair
or similar gathering authorized by the City with specific permission for
consumption of alcoholic beverages in such locations.
D. No person shall intentionally possess any solvent, particularly toluol,
amyl nitrite, butyl nitrite, cyclohexyl nitrite, ethyl nitrite, pentyl nitrite
and propyl nitrite and their iso-analogues for the purpose of using it in
the manner prohibited by Section 215.550 and this Section.
E. No person shall possess or use an alcoholic beverage vaporizer.
F. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the legal
consumption of intoxicating liquor.
A. No person shall intentionally possess or buy any solvent, particularly
toluol, for the purpose of inducing or aiding any other person to violate
the provisions of Sections 215.550 and 215.560 hereof.
B. Any person who violates any provision of Sections 215.550—215.570 is
guilty of an ordinance violation.
A. Definition. As used in this Section, the following term shall have the
following meaning:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid
containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by
volume, which is fit for beverage purposes or intended for beverage
purposes.
B. No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage while in or upon any
public park or public recreation field or on the commercial parking lots
of any shopping center open to the public within the City.
Section
215.560
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.576
AO:231

ARTICLE XII
Offenses Concerning Minors
Section 215.580. Article Definitions
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases are defined
as follows:
GUARDIAN — Guardian appointed by court of competent jurisdiction.
MINOR — Any person under the age of seventeen (17).
PARENT — The natural or adoptive father or mother, legal guardian or any
other person having the care or custody of a minor child.
PARENTAL NEGLECT — Any act or omission by which a parent fails to
exercise customary and effective control over a minor so as to contribute to,
cause or tend to cause a minor to commit any offense.
Section 215.590. Curfew; Unlawful For Parents, Guardians, Etc., To
Permit Violations; And Procedure Upon Violation. [CC 1970 §17-37;
Ord. No. 4784 §1, 10-9-1990; Ord. No. 6466 §1, 1-10-201761]
A. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of seventeen (17) years
to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or to drive or ride in or on a motor vehicle
or play in or upon the streets, highways, alleys, roads, parks,
playgrounds or other public grounds between the hours of 11:00 P.M.
and 6:00 A.M. of the following day, except on Friday and Saturday when
the hours shall be 12:00 Midnight to 6:00 A.M. of the following day,
provided however, that the provisions of this Subsection shall not apply
to a minor accompanied by his/her parent, guardian or other adult
person having the care and custody of the minor or where the minor is
upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his/her
parent, guardian or other adult person having the custody of the minor
or to a minor proceeding to or from place of employment or to a minor
returning or going to a school sanctioned function or when the minor
can give a satisfactory reason for being in or upon the places herein
mentioned. When upon such lawful errands, it shall be unlawful for any
such minor to loiter or linger or ride aimlessly upon any street, highway,
alley or road. Such minor shall transact such business as speedily as
possible.
B. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care and custody of a minor under the age of seventeen (17)
years to knowingly, or with reason to know, permit such minor to violate
the provisions of Subsection (A).
C. Any Police Officer finding a minor violating the provisions of Subsection
(A) shall warn the minor to desist immediately from such violation and
61.Editor’s Note: Ord. No. 6466 also changed the title of this Section from “Curfew” to
“Curfew; Unlawful For Parents, Guardians, Etc., To Permit Violations; And Procedure Upon
Violation.”
Section
215.580
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.590
AO:233
Section 215.600. (Reserved)62
Section 215.605. Failure To Supervise Minor. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1,
1-10-2017]
shall deliver the minor to his/her parent, guardian or other adult person
having the custody of the minor. If contact cannot be made with a
parent, guardian or other adult person having the custody of the minor,
the Police Officer shall retain custody until the parent, guardian or
other adult person having the custody of the minor is located. The
officer shall also report the violation to the departmental juvenile officer
who shall cause a written notice to be served on the parent, guardian
or other adult person having the custody of the minor setting forth the
manner in which this Section has been violated.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions
shall apply:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any beverage constituting intoxicating
liquor, light wines, malt liquor or non-intoxicating beer, as those terms
are defined in Chapter 600 of the Municipal Code of the City of Clayton.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — Any drug, substance or immediate
precursor defined or described as such in Section 195.010, RSMo.
(2000) as may be amended or revised from time to time.
DELIVERY OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES OR CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES — The gift or exchange of an alcoholic beverage or
controlled substance from one (1) person to another.
MINOR — Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
PARENT — A natural or adoptive parent, or a guardian, or the adult
designee of either of them.
PARTY, GATHERING OR EVENT — An assemblage or a group of
persons for a social occasion or for a social activity.
PERSON IN CONTROL OF THE PREMISES — An adult who owns,
leases, rents or is otherwise the lawful occupant of any premises or the
adult designee thereof.
PRACTITIONER — Any medical professional or other person as defined
or described in Section 195.010, RSMo. (2000) as may be amended or
revised from time to time.
B. Use Of Premises For Consumption Of Alcoholic Beverages Or
Controlled Substances. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly
or negligently permit, allow or host, on or in a premises under his or her
control, the consumption of alcoholic beverages or controlled
substances by a minor; except that this Section shall not apply to the
following:
62.Editor’s Note: Former Section 215.600, Parental Responsibility, was repealed 1-10-2017 by
Ord. No. 6466.
Section
215.590
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.605
AO:234
1. The delivery of alcoholic beverages to a minor or the consumption
of alcoholic beverages by a minor in connection with the
performance of any bona fide religious service under the
supervision of an adult, with the consent of the person in control of
the premises.
2. The delivery of an alcoholic beverage to a minor by that minor's
parent and under the direct supervision of the parent.
3. The possession or consumption of or the delivery to a minor of a
controlled substance prescribed for that minor by a practitioner
when such delivery by that minor's parent or by the person in
control of the premises, provided that he or she has obtained the
prior consent of that minor's parent.
C. Rental Of A Premises. It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent,
employee or contractor thereof to rent any room, rooms, apartment or
any building or portion of a building to a minor or to any adult when it is
reasonably foreseeable that said adult, or his or her adult designee, will
leave the said premises or reasonably foreseeable that said premises
may be used for a gathering at which alcoholic beverages or controlled
substances may be in possession of or consumed by minors except as
otherwise provided in this Chapter.
D. Duty To Disperse — Police Services, Fees For Police Services.
1. Any person in control of a premises at which alcoholic beverages or
controlled substances are in the possession of or are being
consumed by minors, or his or her adult designee, shall cause all
persons in or on said premises who are not lawful residents thereof
to disperse not more than fifteen (15) minutes after personally
receiving an order to do so issued by a Peace Officer.
2. When a party, gathering or event occurs on private property and a
Police Officer at the scene determines that there is a threat to the
public peace, health, safety or general welfare, the person or
persons responsible for the party, gathering or event will be held
liable for the cost of providing Police services during a second (2nd)
or follow-up response by the Police after a first (1st) warning to the
person or persons responsible for the party, gathering or event. The
second (2nd) or follow-up response may also result in the arrest
and/or citation of violators pursuant to State law or other
provisions of this Code.
3. The Police services fee shall include the cost of personnel and
equipment but shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a
single incident provided, however, that the City does not waive its
right to seek reimbursement for actual costs exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00) through other legal remedies. The
amount of such fees shall be deemed a debt owed to the City by the
person responsible for the party, gathering or event. If such
persons are minors, their parents or guardians shall be responsible
Section
215.605
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.605
AO:235
Section 215.607. Penalties. [Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017]
for such debt. Any person owing such fees to the City shall be liable
in an action brought in the name of the City for recovery of such
fees, including reasonable attorney's fees.
E. Penalty. Any person or persons convicted of violating the provisions of
this Section shall be fined an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense; except that for third (3rd) and subsequent
violations by the same person or persons, the fine shall not be less than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense.
A. Any parent, guardian or other person who violates Section 215.905 of
this Article after having received notice of the first (1st) violation, as
described in Section 215.590 of this Article, shall upon conviction be
subject to punishment as provided in Section 100.150 of this Code.
B. Any person under the age of seventeen (17) years who violates Section
215.590 of this Article after having received notice of the first (1st)
violation, shall be dealt with in accordance with the juvenile laws of the
State.
Section
215.605
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.607
AO:236
ARTICLE XIII
Offenses Concerning Tobacco
Section 215.610. Definitions [Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-2017; Ord.
No. 6475 § 1, 3-28-2017]
For purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply:
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT — Any non-combustible product
containing nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether
chewed, absorbed, dissolved, or ingested by any other means. Alternative
nicotine product does not include any vapor product, tobacco product or
any product regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and
Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
Act.63
DISTRIBUTE — A conveyance to the public by sale, barter, gift or sample.
MINOR — A person under the age of twenty-one (21).
PROOF OF AGE — A driver's license or other generally accepted means of
identification that contains a picture of the individual and appears on its
face to be valid.
ROLLING PAPERS — Paper designed, manufactured, marketed or sold for
use primarily as a wrapping or enclosure for tobacco which enables a
person to roll loose tobacco into a smokeable cigarette.
SAMPLE — A tobacco product distributed to members of the general public
at no cost or at nominal cost for product promotional purposes.
SAMPLING — The distribution to members of the general public of tobacco
product samples.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS — Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including,
but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco
or dipping tobacco.
VAPOR PRODUCT — Any non-combustible product containing nicotine that
employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other
electronic, chemical or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size,
that can be used to produce vapor from nicotine in a solution or other
form. Vapor product includes any electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any
vapor cartridge or other container of nicotine in a solution or other form
that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic
cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device.
Vapor product does not include any alternative nicotine product or tobacco
product.
Section 215.620. Unlawful To Sell Or Distribute Tobacco Products,
Alternative Nicotine Products, Vapor Products, Or Rolling Papers To
63.Editor's Note: See 21 U.S.C. § 351 et seq.
Section
215.610
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.620
AO:237
Minors — Vending Machine Requirements [Ord. No. 6466 § 1,
1-10-201764; Ord. No. 6475 § 1, 3-28-2017]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, provide or distribute tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or rolling
papers to persons under twenty-one (21) years of age.
B. All vending machines that dispense tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, vapor products, or rolling papers shall be located
within the unobstructed line of sight and under the direct supervision of
an adult responsible for preventing persons less than twenty-one (21)
years of age from purchasing any tobacco product from such machine
or shall be equipped with a lock-out device to prevent the machines
from being operated until the person responsible for monitoring sales
from the machines disables the lock. Such locking device shall be of a
design that prevents it from being left in an unlocked condition and
which will allow only a single sale when activated. A locking device
shall not be required on machines that are located in areas where
persons less than twenty-one (21) years of age are not permitted or
prohibited by law. An owner of an establishment whose vending
machine is not in compliance with the provisions of this Subsection
shall be subject to the penalties contained in Subsection (E) of this
Section. A determination of non-compliance may be made by a local law
enforcement agency or the Division of Liquor Control. Nothing in this
Section shall apply to a vending machine if located in a factory, private
club or other location not generally accessible to the general public.
C. No person or entity shall sell, provide or distribute any tobacco,
alternative nicotine product, vapor product, or rolling papers to any
minor or sell any individual cigarettes to any person in this State. This
Subsection shall not apply to the distribution by family members on
property that is not open to the public.
D. Any person, including, but not limited to, a sales clerk, owner or
operator, who violates Subsection (A), (B) or (C) of this Section or
Section 215.650 of this Article shall be penalized as follows:
1. For the first offense: twenty-five dollars ($25.00);
2. For the second offense: one hundred dollars ($100.00); and
3. For a third and subsequent offense: two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
E. Any owner of the establishment where tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, vapor products, or rolling papers are available for
sale who violates Subsection (C) of this Section shall not be penalized
pursuant to this Section if such person documents the following:
64.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 6466 also changed the title of this Section from "Unlawful To Sell
or Distribute Tobacco Products To Minors - Vending Machine Requirements" to "Unlawful
To Sell or Distribute Tobacco Products, Alternative Nicotine Products, Vapor Products, Or
Rolling Papers To Minors - Vending Machine Requirements."
Section
215.620
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.620
AO:238
Section 215.630. Minors Prohibited From Purchase Or Possession
Of Tobacco Products, Alternative Nicotine Products, Vapor Products
Or Rolling Papers — Misrepresentation Of Age [Ord. No. 6466 § 1,
1-10-201765; Ord. No. 6475 § 1, 3-28-2017]
1. An in-house or other tobacco compliance employee training
program was in place to provide the employee with information on
the State and Federal regulations regarding tobacco sales to
minors. Such training program must be attended by all employees
who sell tobacco products to the general public;
2. A signed statement by the employee stating that the employee has
been trained and understands the State laws and Federal
regulations regarding the sale of tobacco to minors; and
3. Such in-house or other tobacco compliance training meets the
minimum training criteria, which shall not exceed a total of ninety
(90) minutes in length, established by the Division of Alcohol and
Tobacco Control.
F. The exemption in Subsection (E) of this Section shall not apply to any
person who is considered the general owner or operator of the outlet
where tobacco products are available for sale if:
1. Four (4) or more violations per location of Subsection (C) of this
Section occur within a one-year period; or
2. Such person knowingly violates or knowingly allows his/her
employees to violate Subsection (C) of this Section.
G. If a sale is made by an employee of the owner of an establishment in
violation of this Article, the employee shall be guilty of an offense
established in Subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this Section. If a vending
machine is in violation of Section 215.650, the owner of the
establishment shall be guilty of an offense established in Subsections
(C) and (D) of this Section. If a sample is distributed by an employee of a
company conducting the sampling, such employee shall be guilty of an
offense established in Subsections (C) and (D) of this Section.
H. A person cited for selling, providing or distributing any tobacco product
to any individual less than twenty-one (21) years of age in violation of
Subsections (A), (B) or (C) of this Section shall conclusively be
presumed to have reasonably relied on proof of age of the purchaser or
recipient, and such person shall not be found guilty of such violation if
such person raises and proves as an affirmative defense that such
individual presented a driver's license or other government-issued
photo identification purporting to establish that such individual was
twenty-one (21) years of age or older.
65.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 6466 also changed the title of this Section from "Minors
Prohibited From Purchase or Possession of Tobacco — Misrepresentation of Age" to
Section
215.620
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.630
AO:239
Section 215.640. Retail Sales Tax License Required For Sale Of
Tobacco Products, Alternative Nicotine Products, Vapor Products Or
Rolling Papers [Ord. No. 6466 § 1, 1-10-201766; Ord. No. 6475 § 1,
3-28-2017]
No person shall sell cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, vapor products, or rolling papers unless the person has a retail
sales tax license and a business license authorizing such sales from the City
of Clayton.
Section 215.650. Required Sign Stating Violation Of State Law To
Sell Tobacco To Minors Under Age Twenty-One— Display Of Sign
Required Where [Ord. No. 6475 § 1, 3-28-2017]
A. No person less than twenty-one (21) years of age shall purchase,
attempt to purchase or possess cigarettes, other tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or rolling papers unless
such person is an employee of a seller of cigarettes or tobacco products
and is in such possession to effect a sale in the course of employment or
an employee of the Division of Liquor Control for enforcement purposes
pursuant to Subsection (5) of Section 407.934, RSMo.
B. Any person less than twenty-one (21) years of age shall not
misrepresent his/her age to purchase cigarettes, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or rolling papers.
C. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section shall be
penalized as follows:
1. For the first violation, the person is guilty of an infraction and shall
have any cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, vapor products, or rolling papers confiscated;
2. For a second violation and any subsequent violations, the person is
guilty of an infraction, shall have any cigarettes, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or rolling papers
confiscated and shall complete a tobacco education or smoking
cessation program, if available.
A. The owner of an establishment at which tobacco products or rolling
papers are sold at retail or through vending machines shall cause to be
prominently displayed in a conspicuous place at every display from
which tobacco products are sold and on every vending machine where
tobacco products are purchased a sign that shall:
"Minors Prohibited From Purchase or Possession of Tobacco Products, Alternative
Nicotine Products, Vapor Products Or Rolling Papers — Misrepresentation of Age."
66.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 6466 also changed the title of this Section from "Retail Sales Tax
License Required For Sale of Tobacco Products" to "Retail Sales Tax License Required For
Sale of Tobacco Products, Alternative Nicotine Products, Vapor Products Or Rolling
Papers."
Section
215.630
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.650
AO:240
Section 215.660. Restrictions On Sales Of Individual Packs Of
Cigarettes [Ord. No. 6475 § 1, 3-28-2017]
Section 215.670. Proof Of Age Required — When Defense To Action
For Violation Is Reasonable Reliance On Proof — Liability [Ord. No.
6466 § 1, 1-10-2017; Ord. No. 6475 § 1, 3-28-2017]
1. Contain in red lettering at least one-half (1/2) inch high on a white
background the following:
"IT IS A VIOLATION OF LAW FOR CIGARETTES OR OTHER
TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO BE SOLD OR OTHERWISE PROVIDED
TO ANY PERSON UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY-ONE OR FOR
SUCH PERSON TO PURCHASE, ATTEMPT TO PURCHASE OR
POSSESS CIGARETTES OR OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS"; and
2. Include a depiction of a pack of cigarettes at least two (2) inches
high defaced by a red diagonal diameter of a surrounding red circle
and the words "Under 21."
A. No person or entity shall sell individual packs of cigarettes or smokeless
tobacco products unless such packs satisfy one (1) of the following
conditions prior to the time of sale:
1. It is sold through a vending machine; or
2. It is displayed behind the checkout counter or it is within the
unobstructed line of sight of the sales clerk or store attendant from
the checkout counter.
A. A person or entity selling tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, vapor products, or rolling papers or distributing tobacco
product, alternative nicotine product, or vapor product samples shall
require proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient if an
ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance that such
prospective purchaser or recipient may be under the age of twenty-one
(21) years.
B. The operator's or chauffeur's license issued pursuant to the provisions
of Section 302.177, RSMo., or the operator's or chauffeur's license
issued pursuant to the laws of any State or possession of the United
States to residents of those States or possessions, or an identification
card as provided for in Section 302.181, RSMo., or the identification
card issued by any uniformed service of the United States, or a valid
passport shall be presented by the holder thereof upon request of any
law enforcement agent or any owner or employee of an establishment
that sells tobacco, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or
rolling papers for the purpose of aiding the registrant, agent or
employee to determine whether or not the person is at least twenty-one
(21) years of age when such person desires to purchase or possess
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or
Section
215.650
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.670
AO:241
Section 215.680. Smoking Prohibited in Public Places —
Responsibilities of Proprietors and Others — Exceptions [CC 1970
§17-36; Ord. No. 4645 §§1—5, 7-26-1988; Ord. No. 4647 §1,
8-9-1988; Ord. No. 6081 §1, 7-14-2009; Ord. No. 6139 §1,
2-22-2011]
rolling papers procured from a registrant. Upon such presentation, the
owner or employee of the establishment shall compare the photograph
and physical characteristics noted on the license, identification card or
passport with the physical characteristics of the person presenting the
license, identification card or passport.
C. Any person who shall, without authorization from the Department of
Revenue, reproduce, alter, modify or misrepresent any chauffeur's
license, motor vehicle operator's license or identification card shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
D. Reasonable reliance on proof of age or on the appearance of the
purchaser or recipient shall be a defense to any action for a violation of
Subsections (A), (B) and (C) of Section 215.620 of this Article. No
person shall be liable for more than one (1) violation of Subsections (B)
and (C) of Section 215.620 on any single day.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section to promote the health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of the City of Clayton by decreasing
exposure to secondhand smoke; and to create smoke-free environments
for workers, patrons and visitors to places of employment and all other
public places within the City.
B. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
Section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BAR — An area which is primarily devoted to the serving of alcoholic
beverages and in which the service of food is only incidental to the
consumption of such beverages.
BUSINESS — A sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture,
corporation or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit,
including retail establishments where goods or services are sold;
professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical,
dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are
delivered, and private clubs.
CIGAR BAR — An establishment with a permit to sell alcoholic
beverages that generates twenty-five percent (25%) or more of its
quarterly gross revenue from the sale of cigars and/or rental of humidor
space, has a humidor on the premises and does not allow minors
to enter the premises. Revenue generated from other tobacco sales,
including cigarette vending machine sales, shall not be used to
determine whether an establishment satisfies the definition of a cigar
bar.
Section
215.670
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.680
AO:242
CITY — City of Clayton, Missouri.
EMPLOYEE — Any person who performs services for an employer, with
or without compensation.
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, trust or
other organized group of individuals, including the City or any agency
thereof, which utilizes the services of one (1) or more employee.
ENCLOSED AREA — A space bound by walls (with or without windows
or screens) substantially from the floor to the ceiling and enclosed by
doors including, but not limited to, offices, rooms, all space therein
screened by partitions which do not extend to the ceiling or are not
solid, "office landscaping" or similar structures and hallways.
PERMANENTLY DESIGNATED — A hotel or motel guest sleeping room
or suite that may be designated as a smoking room, with such
designation being changeable only one (1) time a year.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT — Any enclosed area under the control of a
public or private employer which employees normally frequent during
the course of employment including, but not limited to, work areas,
employee lounges and restrooms, conference rooms and classrooms,
employee cafeterias and hallways. A private residence is not a "place of
employment" unless it is used as a child care, adult day care or health
care facility.
PRIVATE CLUB — A building or portion of a building permanently
and exclusively occupied by a not-for-profit organization incorporated
under the laws of the State of Missouri for fraternal or social purposes
or for a congressionally chartered veterans' organization which has a
defined membership and restricts admission to members of the club
and their guests and which has no "employees" and is not a "place
of employment" as those terms are defined in this Section. "Private
club" shall not include an establishment that is open to members of the
general public upon payment of a nominal fee. A private club shall not
be considered a "public place" except when it is the site of a meeting,
event or activity that is open to the public.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any enclosed or other area to which the public is
invited or in which the public is permitted including, but not limited
to, banks, educational facilities, reception areas, health facilities,
laundering facilities, public transportation facilities, reception areas,
production and marketing establishments, retail service
establishments, retail stores, theaters and waiting rooms. A private
residence is not a "public place" unless it is used as a child care, adult
day care or health care facility.
RESTAURANT — An eating establishment including, but not limited to,
coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands and private and public school
cafeterias, which provides food to the public, guests or employees, as
well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" shall include a
bar and lounge area within the restaurant.
Section
215.680
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.680
AO:243
SERVICE LINE — Any indoor or outdoor line at which one (1) or more
persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not
such service involves the exchange of money.
SHOPPING MALL — An enclosed public walkway or hall area that
serves to connect retail or professional establishments.
SMOKING — Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted or
heated cigar, cigarette, pipe or other tobacco product.
SPORTS ARENA — Sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing
arenas, outdoor and indoor swimming pools, outdoor athletic fields,
outdoor and indoor roller and ice skating rinks, bowling alleys and
other similar places where members of the general public assemble
either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition
or witness sports events.
C. Prohibition Of Smoking In Enclosed Places Of Employment And Other
Public Places.
1. The possession of lighted or heated smoking materials in any form
including, but not limited to, the possession of lighted or heated
cigarettes, cigars, pipes or other tobacco products shall be
prohibited in all enclosed places of employment within the City.
2. The possession of lighted or heated smoking materials in any form
including, but not limited to, the possession of lighted or heated
cigarettes, cigars, pipes or other tobacco products shall be
prohibited in all enclosed public places within the City and all other
public places hereinafter specified including, but not limited to, the
following places:
a. Elevators in public buildings;
b. Restrooms in public buildings;
c. Libraries, educational facilities, child care and adult day care
facilities, museums, auditoriums, aquariums and art galleries;
d. Any health care facility, health clinic or ambulatory care
facilities including, but not limited to: laboratories associated
with the rendition of health care treatment, hospitals, nursing
homes, doctors' offices and dentists' offices;
e. Any indoor place of entertainment or recreation including, but
not limited to, gymnasiums, theaters, concert halls, bingo
halls, arenas and swimming pools;
f. Service lines;
g. Facilities primarily used for exhibiting a motion picture, stage,
drama, lecture, musical recital or other similar performance;
h. Shopping malls or retail establishments;
Section
215.680
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.680
AO:244
i. Indoor and outdoor sports arenas;
j. Restaurants, including lounge and bar areas, except outdoor
dining areas;
k. Convention facilities;
l. All indoor public areas and waiting rooms of public
transportation facilities including, but not limited to, bus and
mass transportation facilities;
m. Any other area used by the public or serving as a place of work;
n. Every room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly,
including school buildings under the control of any board,
council, commission or committee including, but not limited to,
joint committees or agencies of the City or any political
subdivision of the State during such time as a public meeting is
in progress, to the extent such place is subject to the
jurisdiction of the City;
o. All enclosed facilities owned by the City;
p. Rooms in which meetings or hearings open to the public are
held, except where such rooms are in a private residence;
q. Sidewalks, driveways and other open areas within fifteen (15)
feet of the entry to any building owned or occupied by the City
of Clayton or within fifteen (15) feet of the entry to any building
open to the public; provided however, that this entryway
prohibition shall not apply within outside dining areas where
smoking is permitted or to entries that are located less than
fifty (50) feet from another public entry.
3. No person shall dispose of smoking waste or place or maintain a
receptacle for smoking waste in an area in which smoking is
prohibited under this Section.
D. Responsibilities Of Proprietors, Owners And Managers.
1. A person having control of a place listed in this Section shall not
knowingly permit, cause, suffer or allow any person to violate the
provisions of these regulations. It shall be an affirmative defense to
an alleged violation of this Subsection that the person having
control of a place has asked that the lighted or heated cigarette,
cigar, pipe or other tobacco product be extinguished and asked the
person to leave the establishment if that person has failed or
refused to extinguish the lighted or heated cigarette, cigar, pipe or
other tobacco product.
2. A person having control of a place shall clearly and conspicuously
post "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol
(consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette
Section
215.680
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.680
AO:245
enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) near all entrances
where smoking is prohibited by this Section. Such signage shall
consist of letters not less than one (1) inch in height.
3. It shall be the responsibility of employers to provide smoke-free
workplaces for all employees.
4. All employers shall supply a written copy of the smoking policy
upon request to any existing or prospective employee.
E. Exceptions To Smoking Restrictions. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this Section to the contrary, the following shall not be
subject to the smoking restrictions of this Section:
1. Private residences, not serving as enclosed places of employment
or enclosed public places;
2. Private clubs not serving as enclosed places of employment or
enclosed public places as per the definitions herein contained;
3. Performers on stage in a theatrical production, where smoking is
required as part of the production;
4. Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and long-term
care facilities the residents of which are all smokers and have all
requested the management of the facility to be placed in a room
where smoking is permitted;
5. Retail establishments where more than seventy percent (70%) of
the volume of trade or business carried on is the sale of tobacco
and tobacco-related products;
6. Hotels and motels may permanently designate twenty percent
(20%) of guest sleeping rooms or suites as smoking rooms. Neither
all nor any part of a ballroom, dining room, banquet hall, lounge,
lobby or other common area of a hotel or motel may be
permanently or temporarily designated as being a room in which
smoking is allowed for any purpose related to this Section. A hotel
or motel may only change the specific rooms that are designated as
smoking rooms once during any twelve (12) month period;
7. Cigar bar, provided such entity is in operation on or before the date
of passage of this Section and provided that smoke does not
infiltrate into areas where smoking is otherwise prohibited. Neither
all nor any part of a ballroom, dining room, banquet hall, lounge,
lobby or other common area of a hotel or motel may be
permanently or temporarily designated as being part of a cigar bar
for any purpose related to this Section.
F. Section Not To Preclude More Extensive Smoking Prohibitions. Nothing
in this Section shall be construed or applied in such a manner as to
interfere with or prohibit a property owner, business operator or public
entity, including the City, from more broadly prohibiting smoking on or
Section
215.680
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.680
AO:246
Section 215.681. Smoking Prohibited On City Property [Ord. No.
6118 §1, 8-24-2010; Ord. No. 6251 §1, 1-8-2013]
about their property or from prohibiting smoking in areas, at times, or
under conditions which do not fall within the prohibitions established
by this Section.
G. Businesses Existing When Smoking Restrictions Enacted. Businesses
existing as of the date of enactment of this Section shall be required to
fully comply with the provisions of this Section no later than July 1,
2010. Businesses and other facilities covered by these regulations
opening to the public after the date of passage of this Section shall
comply with the restrictions provided herein immediately.
H. Notice. Notice of the provisions of this Section shall be given to all
applicants for a business license in the City of Clayton.
I. Penalty For Violation Of This Section. Any person, firm or corporation
who violates the provisions of this Section shall be deemed guilty of an
ordinance violation and punished as provided in Section 100.110 of this
Code of Ordinances.
A. Definitions. The definitions set forth in Section 215.680, above, shall
also apply to such terms when used in this Section.
B. Prohibition Of Smoking On City Property. The possession of lighted or
heated smoking materials in any form, including, but not limited to, the
possession of lighted or heated cigarettes, cigars, pipes or other
tobacco products, is prohibited in or on any property or premises
owned or leased for use by the City of Clayton, including buildings,
grounds, parks, playgrounds, sports arenas and facilities, playing fields,
parking lots and parking structures.
C. Exceptions. The prohibitions of this Section shall not apply to:
1. Streets, alleys, rights-of-way and sidewalks other than sidewalks
and pedestrian paths in parks; provided however, that the City
Manager may suspend this exception and order that the smoking
prohibition be applied to streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public
ways where community events, fairs, festivals, neighborhood
events and similar public gatherings are being held during the
period of such events if the City Manager determines that
prohibiting smoking during the event could reasonably be expected
to enhance attendance, participation or enjoyment of the event, or
that such a prohibition could make cleaning City property after the
event less burdensome by reducing litter at the event site; and
2. Property, buildings or parts of buildings owned by the City but
leased to private parties; and
Section
215.680
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.681
AO:247
3. Areas on City property designated by the City Manager for smoking
to accommodate employees and visitors, if any such areas are so
designated from time to time; and
4. Areas of park property designated by the City Manager for smoking
purposes in association with special events, if requested by the
sponsor thereof.
Provided, however, that smoking shall not be allowed in any
location exempted from application of the prohibition of this
Section if such location comes within the prohibitions or
restrictions specified under other applicable regulations.
Specifically, nothing in this Section shall be construed or
applied so as to conflict with or limit in any way the provisions
of the City's general smoking prohibitions in Section 215.680,
any City personnel or workplace regulations or standards, or
any lease entered into by the City as lessor which may contain
a smoking prohibition.
D. Penalty For Violation Of This Section. Any person, firm or corporation
who violates the provisions of this Section shall be deemed guilty of an
ordinance violation and punished as provided in Section 100.110 of this
Code of Ordinances.
Section
215.681
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.681
AO:248
ARTICLE XIV
Domestic and Family Violence
Section 215.690. Construction [Ord. No. 5867 §§1—2, 3-22-2005]
Section 215.695. Definitions — General [Ord. No. 5867 §§1—2,
3-22-2005]
Unless the context otherwise requires, as used in this Article, the following
terms shall mean:
ABUSE — When used in regard to acts of domestic violence between adults,
includes, but is not limited to, the occurrence of any of the following acts,
attempts or threats against a person who may be protected under a valid
protective order issued by the State of Missouri or any other State within
the United States:
A. This Article is to be construed to promote:
1. The protection and safety of all victims of domestic or family
violence in a fair, prompt and effective manner;
2. The prevention of future violence in all families; and
3. Batterer accountability.
ASSAULT — Purposely or knowingly placing or attempting to place
another in fear of physical harm.
1.
BATTERY — Purposely or knowingly causing physical harm to another
with or without a deadly weapon.
2.
COERCION — Compelling another by force or threat of force to engage
in conduct from which the latter has a right to abstain or to abstain
from conduct in which the person has a right to engage.
3.
HARASSMENT — Engaging in a purposeful or knowingly course of
conduct involving more than one (1) incident that alarms or causes
distress to another person and serves no legitimate purpose. The
course of conduct must be such as would cause a reasonable person
to suffer substantial emotional distress and must actually cause
substantial emotional distress to the petitioner. Such conduct might
include, but is not limited to:
a. Following another about in a public place or places;
Peering in the window or lingering outside the residence of
another; but does not include constitutionally protected activity.
b.
4.
SEXUAL ASSAULT — Causing or attempting to cause another to engage
involuntarily in any sexual act by force, threat of force or duress.
5.
UNLAWFUL IMPRISONMENT — Holding, confining, detaining or
abducting another person against that person's will.
6.
Section
215.690
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.695
AO:249
ABUSE — When used in regard to acts of domestic violence against a
child, means any physical injury, sexual abuse or emotional abuse inflicted
on a child other than by accidental means by an adult household member
or stalking of a child. Discipline, including spanking, administered in a
reasonable manner shall not be construed to be abuse.
ADULT — Any person eighteen (18) years of age or older or otherwise
emancipated.
ADULT HOUSEHOLD MEMBER — Any person eighteen (18) years of age
or older, or an emancipated child, who resides with a child in the same
dwelling unit.
CHILD — Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
COURT — The Circuit or Associate Circuit Judge or a family Court
Commissioner;
DOMESTIC OR FAMILY VIOLENCE — Occurs when a family or household
member commits one (1) or more of the following against another family
or household member: assault; theft, destruction, damage or vandalism
of property; peace disturbance; trespass; domestic stalking, as defined
in this Article; domestic harassment, as defined in this Article; domestic
tampering, as defined in this Article or violation of an order of protection;
provided however, that acts of self-defense are not included.
EX PARTE ORDER OF PROTECTION — An order of protection issued by
a court before the respondent has received notice of the petition or an
opportunity to be heard on it.
FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBERS — Include:
FULL ORDER OF PROTECTION — An order of protection issued after a
hearing on the record where the respondent has received notice of the
proceedings and has had an opportunity to be heard.
ORDER OF PROTECTION — Either an ex parte order of protection or a full
order of protection.
1. Persons who are current or former spouses;
2. Persons who live together or who have lived together;
3. Persons who are dating or who have dated;
Persons who are or have been in a continuing social relationship of a
romantic nature or who are engaged in or who have engaged in a sexual
relationship;
4.
5. Persons who are related by blood or adoption;
6. Persons who are related or formerly related by marriage;
7. Persons who have a child in common.
Section
215.695
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.695
AO:250
PETITIONER — A family or household member or a person who has been
the victim of domestic violence who has filed a verified petition under the
provisions of Chapter 455, RSMo.
RESPONDENT — The family or household member or person alleged to
have committed an act of domestic violence, against whom a verified
petition has been filed under the provisions of Chapter 455, RSMo.
STALKING — When an adult purposely and repeatedly engages in an
unwanted course of conduct with regard to a child that causes another
adult to believe that a child would suffer alarm by the conduct or when an
adult purposely and repeatedly engages in an unwanted course of conduct
that causes another alarm to another person when it is reasonable in that
person's situation to have been alarmed by the conduct. As used in this
Subdivision:
Section 215.700. Prohibited Conduct With Regard To Ex Parte or
Full Orders of Protection [Ord. No. 5867 §§1—2, 3-22-2005]
Section 215.705. Reports of Domestic or Family Violence or
Violation of Orders of Protection and Arrest Therefor [Ord. No.
5867 §§1—2, 3-22-2005]
COURSE OF CONDUCT — A pattern of conduct composed of repeated
acts over a period of time, however short, that serves no legitimate
purpose. Such conduct may include, but is not limited to, following the
other person or unwanted communication or unwanted contact.
1.
REPEATED — Two (2) or more incidents evidencing a continuity of
purpose.
2.
3. ALARM — To cause fear of danger or physical harm.
A. Violation of the terms and conditions of an ex parte order of protection
of which the respondent has notice, with regard to abuse, stalking,
child custody, communication initiated by the respondent or entrance
upon the premises of the petitioner's dwelling unit, is hereby
prohibited.
B. Violation of the terms and conditions of a full order of protection, with
regard to abuse, stalking, child custody, communication initiated by the
respondent or entrance upon the premises of the petitioner's dwelling
unit, is hereby prohibited.
C. Violation of the terms and conditions of an ex parte order of protection
of which the respondent has notice for a child, with regard to abuse,
child custody or entrance upon the premises of the victim's dwelling
unit, is hereby prohibited.
D. Violation of the terms and conditions of a full order of protection for a
child, regarding abuse, child custody or entrance upon the premises of
the petitioner's dwelling unit, is hereby prohibited.
Section
215.695
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.705
AO:251
A. When a Law Enforcement Officer has probable cause to believe a party
has committed a violation of law amounting to an offense involving
domestic violence against a family or household member, the officer
may arrest the offending party whether or not the violation occurred in
the presence of the arresting officer.
B. When an officer declines to make arrest pursuant to this Section, the
officer shall make a written report of the incident completely describing
the offending party, giving the victim's name, time, address, reason why
no arrest was made and any other pertinent information.
C. Any Law Enforcement Officer subsequently called to the same address
within a twelve (12) hour period, who shall find probable cause to
believe the same offender has again committed a violation of law
amounting to an offense involving domestic violence against a family or
household member against the same or any other family or household
member, shall arrest the offending party for this subsequent offense.
The primary report of non-arrest in the preceding twelve (12) hour
period may be considered as evidence of the defendant's intent in the
violation for which arrest occurred. The refusal of the victim to sign an
official complaint against the violator shall not prevent an arrest under
this Subsection.
D. When a Law Enforcement Officer has probable cause to believe that a
party, against whom an order of protection has been entered and who
has notice of such order being entered, has committed an act of abuse
in violation of such order, the officer shall arrest the offending partyrespondent
whether or not the violation occurred in the presence of the
arresting officer. Refusal of the victim to sign an official complaint
against the violator shall not prevent an arrest under this Subsection.
E. When an officer makes an arrest, he/she is not required to arrest two (2)
parties involved in an assault when both parties claim to have been
assaulted. The arresting officer shall attempt to identify and shall arrest
the party he/she believes is the primary physical aggressor. The term
"primary physical aggressor" is defined as the most significant, rather
than the first (1st), aggressor. The Law Enforcement Officer shall
consider any or all of the following in determining the primary physical
aggressor:
1. The intent of the law to protect victims of domestic violence from
continuing abuse;
2. The comparative extent of injuries inflicted or serious threats
creating fear of physical injury or harm;
3. The history of domestic violence between the persons involved.
F. No Law Enforcement Officer investigating an incident of domestic
violence shall threaten the arrest of all parties for the purpose of
discouraging requests of law enforcement intervention by any party.
Where complaints are received from two (2) or more opposing parties,
Section
215.705
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.705
AO:252
Section 215.710. Domestic Harassment [Ord. No. 5867 §§1—2,
3-22-2005]
Section 215.715. Domestic Stalking [Ord. No. 5867 §§1—2,
3-22-2005]
the officer shall evaluate each complaint separately to determine
whether he/she should apply for issuance of charges. No Law
Enforcement Officer shall base the decision to arrest or not to arrest on
the specific request or consent of the victim or the officer's perception
of the willingness of a victim or of a witness to the domestic or family
violence to testify or otherwise participate in a judicial proceeding.
G. In an arrest in which a Law Enforcement Officer acted in good faith
reliance on this Section, the arresting and assisting Law Enforcement
Officers and their employing entities and superiors shall be immune
from liability in any civil action alleging false arrest, false imprisonment
or malicious prosecution.
H. When a person against whom an order of protection has been entered
fails to surrender custody of minor children to the person to whom
custody was awarded in an order of protection, the Law Enforcement
Officer shall arrest the respondent and shall turn the minor children
over to the care and custody of the party to whom such care and
custody was awarded.
I. The same procedures, including those designed to protect
constitutional rights, shall be applied to the respondent as those
applied to any individual detained in Police custody.
J. Good faith attempts to effect a reconciliation of a marriage shall not be
deemed tampering with a witness or victim tampering.
K. Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted as creating a private cause
of action for damages to enforce the provisions set forth herein.
A. No person shall, for the purpose of frightening or disturbing another
family or household member:
1. Communicate in writing or by telephone a threat to commit any
felony or act of violence;
2. Make a telephone call or communicate in writing and use coarse
language offensive to one of average sensibility;
3. Make a telephone call anonymously; or
4. Make repeated telephone calls to the same person or telephone
number.
A. As used in this Section, the following terms shall mean:
Section
215.705
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.715
AO:253
Section 215.720. Domestic Tampering — Witness or Victim [Ord.
No. 5867 §§1—2, 3-22-2005]
COURSE OF CONDUCT — A pattern of conduct composed of a series
of acts, which may include electronic or other communications, over
a period of time, however short, evidencing a continuity of purpose.
Constitutionally protected activity is not included within the meaning
of "course of conduct". Such constitutionally protected activity includes
picketing or other organized protests.
CREDIBLE THREAT — A threat made with the intent to cause the
person who is the target of the threat to reasonably fear for his/her
safety. The threat must be against the life of, or a threat to cause
physical injury to, a person and may include a threat communicated
to the targeted person in writing, including electronic communications,
by telephone or by posting of a site or message that is accessible via
computer.
HARASSES — To engage in a course of conduct directed at a specific
person that serves no legitimate purpose, that would cause a
reasonable person to suffer substantial emotional distress and that
actually causes substantial emotional distress to that person.
B. Any person who purposely and repeatedly harasses or follows with the
intent of harassing another family or household member commits the
violation of stalking, which is hereby prohibited.
C. Any person who purposely and repeatedly harasses or follows with the
intent of harassing another family or household member or harasses
another family or household member and makes a credible threat with
the intent to place that person in reasonable fear of death or serious
physical injury commits the violation of aggravated stalking, which is
hereby prohibited.
A. A person commits the offense of domestic witness tampering if, with a
purpose to induce a witness who is a family or household member or a
prospective witness who is a family or household member in an official
proceeding to disobey a subpoena or other legal process or to absent
himself/herself or avoid subpoena or other legal process or to withhold
evidence, information or documents or to testify falsely, he/she:
1. Threatens or causes harm to any person or property;
2. Uses force, threats or deception;
3. Offers, confers or agrees to confer any benefit, direct or indirect,
upon such witness; or
4. Conveys any of the foregoing to another in furtherance of a
conspiracy.
B. A person commits the violation of domestic victim tampering if, with a
purpose to do so, he/she prevents or dissuades or attempts to prevent
Section
215.715
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.720
AO:254
Section 215.725. Law Enforcement Officer May Seize Weapons [Ord.
No. 5867 §§1—2, 3-22-2005]
Section 215.730. Advocate — Victim Privilege Applicable in Cases
Involving Domestic or Family Violence [Ord. No. 5867 §§1—2,
3-22-2005]
or dissuade any person who is a family or household member who has
been a victim of any ordinance violation or a person who is acting on
behalf of any such victim from:
1. Making any report of such victimization to any Peace Officer or
State, local or Federal Law Enforcement Officer or prosecuting
agency or to any judge;
2. Causing a complaint, indictment or information to be sought and
prosecuted or assisting in the prosecution thereof;
3. Arresting or causing or seeking the arrest of any person in
connection with such victimization.
A. Incident to an arrest for a crime involving domestic or family violence, a
Law Enforcement Officer:
1. May seize all weapons that are alleged to have been involved or
threatened to be used in the commission of a crime.
2. May seize a weapon that is in plain view of the officer or was
discovered pursuant to a consensual search, as necessary for the
protection of the officer or other persons.
A. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (B) below, a victim of
domestic or family violence may refuse to disclose and may prevent an
advocate from disclosing confidential oral communication between the
victim and the advocate and written records and reports concerning the
victim if the privilege is claimed by:
1. The victim; or
2. The person who was the advocate at the time of the confidential
communication, except that the advocate may not claim the
privilege if there is no victim in existence or if the privilege has
been waived by the victim.
B. The privilege does not relieve a person from any duty imposed pursuant
to State laws regarding reporting child abuse or neglect. A person may
not claim the privilege when providing evidence in proceedings
concerning child abuse or neglect pursuant to State law.
C. As used in this Section, "advocate" means an employee of or volunteer
for a program for victims of domestic or family violence who:
Section
215.720
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.730
AO:255
Section 215.735. Conditions of Probation For Perpetrator Convicted
of Crime Involving Domestic or Family Violence — Required Reports
By Probation Department [Ord. No. 5867 §§1—2, 3-22-2005]
1. Has a primary function of rendering advice, counseling or
assistance to victims of domestic or family violence; supervising the
employees or volunteers of the program; or administering the
program;
2. Works under the direction of a supervisor of the program,
supervises employees or volunteers or administers the program.
A. Before placing a perpetrator who is convicted of an offense involving
domestic or family violence on probation, the court shall consider the
safety and protection of the victim of domestic or family violence and
any member of the victim's family or household.
B. The court may condition the suspension of sentence or granting of
probation to a perpetrator on compliance with one (1) or more orders of
the court including, but not limited to:
1. Enjoining the perpetrator from threatening to commit or
committing acts of domestic or family violence against the victim or
other family or household member.
2. Prohibiting the perpetrator from harassing, annoying, telephoning,
contacting or otherwise communicating with the victim, directly or
indirectly.
3. Requiring the perpetrator to stay away from the residence, school,
place of employment or a specified place frequented regularly by
the victim and any designated family or household member.
4. Prohibiting the perpetrator from possessing or consuming alcohol
or controlled substances.
5. Prohibiting the perpetrator from using or possessing a firearm or
other specified weapon.
6. Directing the perpetrator to surrender any weapons owned or
possessed by the perpetrator.
7. Directing the perpetrator to participate in and complete, to the
satisfaction of the court, a program of intervention for
perpetrators, treatment for alcohol or substance abuse or
psychiatric or psychological treatment; and/or an evaluation for
such intervention or treatment.
8. Directing the perpetrator to pay restitution to the victim.
9. Imposing any other condition necessary to protect the victim of
domestic or family violence and any other designated family or
household member or to rehabilitate the perpetrator.
Section
215.730
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.735
AO:256
C. The perpetrator shall be responsible for the costs related to fulfilling
any condition of probation and such costs may be taxed as additional
court costs.
D. The court may establish policies and procedures for responding to
reports of non-attendance or non-compliance by a perpetrator with the
conditions of probation imposed pursuant to Subsection (B), including
requiring compliance reviews, and any violations may serve as a basis
for revoking probation.
Section
215.735
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.735
AO:257

ARTICLE XV
Stalking, Harassment and Cyber-Harassment
Section 215.740. Definitions — Determination of Location of
Offense [Ord. No. 6009 §2, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 6032 §1(17-39.1),
9-9-2008]
Section 215.745. Stalking [Ord. No. 6009 §2, 1-22-2008; Ord. No.
6032 §1(17-39.2), 9-9-2008]
A. Definitions. For the purposes of Sections 215.745 and 215.750, the
following words shall have the meanings set out herein:
COURSE OF CONDUCT — A pattern of conduct composed of two (2)
or more acts which may include communication by any means over
a period of time, however short, evidencing a continuity of purpose.
Constitutionally protected activity is not included within the meaning
of "course of conduct". Such constitutionally protected activity includes
picketing or other organized protests.
ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS — The origination, emission,
dissemination, transmission or reception of data, images, signals,
sounds or other intelligence or equivalence of intelligence of any nature
over any communications system by any method including, but not
limited to, a fiber optic, electronic, magnetic, optical, digital or analog
method. By way of example, "electronic communication" includes, but
is not limited to:
ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE — Any instrument,
equipment, machine or other device that facilitates telecommunication
including, but not limited to, a computer, computer network, computer
chip, computer circuit, scanner, telephone, cellular telephone, pager,
personal communications device, transponder, receiver, radio, modem,
or device that enables the use of a modem.
HARASSES — To engage in a course of conduct directed at a specific
person that serves no legitimate purpose that would cause a reasonable
person under the circumstances to be frightened, intimidated or
emotionally distressed.
1. Electronic mail;
2. Internet-based communications;
3. Pager service; and
4. Electronic text messaging.
B. For purposes of Sections 215.745 and 215.750, an offense alleged to
have been committed by means of a writing, by telephone, or by an
electronic communications device may be deemed to have been
committed either at the place from which the communication was made
or at the place where the communication was received.
Section
215.740
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.745
AO:259
Section 215.750. Harassment [Ord. No. 6009 §2, 1-22-2008; Ord.
No. 6032 §1(17-39.3), 9-9-2008; Ord. No. 6232 §1, 9-18-2012]
Section 215.755. Reserved67
A. A person commits the offense of stalking if he or she purposely, through
his or her course of conduct, harasses or follows with the intent of
harassing another person.
B. The offense of stalking shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable
as provided in Section 100.110 of the Municipal Code of the City of
Clayton, Missouri.
A. A person commits the offense of harassment if he/she:
1. Knowingly communicates a threat to commit any felony to another
person and in so doing, frightens, intimidates or causes emotional
distress to such other person; or
2. When communicating with another person, knowingly uses coarse
language offensive to one of average sensibility and thereby puts
such person in reasonable apprehension of offensive physical
contact or harm; or
3. Knowingly frightens, intimidates or causes emotional distress to
another person by anonymously making a telephone call or any
electronic communication; or
4. Knowingly communicates with another person who is, or who
purports to be, seventeen (17) years of age or younger and in so
doing and without good cause recklessly frightens, intimidates or
causes emotional distress to such other person; or
5. Without good cause engages in any other act with the purpose to
frighten, intimidate or cause emotional distress to another person,
cause such person to be frightened, intimidated or emotionally
distressed, and such person's response to the act is one of a person
of average sensibilities considering the age of such person.
B. The offense of harassment shall be an ordinance violation and shall be
punishable as provided in Section 100.110 of the Municipal Code of the
City of Clayton, Missouri.
67.Editor's Note—Ord. no. 6032 §1, adopted September 9, 2008, repealed sections
215.740—215.755 and enacted the new provisions set out in sections 215.740—215.750
above. Section 215.755 "cyber-harassment" was repealed and replaced with the above
provisions. Former section 215.755 derived from ord. no. 6009 §2, 1-22-08. At the editor's
discretion, this section has been reserved for the city's future use.
Section
215.745
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.755
AO:260
ARTICLE XVI
Noises
Section 215.760. Unreasonably Loud, Etc., Noises Prohibited [CC
1970 §17-61; CC 1947 §12-12]
Except as otherwise provided herein, the creation or permitting upon
premises owned or occupied by any person of any unreasonably loud,
unusual, disturbing or unnecessary noise in this City is prohibited.
Section 215.765. Enumeration of Prohibited Noises [CC 1970
§17-62; CC 1947 §12-13; Ord. No. 5093 §1, 8-23-1994; Ord. No. 5795
§1, 11-11-2003]
A. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, unusual,
disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this Code, but said
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
1. The crying or hawking of newspapers or goods, wares or
merchandise between the hours of 9:00 P.M. and 8:00 A.M.
2. The playing of any orchestra, radio, phonograph or musical
instrument or instruments or singing upon any premises while used
for a commercial open air garden, outdoor restaurant or other
business conducted in the open air where such premises are
located within five hundred (500) feet of any residence or building
used or occupied for private family residential purposes between
the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.
3. Construction activity, including, but not limited to, excavation,
demolition, alteration, maintenance or repair upon the exterior of
any structure or on any property or any such interior activity, that
creates noise that can be heard beyond the property line, except
between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. weekdays (excluding
national holidays) or at such times as are specifically permitted by
the City Manager, in writing, on a case-by-case basis taking into
consideration the nature, volume and duration of the proposed
activity, the times involved and the likelihood for disturbing the
peaceful enjoyment of other properties; provided however, that:
a. Construction activity, as described above, performed only by
an owner or occupant of residential property on Saturdays and
holidays between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. shall not
be prohibited; and
b. Construction activity performed only by an owner or occupant
of residential property on Sundays between the hours of 9:00
A.M. and 6:00 P.M. shall not be prohibited if the level of noise
created by the activity cannot be heard beyond the property
line of the residence where the work is performed.
Section
215.760
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.765
AO:261
4. The playing in the open air of tennis, badminton, horseshoes,
baseball or other outdoor game within one hundred (100) feet of
any residence or building used or occupied for private family
residential purposes between the hours of 12:00 Midnight and 8:00
A.M.
5. The sounding of any horn or other signal device on any street
vehicle for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time.
6. The use of any loudspeaker, drum or other device or instrument for
the purpose of attracting attention to a place of business or other
premises or to advertise any business.
7. The playing of any radio, phonograph or musical instrument in such
a manner or with such volume, particularly between the hours of
12:00 Midnight and 8:00 A.M., as to tend to annoy or disturb the
quiet or repose of persons in any dwelling, hotel or other type of
residence; provided, any such noise which can be distinctly heard
at a distance of more than one hundred (100) feet from its source
shall be deemed excessive.
8. The creation of any excessive or unnecessary noise within one
hundred fifty (150) feet of any portion of grounds and premises on
which is located a hospital or other institution reserved for the sick
or any church or school or other institution of learning or court or
other public building, library and the like, while the same are open
or in session which unreasonably interferes with the proper
functioning of any such place above mentioned, provided
conspicuous signs are placed in the public highways indicating
quiet zones within which such noises are prohibited. In case of
emergency or urgent necessity a permit may be issued by the City
Manager for such noises within such zones for limited periods
during the existence of such emergency.
9. The use of motor-driven outdoor maintenance equipment including
lawnmowers, trimmers, chain saws and like devices prior to 7:00
A.M. and after 8:00 P.M. weekdays and Saturdays and prior to 9:00
A.M. and after 8:00 P.M. Sundays and holidays, provided however,
that this provision shall not apply to the use of snowblowers
immediately after a snowstorm or chain saws immediately after a
storm that causes tree limbs to fall.
Section
215.765
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.765
AO:262
ARTICLE XVII
Miscellaneous Offenses
Section 215.770. Begging [CC 1970 §17-5; CC 1947 §12-9]
Any person who shall be found begging shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
Section 215.775. Vehicles — Pollution From Operation of Motor
Vehicles Prohibited [CC 1970 §17-29.1; Ord. No. 3421 §§1—3,
10-13-1970]
Section 215.780. Obstructing Public Places
A. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate or allow to
be operated within the City of Clayton any motor vehicle so as to allow
the escape therefrom of visible fumes, gases, smoke or other
particulate matter as to be detrimental to any person or to the public or
to endanger the health, comfort and safety of any such person or the
public or which would have a tendency to cause injury or damage to
property or business.
B. No person shall cause or permit the engine of a motor vehicle, other
than an emergency vehicle, to idle for longer than three (3) consecutive
minutes while stopped, unless the engine is being used to operate a
loading, unloading or processing device.
C. Any person, firm or corporation who violates the provisions of this
Section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
A. Definition. The following term shall be defined as follows:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the general public has access and
a right of resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose,
but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the
public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store,
shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public
grounds, areas or parks.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or remain idle either alone
or in consort with others in a public place in such manner so as to:
1. Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending
to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles,
traffic or pedestrians;
2. Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing
which is an obstruction or interference to the free and
uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully
conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such
Section
215.770
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.780
AO:263
Section 215.790. Park Hours [CC 1970 §18-1; Ord. No. 5754 §1,
5-13-2003]
public street, public highway, public sidewalk, or any other public
place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted
ingress, egress and regress, therein, thereon and thereto;
3. Obstruct the entrance to any business establishment, without so
doing for some lawful purpose, if contrary to the expressed wish of
the owner, lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of
the building or premises.
C. When any person causes or commits any of the conditions in this
Section, a Police Officer or any Law Enforcement Officer shall order
that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move
on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall
be guilty of a violation of this Section.
A. Public parks of the City of Clayton other than Henry Shaw Park shall be
open for use between 6:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M. each day. It shall be
unlawful for any person to enter into, remain upon or be present in any
park owned or operated by the City of Clayton other than Shaw Park
between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M. the following day;
provided however, that the City Manager or the Director of Parks and
Recreation, in writing and upon application for good cause shown, may
authorize later use of parks and park facilities in conjunction with
special events.
B. Henry Shaw Park shall be open for use between 5:00 A.M. and 11:00
P.M. each day. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter into, remain
upon or be present in Shaw Park between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and
5:00 A.M. the following day; provided however, that the City Manager
or the Director of Parks and Recreation, in writing and upon application
for good cause shown, may authorize later use of Shaw Park in
conjunction with special events.
Section
215.780
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.790
AO:264
ARTICLE XVIII
Alarm Systems
Section 215.800. Purpose — Scope of Article [Ord. No. 6063 §1,
3-24-2009]
Section 215.810. Definitions [Ord. No. 6063 §1, 3-24-2009]
As used in this Article, the following words and terms shall mean as follows:
ALARM AGENT — Any person employed by an alarm business whose duties
include altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing,
selling, servicing, responding to or causing others to respond to an alarm
device.
ALARM BUSINESS — Any business operated by a person or entity who
engages in the activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, moving,
repairing, replacing, selling, servicing or responding to an emergency alarm
system or which causes any of these activities to take place.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any mechanical or electrical device which is designed
to be activated manually or automatically upon the detection of an
unauthorized entry, intrusion or other criminal emergency in or on any
building, structure, facility or premises through the emission of a sound or
transmission of a signal or message.
ALARM USER — Any person who uses an alarm system to protect any
building, structure, facility or premises.
AUDIBLE ALARM — A local alarm located on the building, structure, facility
or premises protected and equipped with an exterior sound-producing
device, such as a gong, buzzer, siren, bell or horn.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE — That part of an alarm system which
automatically dials a specific telephone number and transmits a
prerecorded emergency message.
FALSE ALARM — Any activation of an alarm system intentionally, by
inadvertence, negligence, unintentional act or malfunction of the alarm
system to which the City of Clayton Police Department is asked to respond
when there is no unauthorized entry, intrusion or criminal emergency,
provided that the following shall not be considered false alarms:
A. The provisions of this Article are intended to address only alarms and
alarm systems used to signal the occurrence of a crime. The provisions
which follow are intended to enhance public safety by reducing or
eliminating false alarms and the assignment of Police personnel in
response thereto.
B. Alarms and alarm systems associated with fire and emergency medical
situations are addressed in other provisions of this Code of Ordinances
and remain in full force and effect.
Section
215.800
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.810
AO:265
Section 215.820. Automatic Dialing Device — Programming [Ord.
No. 6063 §1, 3-24-2009]
Automatic dialing devices shall only be programmed to dial a telephone
number at the Police Department which is authorized by the Chief of Police
and shall not be programmed to dial the Police Department emergency
number.
Section 215.830. Audible Alarm Cutoff [Ord. No. 6063 §1,
3-24-2009]
All alarm systems with an audible alarm shall be equipped with a cutoff
timer of not more than fifteen (15) minutes.
Section 215.840. Alarm Business — Operational Instruction [Ord.
No. 6063 §1, 3-24-2009]
Any alarm business or alarm agent that sells, leases or installs an alarm
system in the City of Clayton shall furnish the alarm user with written
instructions for the operation of the system. The alarm business or alarm
agent shall provide training in the operation of the system and, upon
request from the alarm user, refresher training.
Alarms caused by the malfunction of equipment located in the Clayton
Police Department or the East Central Dispatch Center.
1.
Alarms caused by an attempted illegal or unauthorized entry of which
there is visible or demonstrated evidence.
2.
Alarms caused by damage, testing or repair of the means of
transmission, provided that such incidents are promptly reported to the
company providing said means of transmission.
3.
Alarms caused by acts over which the user has no control, such as
windstorm, thunder, lightning or other similar phenomena.
4.
Alarms intentionally caused by a person acting under a reasonable
belief that a need exists to summon Police assistance.
5.
Alarms occurring on a repeated basis without apparent cause but
where reasonable effort in the judgment of the Police Chief or his
designated representative is being made by the alarm user, alarm
business, alarm agent or other concerned person to correct the
malfunction expeditiously.
6.
Alarms followed by an immediate call to the Police Department
canceling same by giving the proper code number prior to arrival of
Police personnel.
7.
Section
215.810
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.850
AO:266
Section 215.850. Alarm System — Standards [Ord. No. 6063 §1,
3-24-2009]
Alarm systems installed after the effective date of this Article shall meet or
exceed standards set by American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and/
or Underwriter Laboratories (UL) for the applicable alarm system.
Section 215.860. Alarm System — Repair Service [Ord. No. 6063 §1,
3-24-2009]
Any alarm business or alarm agent that sells, leases or installs an alarm
system within the City of Clayton must offer, either directly or through an
agency, repair service for said alarm system to maintain it in proper working
order.
Section 215.870. Alarm User Responsibilities [Ord. No. 6063 §1,
3-24-2009]
The alarm user shall be responsible for maintaining the alarm system in
good repair to assure reliability of operation.
Section 215.880. Enforcement [Ord. No. 6063 §1, 3-24-2009]
For the purpose of enforcing provisions of this Article, the Police Chief or
his designated representative shall have the authority, at reasonable times
and upon reasonable oral notice, to enter any building, structure, facility or
premises in the City of Clayton in or upon which an alarm system or alarm
business is located to inspect the installation or operation of such alarm
system or alarm business. Any alarm user may request written notice of
inspection and at any alarm user's option inspection shall be made at alarm
user's expense by a licensed electrical contractor acceptable to him and
to the City. If such inspection reveals any violation of the provision of this
Article, the alarm user or alarm business shall be granted thirty (30) days
to correct such violation.
Section 215.890. Non-Liability of City [Ord. No. 6063 §1, 3-24-2009]
The City of Clayton shall not be liable for any defects in operation of
automatic dialing devices or signal line systems for any failure or neglect to
respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm from any such source, nor
for the failure or neglect of any alarm business or alarm agent.
Section 215.900. False Alarms [Ord. No. 6063 §1, 3-24-2009]
A. An alarm, as that term is defined in this Article, is declared to be an
ordinance violation. There shall be no penalty for the first two (2) false
alarms in any twelve (12) month period or for any false alarms during
the first two (2) weeks following the installation of an alarm system.
Section
215.850
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.900
AO:267
Section 215.910. Licensing [Ord. No. 6063 §1, 3-24-2009]
Any alarm business or alarm agent installing an alarm system within the
City of Clayton shall be licensed and bonded in compliance with applicable
ordinances of St. Louis County and if required by applicable ordinances of
the City of Clayton or Statutes of the State of Missouri.
Section 215.920. Severability [Ord. No. 6063 §1, 3-24-2009]
The Sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Article are
severable and if any Section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
Article shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree
of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect
any of the remaining Sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of
this Article.
Section 215.930. Violations, Penalties [Ord. No. 6063 §1,
3-24-2009]
Any person, firm, corporation, institution or organization or representative
thereof violating any of the provisions of this Article or failing to comply
with any of the provisions of this Article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and
each day such failure to comply or such violation continues shall be deemed
a separate offense.
B. Thereafter, the penalty for false alarms shall be as follows: for the third
(3rd) or subsequent false alarm in any twelve (12) month period, the
alarm user shall be punished as provided in Section 215.930 below.
C. In lieu of prosecution, if the Police Chief determines that the false alarm
in question was primarily due to inadvertence and was not an
intentionally false summoning of Police assistance, the offender may
pay to the Director of Finance an administrative penalty of fifty dollars
($50.00) for the third (3rd) false alarm in a twelve (12) month period,
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the fourth (4th) false alarm in any
twelve (12) month period and two hundred dollars ($200.00) for any
subsequent false alarm in any twelve (12) month period.
Section
215.900
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
215.930
AO:268
Chapter 220
NUISANCES
Section
215.930
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.930
AO:269

ARTICLE I
In General
Section 220.010. General Definition [CC 1970 §13-3; Ord. No. 3726
§2, 3-11-1975]
Every act or thing done or made, permitted, allowed or continued on any
property, public or private, by any person to the annoyance, inconvenience,
detriment, damage or injury of any of the inhabitants of this City and not
specified in this Code shall be deemed a nuisance.
Section 220.020. Nuisances Affecting Health
A. The following are declared to be nuisances affecting health:
1. All decayed or unwholesome food offered for sale to the public or
offered to the public at no charge.
2. All diseased animals running at large.
3. All ponds or pools of stagnant water.
4. Carcasses of dead animals not buried or destroyed within twentyfour
(24) hours after death.
5. Accumulations, wheresoever they may occur, of manure, rubbish,
garbage, refuse and human and industrial, noxious or offensive
waste, except the normal storage on a farm of manure for
agricultural purposes.
6. Garbage cans which are not fly-tight, that is, garbage cans which
do not prevent the entry of flies, insects and rodents.
7. The pollution of any well, cistern, spring, underground water,
stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage or industrial wastes,
or other substances harmful to human beings.
8. Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders in
unreasonable quantities, or the presence of any gas, vapor, fume,
smoke, dust or any other toxic substance on, in or emitted from the
equipment of any premises in quantities sufficient to be toxic,
harmful or injurious to the health of any employee or to any
premises, occupant or to any other person.
9. Common drinking cups, roller towels, combs, brushes or eating
utensils in public or semi-public places where not properly
sanitized after use.
10. Any vehicle used for septic tank cleaning which does not meet the
requirements of this Chapter of the Code of Ordinances of the City
of Clayton.
Section
220.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.020
AO:271
11. Any vehicle used for garbage or rubbish disposal which is not
equipped with a watertight metal body and provided with a tight
metal cover or covers and so constructed as to prevent any of the
contents from leaking, spilling, falling or blowing out of such
vehicle at any time, except while being loaded, or not completely
secured and covered so as to prevent offensive odors from escaping
therefrom or exposing any part of the contents at any time.
12. Any and all infestations of flies, fleas, roaches, lice, ticks, rats,
mice, fly maggots, mosquito larvae and hookworm larvae.
13. The keeping of animals (excluding domestic fowl) in any area
within the City not zoned for agricultural uses except pet cats and
dogs, animals in public or licensed zoos, and farm animals in
laboratories. [Ord. No. 6291 §1, 9-24-2013]
14. Unlicensed dumps and licensed dumps not operated or maintained
in compliance with the ordinances of the City of Clayton and the
Statutes of the State of Missouri.
15. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into a
stormwater system any waste materials, liquids, vapor, fat,
gasoline, benzene, naphtha, oil or petroleum product, mud, straw,
lawn clippings, tree limbs or branches, metal or plastic objects,
rags, garbage or any other substance which is capable of causing
an obstruction to the flow of the storm system or interfere with the
proper operation of the system or which will pollute the natural
creeks or waterways.
16. All other acts, practices, conduct, business, occupation callings,
trades, uses of property and all other things detrimental or certain
to be detrimental to the health of the inhabitants of the City of
Clayton.
B. Unlawful To Cause, Maintain Within City Or One-Half Mile Thereof. It is
unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant or any agent, servant,
representative or employee of any such owner, lessee or occupant
having control of any occupied lot or land or any part thereof in the City
of Clayton or within one-half (½) mile of the corporate limits of the City
of Clayton, Missouri, to cause, permit or maintain a nuisance on any
such lot or land. Additionally, it is unlawful for any person or his/her
agent, servant, representative or employee to cause or maintain a
nuisance on the land or property of another with or without permission.
Each day that a nuisance shall be maintained is a separate offense.
C. Authority To Abate Emergency Cases. In cases where it reasonably
appears that there is an immediate danger to the health, safety or
welfare of the public due to the existence of a nuisance, the City shall
have authority to immediately abate the nuisance in an appropriate
manner.
Section
220.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
220.020
AO:272
D. Abatement—Procedure Generally. Whenever the Board of Aldermen
receives notification that a nuisance may exist, it shall proceed as
follows, except as may be otherwise provided herein:
1. It shall investigate the same. The Board may order any person who
has caused or is maintaining the nuisance to appear before the
Board at such time and place as the Board may direct to show
cause, if any, why that person should not abate the nuisance. Every
person required to appear before the Board shall have at least ten
(10) days' notice thereof.
2. Such notice shall be signed by the Health Officer or Chief of Police
and shall be served upon that person by delivering a copy thereof to
the person, or by leaving a copy at his/her residence with some
member of the family or household over fifteen (15) years of age, or
upon any corporation by delivering the copy thereof to the
President or to any other officer at any business office of the
corporation within the City. If the notice cannot be given for the
reason that the person named in the notice or his/her agent cannot
be found in the City, of which fact the return upon such notice of
the officer serving the same shall be conclusive evidence, such
notice shall be published in a daily newspaper for three (3)
consecutive days, if a daily, or once, if a weekly paper, giving at
least ten (10) days' notice from the final publication date of the time
fixed for the parties to appear before the Board.
3. If after hearing all the evidence the Board of Aldermen may
determine that a nuisance exists, it may direct the Health Officer or
Chief of Police or other City Official to order the person to abate the
nuisance within twenty (20) days or within such other time as the
Board may deem reasonable. Such order shall be served in the
manner provided in this Section for service of the order to show
cause. The order may further provide that the appropriate City
Official be directed to abate the nuisance if the order is not obeyed
within the time period set by the Board, and that a special tax bill
be issued for the costs of abating the nuisance.
4. If the order has not been obeyed within the time period set by the
Board, the appropriate City Official shall proceed to abate the
nuisance in the manner provided by the order of the Board, and the
cost of same, if ordered by the Board, may be assessed as a special
tax against the property so improved or upon which such work was
done; and, if so ordered, the City Clerk shall cause a special tax bill
therefor against the owner thereof when known, and if not known
then against the unknown persons, and the certified bills of such
assessment shall describe therein the property upon which the
work was done.
5. The bills for the above work shall be recorded and shall be
collected and paid as provided for the collection of other special tax
Section
220.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.020
AO:273
Section 220.030. Dead or Diseased Trees [CC 1970 §13-9; Ord. No.
3726 §2, 3-11-1975]
The maintenance, upon public or private property, of dead or dying trees or
tree limbs or branches which, by reason of their location, size or state of
deterioration, constitute a danger to the public health, safety or welfare or
the maintenance upon public or private property of trees which are infected
with contagious disease or blight, dangerous to persons, animals, other
trees or plant life is declared to be a nuisance.
Section 220.040. Responsibility of Lessor and Agent For Common
Halls, Etc., of Multiple-Occupancy Premises [CC 1970 §13-10; Ord.
No. 3726 §2, 3-11-1975]
Whenever any owner or agent shall rent, lease or hire out to be occupied
any building or part thereof as a home or residence or more than two
(2) families living independently of each other or any building to different
persons for stores or offices in said building giving to each family or person
the common right to halls, basements, yards, toilets or urinals or any of
them, such owner or agent shall be liable for the condition of such halls,
basements, yards, toilets or urinals or any of them and said owner or agent,
the same as the occupant of premises may be charged with the violation of
any provision of this Article.
bills for the repairing of sidewalks or grading or paving of streets
and shall be a lien on the property.
6. The cost of abating nuisances on private property shall be levied
and assessed on each lot in proportion to the amount of work done
and material used in abating the nuisance located on each such lot.
Section
220.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
220.040
AO:274
ARTICLE II
Weeds and Other Vegetation
Section 220.050. Debris On Property — Effect of Failure To Remove
Nuisance — Penalties
A. Any lot or land shall be a public nuisance if it has the presence of debris
of any kind including, but not limited to, weed cuttings, cut and fallen
trees and shrubs, overgrown vegetation and noxious weeds which are
seven (7) inches or more in height, rubbish and trash, lumber not piled
or stacked twelve (12) inches off the ground, rocks or bricks, tin, steel,
parts of derelict cars or trucks, broken furniture, any flammable
material which may endanger public safety or any material which is
unhealthy or unsafe and declared to be a public nuisance.
B. When a public nuisance as described above exists, the Building Official
shall so declare and give written notice to the owner of the property by
personal service, certified mail, if otherwise unsuccessful, by
publication. Such notice shall, at a minimum:
1. Declare that a public nuisance exists;
2. Describe the condition which constitute such nuisance;
3. Order the removal or abatement of such condition within seven
days from the date of service of such notice;
4. Inform the owner that he or she may file a written request for a
hearing before the Building Official on the question of whether a
nuisance exists upon such property; and
5. State that if the owner fails to begin removing the nuisance within
time allowed, or upon failure to pursue the removal of such
nuisance without unnecessary delay, the Building Official shall
cause the condition which constitutes the nuisance to be removed
or abated and that the cost of such removal or abatement may be
included in a special tax bill or added to the annual real estate tax
bill for the property and collected in the same manner and
procedure for collecting real estate taxes.
C. If the owner of such property fails to begin removing the nuisance
within the time allowed, or upon failure to pursue the removal of such
nuisance without unnecessary delay, the Building Official shall cause
the condition which constitutes the nuisance to be removed. If the
Building Official causes such condition to be removed or abated, the
cost of such removal shall be certified to the Director of Finance who
shall cause the certified cost to be included in a special tax bill or added
to the annual real estate tax bill, at the collecting official's option, for
the property and the certified cost shall be collected by the City
Collector or other official collecting taxes in the same manner and
procedure for collecting real estate taxes. If the certified cost is not
paid, the tax bill shall be considered delinquent, and the collection of
Section
220.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.050
AO:275
the delinquent bill shall be governed by the laws governing delinquent
and back taxes. The tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be
deemed a personal debt against the owner and shall also be a lien on
the property until paid.
Section
220.050
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
220.050
AO:276
Chapter 223
ABANDONED PROPERTY
Cross References — As to maximum charges for towing and storage,
§375.050; as to sale of abandoned property by city, §375.060; as to crime
inquiry and inspection reports required by state law, §375.040.
Section 223.010. Definitions68
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set out
herein:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Any unattended or unlicensed motor vehicle,
trailer, all-terrain vehicle, outboard motor or vessel removed or subject
to removal from public or private property as provided in this Chapter,
whether or not operational. For any vehicle towed from the scene of an
accident at the request of law enforcement and not retrieved by the
vehicle's owner within five (5) days of the accident, the agency requesting
the tow shall be required to write an abandoned property report or a
criminal inquiry and inspection report.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation or other legal entity.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The entire width of land between the boundary lines of a
public road or State highway, including any roadway.
ROADWAY — That portion of a public road or State highway ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
TOWING COMPANY — Any person or entity which tows, removes or stores
abandoned property.
Section 223.020. Abandoned Vehicles or Trailers Prohibited69
No person shall abandon any motor vehicle or trailer on any private real
property owned by another without his/her consent.
Section 223.030. Open Storage of Inoperable Vehicles or Public
Safety Hazards Prohibited70
The open storage of inoperable or unlicensed vehicles or other vehicles
deemed by the City to constitute a public safety hazard is prohibited.
Nothing in this Section shall apply to a vehicle which is completely enclosed
within a locked building or locked fenced area and not visible from adjacent
public or private property, nor to any vehicle upon the property of a
business licensed as salvage, swap, junk dealer, towing or storage facility so
long as the business is operated in compliance with its business license and
the property is in compliance with applicable zoning ordinances.
68.State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §304.001, RSMo.
69.State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §577.080, RSMo.
70.State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §304.159, RSMo.
Section
220.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
223.040
AO:277
Section 223.040. Towing of Abandoned Property On Private Real
Property71
A. Generally. The City, including the City Police Department, may tow
motor vehicles from real property which are deemed a public safety
hazard pursuant to Section 223.030 or are derelict, junk, scrapped,
disassembled or otherwise harmful to the public health. The City shall
perform such tow pursuant to the terms of Section 223.050. When a
City agency other than the Police Department authorizes a tow under
this Subsection, it shall report the tow to the Police Department within
two (2) hours with a crime inquiry and inspection report.
B. Towing Authorized By City Police Department. If a person abandons
property on any real property owned by another without the consent of
the owner or person in possession of the real property, at the request of
the person in possession of the real property, any City Police Officer
may authorize a towing company to remove such abandoned property
from the property in the following circumstances:
1. The abandoned property is left unattended for more than fortyeight
(48) hours; or
2. In the judgment of a Police Officer, the abandoned property
constitutes a safety hazard or unreasonably interferes with the use
of the real property by the person in possession.
C. Towing Authorized By Real Property Owner, Lessee Or Property Or
Security Manager.
1. The owner of real property or lessee in lawful possession of the real
property or the property or security manager of the real property
may authorize a towing company to remove abandoned property or
property parked in a restricted or assigned area without
authorization by a Law Enforcement Officer only when the owner,
lessee or property or security manager of the real property is
present. A property or security manager must be a full-time
employee of a business entity. An authorization to tow pursuant to
this Subsection may be made only under any of the following
circumstances:
a. Sign. There is displayed, in plain view at all entrances to the
property, a sign not less than seventeen (17) by twenty-two
(22) inches in size, with lettering not less than one (1) inch in
height, prohibiting public parking and indicating that
unauthorized abandoned property or property parked in a
restricted or assigned area will be removed at the owner's
expense, disclosing the maximum fee for all charges related to
towing and storage, and containing the telephone number of
the local traffic law enforcement agency where information can
71.State Law References—For similar provisions, §§304.157.1—2, 304.157.4—9, 304.158.2—4,
304.158.8—9, RSMo. (2004)
Section
223.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
223.040
AO:278
be obtained or a twenty-four (24) hour staffed emergency
information telephone number by which the owner of the
abandoned property or property parked in a restricted or
assigned area may call to receive information regarding the
location of such owner's property.
b. Unattended on owner-occupied residential property. The
abandoned property is left unattended on owner-occupied
residential property with four (4) residential units or less and
the owner, lessee or agent of the real property in lawful
possession has notified the City Police Department, and ten
(10) hours have elapsed since that notification.
c. Unattended on other private real property. The abandoned
property is left unattended on private real property and the
owner, lessee or agent of the real property in lawful possession
of real property has notified the City Police Department, and
ninety-six (96) hours have elapsed since that notification.
2. Pursuant to this Section, any owner or lessee in lawful possession
of real property that requests a towing company to tow abandoned
property without authorization from a City Police Officer shall at
that time complete an abandoned property report which shall be
considered a legal declaration subject to criminal penalty pursuant
to Section 575.060, RSMo. The report shall be in the form
designed, printed and distributed by the Missouri Director of
Revenue and shall contain the following:
a. The year, model, make and abandoned property identification
number of the property, and the owner and any lienholders, if
known;
b. A description of any damage to the abandoned property noted
by owner, lessee or property or security manager in possession
of the real property;
c. The license plate or registration number and the State of
issuance, if available;
d. The physical location of the property and the reason for
requesting the property to be towed;
e. The date the report is completed;
f. The printed name, address and telephone number of the
owner, lessee or property or security manager in possession of
the real property;
g. The towing company's name and address;
h. The signature of the towing operator;
Section
223.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
223.040
AO:279
i. The signature of the owner, lessee or property or security
manager attesting to the facts that the property has been
abandoned for the time required by this Section and that all
statements on the report are true and correct to the best of the
person's knowledge and belief and that the person is subject to
the penalties for making false statements;
j. Space for the name of the law enforcement agency notified of
the towing of the abandoned property and for the signature of
the Law Enforcement Official receiving the report; and
k. Any additional information the Missouri Director of Revenue
deems appropriate.
3. Any towing company which tows abandoned property without
authorization from the City Police Department pursuant to
Subsection (B) of this Section shall deliver a copy of the abandoned
property report to the City Police Department. The copy may be
produced and sent by facsimile machine or other device which
produces a near exact likeness of the print and signatures required,
but only if the City Police Department has the technological
capability of receiving such copy and has registered the towing
company for such purpose. The report shall be delivered within two
(2) hours if the tow was made from a signed location pursuant to
Subsection (C)(1)(a) of this Section, otherwise the report shall be
delivered within twenty-four (24) hours.
4. The City Police Department, after receiving such abandoned
property report, shall record the date on which the abandoned
property report is filed with the Police Department and shall
promptly make an inquiry into the National Crime Information
Center (NCIC) and any statewide Missouri law enforcement
computer system to determine if the abandoned property has been
reported as stolen. The Police Department shall enter the
information pertaining to the towed property into the statewide law
enforcement computer system and a Police Officer shall sign the
abandoned property report and provide the towing company with a
signed copy.
5. The City Police Department, after receiving notification that
abandoned property has been towed by a towing company, shall
search the records of the Missouri Department of Revenue and
provide the towing company with the latest owner and lienholder
information on the abandoned property, and if the tower has online
access to the Department of Revenue's records, the tower shall
comply with the requirements of Section 304.155, RSMo. If the
abandoned property is not claimed within ten (10) working days,
the towing company shall send a copy of the abandoned property
report signed by a Law Enforcement Officer to the Department of
Revenue.
Section
223.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
223.040
AO:280
6. No owner, lessee or property or security manager of real property
shall knowingly authorize the removal of abandoned property in
violation of this Section.
7. Any owner of any private real property causing the removal of
abandoned property from that real property shall state the grounds
for the removal of the abandoned property if requested by the
registered owner of that abandoned property. Any towing company
that lawfully removes abandoned property from private property
with the written authorization of the property owner or the
property owner's agent who is present at the time of removal shall
not be held responsible in any situation relating to the validity of
the removal. Any towing company that removes abandoned
property at the direction of the landowner shall be responsible for:
a. Any damage caused by the towing company to the property in
the transit and subsequent storage of the property; and
b. The removal of property other than the property specified by
the owner of the private real property from which the
abandoned property was removed.
D. Damage To Property. The owner of abandoned property removed from
private real property may recover for any damage to the property
resulting from any act of any person causing the removal of, or
removing, the abandoned property.
E. Real Property Owner Liability. Any owner of any private real property
causing the removal of abandoned property parked on that property is
liable to the owner of the abandoned property for double the storage or
towing charges whenever there has been a failure to comply with the
requirements of this Chapter.
F. Written Authorization Required—Delegation Of Authority To Tow.
1. Except for the removal of abandoned property authorized by the
City Police Department pursuant to this Section, a towing company
shall not remove or commence the removal of abandoned property
from private real property without first obtaining written
authorization from the real property owner. All written
authorizations shall be maintained for at least one (1) year by the
towing company.
2. General authorization to remove or commence removal of
abandoned property at the towing company's discretion shall not
be delegated to a towing company or its affiliates except in the case
of abandoned property unlawfully parked within fifteen (15) feet of
a fire hydrant or in a fire lane designated by a Fire Department or
the State Fire Marshal.
G. Towing Company Liability. Any towing company, or any affiliate of a
towing company, which removes, or commences removal of, abandoned
Section
223.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
223.040
AO:281
Section 223.050. General Provisions and Procedures72
property from private property without first obtaining written
authorization from the property owner or lessee, or any employee or
agent thereof, who is present at the time of removal or commencement
of the removal, except as permitted in Subsection (F) of this Section,
is liable to the owner of the property for four (4) times the amount of
the towing and storage charges, in addition to any applicable ordinance
violation penalty, for a violation of this Section.
A. Payment Of Charges. The owner of abandoned property removed as
provided in this Chapter shall be responsible for payment of all
reasonable charges for towing and storage of such abandoned property
as provided in Section 375.050.
B. Crime Inquiry And Inspection Report. As to Crime Inquiry and
Inspection Reports required by State Law, see Chapter 375 of this
Code, Section 375.040.
C. Reclaiming Property. The owner of such abandoned property, or the
holder of a valid security interest of record, may reclaim it from the
towing company upon proof of ownership or valid security interest of
record and payment of all reasonable charges for the towing and
storage of the abandoned property.
D. Lienholder Repossession. If a lienholder repossesses any motor vehicle,
trailer, all-terrain vehicle, outboard motor or vessel without the
knowledge or cooperation of the owner, then the repossessor shall
notify the City Police Department within two (2) hours of the
repossession and shall further provide the Police Department with any
additional information the Police Department deems appropriate. The
City Police Department shall make an inquiry with the National Crime
Information Center and the Missouri statewide law enforcement
computer system and shall enter the repossessed vehicle into the
statewide law enforcement computer system.
E. Notice To Owner/Tow Lien Claim. Any towing company which comes
into possession of abandoned property pursuant to this Chapter and
who claims a lien for recovering, towing or storing abandoned property
shall give notice to the title owner and to all persons claiming a lien
thereon, as disclosed by the records of the Missouri Department of
Revenue or of a corresponding agency in any other State. The towing
company shall notify the owner and any lienholder within ten (10)
business days of the date of mailing indicated on the notice sent by the
Missouri Department of Revenue pursuant to Section 304.156, RSMo.,
by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall contain the
following:
72.State Law References—For similar provisions, §§304.155.5—6(2004),
304.155.11—12(2004), 304.158.1, 304.158.5, 304.158.7, RSMo.
Section
223.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
223.050
AO:282
1. The name, address and telephone number of the storage facility;
2. The date, reason and place from which the abandoned property
was removed;
3. A statement that the amount of the accrued towing, storage and
administrative costs are the responsibility of the owner, and that
storage and/or administrative costs will continue to accrue as a
legal liability of the owner until the abandoned property is
redeemed;
4. A statement that the storage firm claims a possessory lien for all
such charges;
5. A statement that the owner or holder of a valid security interest of
record may retake possession of the abandoned property at any
time during business hours by proving ownership or rights to a
secured interest and paying all towing and storage charges;
6. A statement that, should the owner consider that the towing or
removal was improper or not legally justified, the owner has a right
to request a hearing as provided in this Section to contest the
propriety of such towing or removal;
7. A statement that if the abandoned property remains unclaimed for
thirty (30) days from the date of mailing the notice, title to the
abandoned property will be transferred to the person or firm in
possession of the abandoned property free of all prior liens; and
8. A statement that any charges in excess of the value of the
abandoned property at the time of such transfer shall remain a
liability of the owner.
F. Physical Search Of Property. In the event that the Missouri Department
of Revenue notifies the towing company that the records of the
Department of Revenue fail to disclose the name of the owner or any
lienholder of record, the towing company shall attempt to locate
documents or other evidence of ownership on or within the abandoned
property itself. The towing company must certify that a physical search
of the abandoned property disclosed no ownership documents were
found and a good faith effort has been made. For purposes of this
Section, "good faith effort" means that the following checks have been
performed by the company to establish the prior State of registration
and title:
1. Check of the abandoned property for any type of license plates,
license plate record, temporary permit, inspection sticker, decal or
other evidence which may indicate a State of possible registration
and title;
Section
223.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
223.050
AO:283
2. Check the law enforcement report for a license plate number or
registration number if the abandoned property was towed at the
request of a law enforcement agency;
3. Check the tow ticket/report of the tow truck operator to see if a
license plate was on the abandoned property at the beginning of
the tow, if a private tow; and
4. If there is no address of the owner on the impound report, check
the law enforcement report to see if an out-of-state address is
indicated on the driver license information.
G. Petition In Circuit Court. The owner of the abandoned property
removed pursuant to this Chapter or any person claiming a lien, other
than the towing company, within ten (10) days after the receipt of
notification from the towing company pursuant to Subsection (E) of this
Section may file a petition in the Associate Circuit Court in the County
where the abandoned property is stored to determine if the abandoned
property was wrongfully taken or withheld from the owner. The petition
shall name the towing company among the defendants. The petition
may also name the agency ordering the tow or the owner, lessee or
agent of the real property from which the abandoned property was
removed. The Missouri Director of Revenue shall not be a party to such
petition but a copy of the petition shall be served on the Director of
Revenue.
H. Notice To Owner. Notice as to the removal of any abandoned property
pursuant to this Chapter shall be made in writing within five (5)
working days to the registered owner and any lienholder of the fact of
the removal, the grounds for the removal, and the place to which the
property has been removed by either:
1. The public agency authorizing the removal; or
2. The towing company, where authorization was made by an owner
or lessee of real property.
If the abandoned property is stored in any storage facility,
a copy of the notice shall be given to the operator of the
facility. The notice provided for in this Section shall include
the amount of mileage if available shown on the abandoned
property at the time of removal.
I. Tow Truck Requirements. Any towing company which tows abandoned
property for hire shall have the towing company's name, City and State
clearly printed in letters at least three (3) inches in height on the sides
of the truck, wrecker or other vehicle used in the towing.
J. Storage Facilities. Persons operating or in charge of any storage facility
where the abandoned property is stored pursuant to this Chapter shall
accept cash for payment of towing and storage by a registered owner or
the owner's agent claiming the abandoned property.
Section
223.050
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
223.050
AO:284
Chapter 225
HUMAN RIGHTS
K. Disposition Of Towed Property. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Section 301.227, RSMo., any towing company who has complied with
the notification provisions in Section 304.156, RSMo., including notice
that any property remaining unredeemed after thirty (30) days may be
sold as scrap property may then dispose of such property as provided in
this Subsection. Such sale shall only occur if at least thirty (30) days has
passed since the date of such notification, the abandoned property
remains unredeemed with no satisfactory arrangements made with the
towing company for continued storage, and the owner or holder of a
security agreement has not requested a hearing as provided in Section
304.156, RSMo. The towing company may dispose of such abandoned
property by selling the property on a bill of sale as prescribed by the
Director of Revenue to a scrap metal operator or licensed salvage
dealer for destruction purposes only. The towing company shall forward
a copy of the bill of sale provided by the scrap metal operator or
licensed salvage dealer to the Director of Revenue within two (2) weeks
of the date of such sale. The towing company shall keep a record of
each such vehicle sold for destruction for three (3) years that shall be
available for inspection by law enforcement and authorized Department
of Revenue officials. The record shall contain the year, make,
identification number of the property, date of sale, and name of the
purchasing scrap metal operator or licensed salvage dealer and copies
of all notifications issued by the towing company as required in this
Chapter. Scrap metal operators or licensed salvage dealers shall keep a
record of the purchase of such property as provided in Section 301.227,
RSMo. Scrap metal operators and licensed salvage dealers may obtain a
junk certificate as provided in Section 301.227, RSMo., on vehicles
purchased on a bill of sale pursuant to the Section.
Section
223.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
223.050
AO:285

ARTICLE I
In General
Section 225.010. Purposes of Chapter [Ord. No. 6173 §1,
11-22-2011; Ord. No. 6608, 8-13-2019]
Section 225.020. Definitions [Ord. No. 6173 §1, 11-22-2011]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall be deemed to
have the meanings indicated below:
COMMISSION — The Missouri Commission on Human Rights.
COMPLAINANT — A person who has filed a complaint with the Commission
alleging that another person has engaged in a prohibited discriminatory
practice.
DISABILITY — A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits
one (1) or more of a person's major life activities, being regarded as having
such an impairment, or a record of having such an impairment, which with
or without reasonable accommodation does not interfere with performing
the job, utilizing the place of public accommodation, or occupying the
dwelling in question. For purposes of this Chapter, the term "disability" does
not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as
such term is defined by Section 195.010, RSMo.; however, a person may be
considered to have a disability if that person:
A. The purposes of this Chapter are:
1. To secure for all individuals within the City freedom from any
discriminatory practice made unlawful by Article II of this Chapter.
2. To implement within the City the policies embodied in Missouri and
Federal human rights legislation and to promote cooperation
between the City and the State and Federal agencies enforcing that
legislation.
3. To provide a City Commission on Human Rights which is dedicated
to the elimination of discriminatory practices made unlawful by
Article II of this Chapter.
Has successfully completed a supervised drug rehabilitation program
and is no longer engaging in the illegal use of, and is not currently
addicted to, a controlled substance or has otherwise been rehabilitated
successfully and is no longer engaging in such use and is not currently
addicted;
1.
Is participating in a supervised rehabilitation program and is no longer
engaging in illegal use of controlled substances; or
2.
Is erroneously regarded as currently illegally using, or being addicted
to, a controlled substance.
3.
Section
225.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
225.020
AO:287
DISCRIMINATION — Any unfair treatment based on race, color, religion,
national origin, ancestry, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, age as it
relates to employment, disability or familial status as it relates to housing.
DWELLING — Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied
as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one (1) or
more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion
thereof.
FAMILIAL STATUS — One (1) or more individuals who have not attained the
age of eighteen (18) years being domiciled with:
GENDER IDENTITY — The gender-related identity, appearance,
mannerisms or other gender-related characteristics of an individual, with or
without regard to the individual's designated sex at birth.
HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS — Housing:
1. A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual; or
The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with
the written permission of such parent or other person.
The protection afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial
status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of
securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age
of eighteen (18) years.
2.
Provided under any State or Federal program that the Commission
determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly
persons, as defined in the State or Federal program;
1.
Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons sixty-two (62) years of age
or older; or
2.
Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one (1) person fiftyfive
(55) years of age or older per unit.
Housing qualifies as housing for older persons under this Chapter if:
1. The housing has significant facilities and services specifically
designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons, or
if the provision of such facilities and services is not practicable,
that such housing is necessary to provide important housing
opportunities for older persons;
2. At least eighty percent (80%) of the units are occupied by at least
one (1) person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit; and
3. The owner or manager of the housing has published and adhered to
policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by said owner
or manager to provide housing for persons fifty-five (55) years of
age or older.
3.
Section
225.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
225.020
AO:288
PERSON — Includes one (1) or more individuals, corporations,
partnerships, associations, organizations, labor organizations, legal
representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, trustees,
trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries or other organized groups of
persons.
PLACES OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION — All places or businesses
offering or holding out to the general public goods, services, privileges,
facilities, advantages or accommodations for the peace, comfort, health,
welfare and safety of the general public or such public places providing
food, shelter, recreation and amusement including, but not limited to:
RENT — Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for
consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
RESPONDENT — A person who is alleged to have engaged in a prohibited
discriminatory practice in a complaint filed with the Commission.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION — An individual's real or perceived heterosexuality,
homosexuality or bisexuality.
SOURCE OF INCOME — The point or form of the origination of legal
gains of income accruing to a person in a stated period of time; from
any occupation, profession or activity, from any contract, agreement or
settlement, from Federal, State or local payments, including Section 8 or
any other rent subsidy or rent assistance program, from court ordered
Any inn, hotel, motel or other establishment which provides lodging to
transient guests, other than an establishment located within a building
which contains not more than five (5) rooms for rent or hire and which
is actually occupied by the proprietor of such establishment as his/her
residence;
1.
Any restaurant, cafeteria, lunchroom, lunch counter, soda fountain or
other facility principally engaged in selling food for consumption on the
premises including, but not limited to, any such facility located on the
premises of any retail establishment;
2.
Any gasoline station, including all facilities located on the premises of
such gasoline station and made available to the patrons thereof;
3.
Any motion picture house, theater, concert hall, sports arena, stadium
or other place of exhibition or entertainment;
4.
Any public facility owned, operated or managed by or on behalf of this
State or any agency or subdivision thereof, or any public corporation;
and any such facility supported in whole or in part by public funds; or
5.
Any establishment which is physically located within the premises of
any establishment otherwise covered by this Section or within the
premises of which is physically located any such covered establishment,
and which holds itself out as serving patrons of such covered
establishment.
6.
Section
225.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
225.020
AO:289
payments or from payments received as gifts, bequests, annuities or life
insurance policies.[Ord. No. 6608, 8-13-2019]
UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE — Any act that is unlawful
under this Chapter.
Section
225.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
225.020
AO:290
ARTICLE II
Discriminatory Practices
Section 225.030. Unlawful Housing Practices [Ord. No. 6173 §1,
11-22-2011; Ord. No. 6608, 8-13-2019]
A. It shall be an unlawful housing practice:
1. To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, to deny or otherwise
make unavailable a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, gender identity, sexual
orientation, disability or familial status.
2. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, gender identity, sexual
orientation, disability, lawful source of income or familial status.
3. To make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published
any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, national origin,
ancestry, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, disability, lawful
source of income or familial status, or an intention to make any
such preference, limitation or discrimination.
4. To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national
origin, ancestry, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, disability,
lawful source of income or familial status that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact
so available.
5. To induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any
dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective
entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular
race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, gender identity,
sexual orientation, disability, lawful source of income or familial
status.
6. To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a
disability of:
a. That buyer or renter;
b. A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
c. Any person associated with that buyer or renter.
Section
225.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
225.030
AO:291
7. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a
disability of:
a. That person;
b. A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
c. Any person associated with that person.
B. For purposes of Sections 225.030, 225.040 and 225.050, discrimination
includes:
1. A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person with the disability,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be
occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to
afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in
the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do
so, condition permission for a modification on the renter's agreeing
to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed
before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted.
2. A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices or services when such accommodations may be necessary
to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling.
3. In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily
dwellings for first (1st) occupancy after March 13, 1991, a
failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a manner
that:
a. The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are
readily accessible to and usable by persons with a disability.
b. All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow
passage by persons with a disability in wheelchairs.
c. All premises within such dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
(1) An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
(2) Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other
environmental controls in accessible locations;
(3) Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later
installation of grab bars; and
(4) Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
Section
225.030
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
225.030
AO:292
Section 225.040. Discrimination in Commercial Real Estate Loans
[Ord. No. 6173 §1, 11-22-2011]
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance
company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose
business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate
loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance because of race, color,
religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation,
disability or familial status to a person applying therefor for the purpose of
purchasing, construction, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling,
or to discriminate against him/her in fixing of the amount, interest rate,
duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial
assistance because of the race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry,
sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, disability or familial status of such
person or of any person associated with him/her in connection with such
loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners,
lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwellings in relation to which such loan
or other financial assistance is to be made or given.
Section 225.050. Discrimination in Selling or Renting By Real
Estate Agencies Prohibited [Ord. No. 6173 §1, 11-22-2011; Ord. No.
6608, 8-13-2019]
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers'
organization or other service organization or facility relating to the business
of selling or renting dwellings on account of race, color, religion, national
origin, ancestry, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, disability, lawful
source of income or familial status.
Section 225.060. Discrimination in Public Accommodations
Prohibited — Exceptions [Ord. No. 6173 §1, 11-22-2011]
C. As used in Subdivision (3) of Subsection (B) of this Section, the term
"covered multi-family dwelling" means:
1. Buildings consisting of four (4) or more units if such buildings have
one (1) or more elevators; and
2. Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four (4) or more
units.
D. Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American
National Standard for Buildings and Facilities providing accessibility
and usability for people with physical disabilities, commonly cited as
"ANSI A117.1," suffices to satisfy the requirements of Subsection
(B)(3)(a) of this Section.
A. All persons within the City of Clayton are free and equal and shall be
entitled to the full and equal use and enjoyment within this City of any
place of public accommodation, as hereinafter defined, without
Section
225.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
225.060
AO:293
Section 225.070. Additional Unlawful Discriminatory Practices
[Ord. No. 6173 §1, 11-22-2011; Ord. No. 6608, 8-13-2019]
Section 225.080. Exemptions [Ord. No. 6173 §1, 11-22-2011]
discrimination or segregation on the grounds of race, color, religion,
national origin, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, ancestry or
disability.
B. It is an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person, directly or
indirectly, to refuse, withhold from or deny any other person or to
attempt to refuse, withhold from or deny any other person any of the
accommodations, advantages, facilities, services or privileges made
available in any place of public accommodation, as defined in Section
225.020 and this Section, or to segregate or discriminate against any
such person in the use thereof on the grounds of race, color, religion,
national origin, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, ancestry or
disability.
C. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to a private club, a place of
accommodation owned by or operated on behalf of a religious
corporation, association or society or other establishment which is not
in fact open to the public, unless the facilities of such establishments
are made available to the customers or patrons of a place of public
accommodation as defined in Section 225.020 and this Section.
A. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice:
1. To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the commission of acts
prohibited under this Chapter or to attempt to do so;
2. To retaliate or discriminate in any manner against any other person
because such person has opposed any practice prohibited by this
Chapter or because such person has filed a complaint, testified,
assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation,
proceeding or hearing conducted pursuant to this Chapter;
3. For the City to discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion,
national origin, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, ancestry,
age, as it relates to employment, disability, lawful source of income
or familial status as it relates to housing; or
4. To discriminate in any manner against any other person because of
such person's association with any person protected by this
Chapter.
A. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to invalidate or limit any law
of the State or of the City that requires dwellings to be designed and
constructed in a manner that affords persons with disabilities greater
access than is required by this Chapter.
B. Nothing in Sections 225.030, 225.040 and 225.050:
Section
225.060
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
225.080
AO:294
1. Requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose
tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of
other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others.
2. Limits the applicability of any reasonable local restriction
regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy
a dwelling, nor does any provision of said Sections regarding
familial status apply with respect to housing for older persons.
3. Shall prohibit conduct against a person because such person has
been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal
manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance, as defined
by Section 195.010, RSMo.
C. Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association or society or any non-profit institution or organization
operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious
organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental or
occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving
preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is
restricted on account of race, color or national origin. Nor shall
anything in this Chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the
public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes
provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial
purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its
members or from giving preference to its members.
D. Nothing in this Chapter, other than the prohibitions against
discriminatory advertising in Subsection (A)(3) of Section 225.030,
shall apply to:
1. The sale or rental of any single-family house by a private individual
owner, provided the following conditions are met:
a. The private individual owner does not own or have any interest
in more than three (3) single-family houses at any one time;
and
b. The house is sold or rented without the use of a real estate
broker, agent or salesperson or the facilities of any person in
the business of selling or renting dwellings and without
publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement. If the
owner selling the house does not reside in it at the time of the
sale or was not the most recent resident of the house prior to
such sale, the exemption in this Section applies to only one (1)
such sale in any twenty-four (24) month period.
2. Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living
Section
225.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
225.080
AO:295
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and
occupies one (1) of such living quarters as his/her residence.
Section
225.080
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
225.080
AO:296
ARTICLE III
Miscellaneous Provisions
Section 225.090. Equal Opportunity and Non-Discrimination [CC
1970 §17-117; Ord. No. 5391 §2, 10-28-1997; Ord. No. 6173 §1,
11-22-2011]
It shall be the policy of the City of Clayton to encourage and expect those
with whom the City contracts or does business to uphold the same
principles and practices as the City, and especially to affirm and fulfill
theses standards in all undertakings associated with the City.
Section 225.100. through Section 225.190. (Reserved)
Section
225.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
225.100
AO:297

ARTICLE IV
Domestic Partnership Registry
Section 225.200. Definitions [Ord. No. 6182 §1, 1-24-2012]
The following definitions apply to this Article:
BASIC NECESSITIES OF LIFE — The cost of essential food, shelter and
other fundamental needs.
CITY CLERK — The City Clerk of the City of Clayton, Missouri.
DEPENDENT — A person who resides within the household of a registered
domestic partnership and is:
DOMESTIC PARTNERS — Two (2) adults who consider themselves to be
members of each other's immediate family, share a principal residence in
the City of Clayton, and are jointly responsible for the basic necessities
of life. The individuals need not contribute equally to the cost of these
necessities, as long as they agree that both share that responsibility.
Section 225.210. Establishment of Domestic Partnership Registry
[Ord. No. 6182 §1, 1-24-2012]
There is hereby created a domestic partnership registry which shall be
maintained by the City Clerk.
Section 225.220. Requirements For Domestic Partnership [Ord. No.
6182 §1, 1-24-2012]
A biological, adopted, or foster child of a registered domestic partner;
or
1.
A dependent as defined under United States Internal Revenue Service
regulations; or
2.
A ward of a registered domestic partner as determined in a
guardianship or other legal proceeding.
3.
A. To establish a domestic partnership, two (2) individuals must file a joint
declaration of domestic partnership with the City Clerk affirming that
they:
1. Have resided together in the City of Clayton for at least six (6)
months;
2. Each intends to reside with the other and share responsibility for
the common necessities of life for one another;
3. Are each eighteen (18) years of age or older;
4. Are mentally competent to contract;
5. Are not related by blood closer than would bar marriage in the
State of Missouri;
Section
225.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
225.220
AO:299
Section 225.230. Filing of Declaration of Domestic Partnership.
[Ord. No. 6182 § 1, 1-24-2012]
Section 225.240. Administration of Registry. [Ord. No. 6182 § 1,
1-24-2012]
6. Are not married to any person other than their domestic partner;
and
7. Are each other's sole domestic partner.
A. Filing Location. Two (2) individuals seeking to become domestic
partners must complete and file a declaration of domestic partnership
with the City Clerk.
B. Filing Prohibition. No individual who has previously filed a declaration
of domestic partnership may file a new declaration of domestic
partnership until six (6) months after a termination of domestic
partnership has been completed as provided by the governing law of
that jurisdiction where previously filed or, in the case of declarations
filed in the City of Clayton, a notice of termination of that previous
declaration has been filed as hereinafter provided. This prohibition
shall not apply if the previous domestic partnership ended because one
(1) of the domestic partners is deceased.
C. Filing Fee. Individuals filing a declaration or termination of domestic
partnership shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to the City.
A. The declaration of domestic partnership form shall require each
registrant to:
1. Affirm that he or she meets the requirements of Section 225.220;
and
2. Provide the mailing address of the common residence; and
3. Sign the form attesting that all statements are true and correct.
B. The City shall have declaration and termination forms available at the
office of the City Clerk.
C. The declaration of domestic partnership form and the termination of
domestic partnership form shall contain notice that false statements
made on the form are punishable.
D. Partnership Registration. The City shall register the declaration of
domestic partnership submitted by the partners in a registry and return
a copy of the declaration to the domestic partners at the address
provided as their common residence.
E. The City shall register the notice of termination of domestic partnership
pursuant to the requirements set forth in Section 225.250.
Section
225.220
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
225.250
AO:300
Section 225.250. Termination of Domestic Partnership. [Ord. No.
6182 § 1, 1-24-2012]
Section 225.260. Rights of Registered Domestic Partnership. [Ord.
No. 6182 § 1, 1-24-2012]
A. Termination. A domestic partnership ends when:
1. One (1) of the domestic partners dies, marries a person other than
their domestic partner, or enters into a civil union or registered
domestic partnership with someone other than his or her
registered domestic partner; or
2. A notice of termination of domestic partnership has been filed by
one (1) or both domestic partners with the City.
B. Notice Of Termination. If the facts affirmed in the declaration of
domestic partnership cease to be true, one (1) or both parties to a
domestic partnership shall file a notice of termination of domestic
partners with the City Clerk. Upon receipt, the City Clerk shall return a
copy of the notice marked "filed" to each of the partners if jointly filed;
or two (2) copies to the filing partner. Unless the partners jointly file the
notice, the partner filing the notice shall, within five (5) days, send a
copy of the filed notice to the other partner's last known address.
However, this requirement shall not apply if the termination is due to
the death of one (1) of the domestic partners.
C. Effective Termination Date. Termination of a domestic partnership shall
be effective upon filing of the notice of termination of domestic
partnership with the City Clerk by one (1) or both partners, or on the
date of the death of one (1) of the domestic partners.
D. Notice To Third Parties. Following the termination of a domestic
partnership, each former domestic partner who has received or
qualified for any benefit or right based upon the existence of a domestic
partnership and receipt of that benefit or enjoyment of that right has
not otherwise terminated, shall give prompt notification to any third
party who provides such benefit or right that the domestic partnership
has terminated.
E. Failure To Give Notice. Failure to provide notice to third parties as
prescribed in the Section shall not delay or prevent the termination of
the domestic partnership.
A. Use Of And Access To City Facilities. All facilities owned and operated
by the City, including, but not limited to, recreational facilities, shall
allow the registered domestic partner of a user or member, and his or
her dependents, to be included in any rights and privileges accorded a
spouse and children for purposes of use and access to City facilities.
B. No Property Rights. The creation or conveyance of property rights are
not matters within the authority of the City of Clayton. The registration
Section
225.250
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
225.260
AO:301
of a domestic partnership does not, in and of itself, create or confer on
either party any property right to real or personal property of the other
partner. Any party wishing to create or convey such an interest must
do so in accord with the relevant civil laws of the State of Missouri.
Likewise, the termination of a domestic partnership registration shall
not, in and of itself, alter or terminate any property right of either
member with respect to real or personal property separately or jointly
owned. Such alteration or termination must be accomplished in accord
with the relevant civil laws of the State of Missouri. The City of Clayton
is not authorized to, and will not, adjudicate any property rights or
interests of current or previous registered domestic partners.
C. Recognition By Others. The City of Clayton urges health care providers
and facilities to accept this registration as proof of relationship for their
visitation and other policies. The City also calls upon all others with
whom Clayton registered domestic partners interact to join the City in
respecting the societal importance of the commitment and relationship
of such partners and to recognize that relationship in their dealings
with either or both partners.
Section
225.260
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
225.260
AO:302
Chapter 230
CIVIL DEFENSE AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section 230.010. Definitions [CC 1970 §6-1; Ord. No. 5207 §1,
12-12-1995]
For purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings set below, unless the context requires otherwise:
DISASTERS — Disasters which may result from terrorism, including
bioterrorism, or from fire, wind, flood, earthquake, or other natural or manmade
causes.
EMERGENCY — Any state of emergency declared by proclamation by the
Governor, or by resolution of the legislature pursuant to Sections 44.010
to 44.130, RSMo., upon the actual occurrence of a natural or man-made
disaster of major proportions within this State when the safety and welfare
of the inhabitants of this State are jeopardized.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT — Government at all levels performing
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible.
EOC — Emergency operations center.
MANAGEMENT — The activities of the Emergency Management Director
in the implementation of emergency operations plans during time of
emergency.
MITIGATION — Those activities which eliminate or reduce the chance of
occurrence or the effects of a disaster.
PLANNING — Activities of the State and local Emergency Management
Agency in the formulation of emergency management plans to be used in
time of emergency.
RECOVERY — Those activities designed to return a community's systems to
normal or near normal.
RESPONSE — Those activities designed to provide emergency assistance to
victims of a disaster and to reduce the likelihood of secondary damage.
SAVE — Structural assessment, visual evaluation.
Section 230.020. Emergency Management Director — Appointment
— Length of Term [CC 1970 §6-2; Ord. No. 5207 §1, 12-12-1995]
The City Manager shall have general overall control of the City's emergency
management program and shall be responsible for causing the provisions
of this Chapter to be carried out in a timely and effective fashion. To that
end, the City Manager shall appoint either the Police Chief or Fire Chief as
the Emergency Management Director for the City of Clayton. In addition to
his/her regular duties, said Emergency Management Director shall direct
and coordinate all civil defense and emergency management activities of
Section
225.260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
230.020
AO:303
the City. The Emergency Management Director shall report directly to the
City Manager and serve an indeterminate length of time.
Section 230.030. Emergency Management Director — Duties and
Responsibilities [CC 1970 §6-3; Ord. No. 5207 §1, 12-12-1995]
A. The Emergency Management Director shall perform a variety of duties
in conjunction with his/her responsibility to provide an adequate
emergency management program for the City. These shall relate to the
mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery phases of
comprehensive emergency management with specific functions and
tasks delineated as follows:
1. To review the existing legal authority to accomplish and effectuate
the duties of the position of Emergency Management Director and,
should inadequate authority be found to exist, to make such
recommendations as to the type of ordinance provisions or Charter
amendments which would supply the legal authority to act.
2. To conduct hazard identification and vulnerability analyses with
regard to those threats which pose the greatest danger to the City
and to develop specific response plans toward mitigating their
potential effects.
3. To consult with City Officials and other department heads with
regard to the development and adoption of building codes and
inspection procedures for new construction, which will enhance the
survivability of such structures in the event of an earthquake or
similar type disaster.
4. To make a study of the available emergency management resources
of the City and the extent to which they should be supplemented.
Recommendations shall be tendered to the City Manager and will
include a written estimate of the costs associated with the adoption
of such proposals. All non-emergency budgetary requests and/or
estimates shall be made in accordance with existing policies and
procedures.
5. To make a study of the available corporate, civic and private
resources within the community which may be called into service
by the City during a disaster situation. Pre-disaster assistance
agreements will be obtained as feasible and are to be entered into a
resource log which shall be periodically reviewed and updated.
6. To prepare a City-wide emergency management plan which shall
serve as the basis for the City's response to an emergency event.
The plan will subsequently be submitted to the City Manager for
his/her review and upon his/her approval thereof, a copy of the
emergency management plan shall be distributed to all City
departments and elected officials.
Section
230.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
230.030
AO:304
7. To institute and conduct periodic emergency preparedness training
programs for City employees, to include semi-annual emergency
management training exercises for various elected officials,
department heads and other selected emergency service workers.
8. To institute and conduct periodic public information and public
relations programs pertaining to emergency preparedness.
9. To procure and store necessary emergency supplies and equipment
in the various City facilities and to inventory and update the cached
supplies on a periodic basis.
10. To direct and coordinate all the components of the emergency
management system within the City to include fire and Police,
emergency medical service, public works, volunteers and other
groups contributing to the management of an emergency.
11. To establish and safeguard a system of communications between
the various City departments and outside civilian and
governmental agencies as soon after a disaster as practicable. The
system shall include a method or route to provide a stable flow of
current and/or updated information to the Mayor and the Board of
Aldermen for subsequent dissemination to the public.
12. To enter into those mutual-aid agreements as are deemed
necessary and practical and to cooperate with the civil defense and
emergency management agencies of the United States, the State of
Missouri and other local political subdivisions and organizations, as
appropriate.
13. To assess the damages inflicted by a disaster and forward such
information to the Mayor and Board of Aldermen in a timely
manner, preparatory to a mayoral declaration of a state of
emergency.
14. To establish an emergency operations center, a public information
center, temporary living shelters, treatment centers, staging areas,
a temporary morgue and any other support facilities that are
deemed necessary to the efficient and effective functioning of the
response and recovery phases of the City's emergency
management program.
15. To identify methods by which alternate supplies of electricity,
water, telephone and other essential utility services can be secured
in the event of a major disruption.
16. To document in a permanent written record the decisions and
actions of the EOC staff as they pertain to the handling of a disaster
situation. Included in such record shall be a detailed itemization of
personnel and equipment expenses, along with any physical
damages the City may have incurred to its facilities and
infrastructure. To facilitate compliance with Federal reporting
Section
230.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
230.030
AO:305
Section 230.040. Declaration of A State of Emergency [CC 1970
§6-4; Ord. No. 5207 §1, 12-12-1995]
requirements, said damage assessment shall address each of the
following categories:
Category A: Debris clearance or the removal of damaged structures
or objects from public roads or streets, public property, private
property.
Category B: Protective measures which are taken to protect life,
safety, property and health. This shall include evacuations, traffic
control and the use of barricades.
Category C: Road systems or the degree to which roads, streets,
bridges and culverts are damaged or destroyed.
Category D: Water control facilities or the extent to which dikes,
levees, dams and other water facilities are damaged or destroyed.
Category E: Public buildings and equipment which will include the
number and cost of buildings, supplies and/or inventory, vehicles or
other equipment that were damaged or destroyed.
Category F: Public utility systems within the political jurisdiction
that sustain damage, to include water and sewer systems, storm
drains, light and power, heat and other utilities.
Category G: Public facilities under construction.
Category H: Private non-profit facilities such as educational,
emergency, medical and custodial facilities which may have
sustained damage. However, this shall not include places used
exclusively for worship.
Category I: Parks, recreational and other facilities that are
damaged or destroyed, to include parks, sports complexes and
fields, community centers, etc.
Category J: Political jurisdiction financial effort, which shall include
overtime costs, mileage expenses, operational expenses, etc.
The completed document shall then be utilized as the basis for
any subsequent claim(s) submitted to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency requesting reimbursement.
17. To ensure that all emergency tasks are carried out within the legal
authority provided by this Chapter.
18. To address any additional matters which are deemed necessary for
the formulation of an adequate emergency management program
for the City.
Section
230.030
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
230.040
AO:306
Section 230.050. Emergency Management Director — Emergency
Powers [CC 1970 §6-5; Ord. No. 5207 §1, 12-12-1995]
A. As the chief elected official of the City, the Mayor shall, in the event of a
technological or natural disaster, be responsible for the issuance of a
declaration of a state of emergency. Once such a declaration is made, it
shall then confer certain discretionary emergency powers to the
Emergency Management Director to be employed as prudence and
circumstances require.
B. Should the Mayor be incapacitated or be otherwise unavailable, the
Mayor Pro Tem or a simple majority of the Board of Aldermen, may
declare a state of emergency.
A. In the event of a natural or manmade disaster, wherein the City or a
portion of the City is severely affected, the Emergency Management
Director shall, upon the issuance of an official declaration of a state of
emergency by the Mayor or other elected authority, have the authority
to initiate certain emergency actions in the interests of public safety:
1. Immediately following the declaration of a state of emergency, the
Emergency Management Director may, contingent upon existing
circumstances, institute the following emergency procedures:
a. Suspend routine governmental services for either the duration
of an emergency or until the situation has stabilized to the
point that resources may be safely diverted toward the
resumption of normal services.
b. Proclaim a general curfew in the affected areas, where all
persons, excluding emergency service workers, registered
volunteers or those individuals with official sanction, shall be
prohibited from entering or transiting designated restricted
areas either by foot, bicycle or motor vehicle.
c. Extend the acceptable ceiling for fixed-wing and rotary aircraft
flight to a minimum of two thousand (2,000) feet from the
current ceiling of five hundred (500) feet. However, this
Section shall not apply to those medical or supply flights
arriving or departing along prearranged flight paths from
established emergency treatment and/or staging areas.
d. Suspend the sale of intoxicating liquor by the package at all
retail, wholesale and manufacturing outlets within the City. In
addition, while the sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink will
generally be permitted at licensed establishments, such sale
shall be terminated at 8:00 P.M. of each calendar day.
e. Organize civilian volunteers into supplemental labor battalions
and provide such workers with the necessary supervision,
protective equipment, tools and provisions necessary to do the
job.
Section
230.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
230.050
AO:307
f. Enter into contracts with private vendors, contractors or
merchants to procure emergency supplies, equipment or
services without regard to the requisite bid process.
g. Order and conduct such evacuations as are consistent with the
safety and welfare of the general public.
h. Commandeer vehicles, equipment, fuel, supplies, buildings or
parcels of real property deemed necessary to the prompt and
efficient functioning of the City's emergency management and
civil defense apparatus.
When any property is seized, taken or requisitioned under this
Section, the Board of Aldermen will, on the application of the
owner thereof, assess any damages which the owners may
have sustained by reason of the appropriation and determine
the amount and form of compensation due the owner.
i. Deputize SAVE (structural assessment, visual evaluation)
volunteers as deputy Building Inspectors and provide such
volunteers with a full and timely reimbursement of their
expenses, to include travel, meals, lodging and such other
miscellaneous expenses as may be incurred.
j. Establish and coordinate a building inspection program where
damaged structures are evaluated for continued occupancy
and/or use. This will include barring residents, owners or
managers, tenants or employees thereof from entering those
structures which are deemed too dangerous to enter.
Essential facilities or those identified as critical to the
emergency response effort shall be given first (1st) priority in
the evaluation process.
Structures which are noted to be severely damaged to the
point that they constitute a detriment to the health, safety and
welfare of people shall be declared a nuisance and handled in a
manner deemed necessary for public safety irrespective of the
provisions of the Property Maintenance Code, Section 500.040
of the City's Code of Ordinances.
k. Approve excavation, demolition or other related construction
type activities irrespective of existing limitations established in
Section 215.765(3) of the City's Code of Ordinances.
l. Waive vehicle size and weight restrictions in accordance with
the authority granted in Section 360.240 of the City's Code of
Ordinances.
m. Coordinate local response and relief efforts with the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, the office of the Governor of
Missouri, the State Emergency Management Agency, the
Section
230.050
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
230.050
AO:308
Section 230.060. Appointment of Deputy Emergency Management
Director — Use of Subordinates [CC 1970 §6-6; Ord. No. 5207 §1,
12-12-1995]
The Emergency Management Director shall have the authority to appoint
a Deputy Emergency Management Director from within the top command
rank of either the Police or Fire Departments and to utilize other
subordinate personnel to perform specific assignments as required. In
addition to his/her routine duties, the Deputy Emergency Management
Director shall be responsible to provide assistance in fulfilling the
emergency preparedness duties and obligations tasked to his/her superior
and shall serve as the Emergency Management Director in the event that
the former becomes incapacitated or is otherwise unavailable.
Recommendations for such an appointment will be submitted to the City
Manager for approval prior to the nominee assuming the position.
Section 230.070. Authorization To Render Mutual Aid or
Emergency Assistance [CC 1970 §6-7; Ord. No. 5207 §1, 12-12-1995]
Under the authority set forth in Section 70.783, RSMo., the Clayton Police,
Fire and Public Works Departments are authorized to respond and provide
assistance as requested in any mutual aid or emergency aid request in the
State of Missouri or any bordering State having reciprocal legislation.
Missouri National Guard, St. Louis County, the Red Cross, local
jurisdictions and such other private or governmental agencies
as may be applicable.
n. Perform such other measures as are necessary to promote and
secure the safety and protection of the civilian population.
2. Whereas the enactment of all of the provisions set forth in
Subsection (1) above may not be required in certain situations, the
Emergency Management Director shall have full discretion to
initiate those provisions which are most applicable to the
circumstances surrounding a given emergency situation.
3. The provisions of Subsection (1) of this Section shall not generally
exceed seven (7) calendar days in duration but may, with the
express approval of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen, be extended
as circumstances require.
4. Once the emergency decrees have been put into effect, any person
who shall be found guilty of a violation of the provisions set forth in
paragraphs (b—d) and (g) of Subsection (1) above shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.
5. The state of emergency shall terminate upon proclamation by the
Mayor or resolution by the Board of Aldermen.
Section
230.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
230.080
AO:309
Section 230.080. Emergency Management Program — Expenditures
[CC 1970 §6-8; Ord. No. 5207 §1, 12-12-1995]
Section 230.090. Non-Liability For Emergency Management Acts
[CC 1970 §6-9; Ord. No. 5344 §1, 6-24-1997]
Neither the City, its elected or appointed officials, nor any officer or member
of the City's emergency management staff shall be liable for personal
injury or property damage sustained by any person appointed or acting
as a volunteer worker or member of any agency engaged in emergency
management activities. Neither shall the City or any official or employee
thereof be liable for the death or injury of any persons or damage to
property resulting from emergency management activities, except as
provided for by Section 230.050(1)(h) of this Chapter.
Section 230.100. Acceptance of Donations or Loans [CC 1970 §6-10;
Ord. No. 5344 §1, 6-24-1997]
In the event the Federal Government, the State or any individual person,
firm, corporation, group or private agency offers services, equipment,
supplies, materials or funds to the City by way of donation, gift or loan for
purposes of emergency management, the Emergency Management Director
may accept such offer, contingent upon the terms of the donation, gift or
loan and any associated rules and regulations, if any, governing its use.
Should the terms be found to be acceptable, the Emergency Management
Director shall direct the appropriate City department to take receipt of the
goods or services offered.
Chapter 235
GARBAGE AND TRASH
A. In the event of a technological or natural disaster, the Emergency
Management Director shall have full authority to expend those funds
which are necessary to meet the demands of the situation in accordance
with the interests of both the City and public safety.
B. The Emergency Management Director shall follow all purchasing
requirements established by the City and shall maintain the appropriate
records covering such expenditures, except as outlined in Section
230.050(1)(f) of this Chapter.
Section
230.080
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
230.100
AO:310
ARTICLE I
Collection Service and Regulations
Section 235.010. Definitions [CC 1970 §12-16; CC 1947 §6-57]
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the respective
meanings ascribed to them:
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — Any person engaged in this City in retail
or wholesale commercial, manufacturing, individual or personal services,
educational, religious, benevolent or professional activities or in the
management or operation thereof.
CITY REFUSE COLLECTOR — Any person under contract with the City
for the collection, removal and final disposition of garbage or rubbish
from all premises owned, rented, leased or occupied by any householder,
business establishment or institution within the City under the direction and
supervision of the Director of Public Works.
GARBAGE — All semi-solid and solid food wastes derived from and during
the procurement, storage, processing, sale, cooking, serving and
consumption of food materials of animal, vegetable or synthetic origin
which are intended for and are used by householders, business
establishments or public or private institutions for the refreshment or
sustenance of human beings or animals. The term "garbage", as used in
this Article, shall not include dead animals, liquid wastes or the wastes
resulting from the operation of slaughterhouses and packing plants or from
the processing of hides or other animal parts.
HOUSEHOLDER — Any individual who is the legal or nominal head of
a household comprised of himself/herself and other individuals who hold
temporary or permanent domicile in a single or multiple dwelling, hotel,
rooming house, boarding house or boarding school within this City.
INSTITUTION — The premises and activities of any person engaged within
this City in teaching of any kind, in religious or benevolent services or
in the temporary or permanent care or treatment of more than three (3)
individuals who either have or are suspected of having physical or mental
afflictions.
PRIVATE REFUSE COLLECTOR — Any person who has been licensed by the
City to engage in the collection, removal and final disposition of refuse and
who has been employed by any other person to render such service.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials including,
but not limited to, solid and semi-solid waste materials resulting from
industrial, commercial, agricultural, governmental and domestic activities,
but does not include hazardous waste as defined in Sections 260.360 to
260.432, RSMo., recovered materials, overburden, rock, tailings, matte,
slag or other waste material resulting from mining, milling or smelting.
Solid waste does not include "Yard Waste" as defined herein.
Section
235.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.010
AO:311
YARD WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden vegetation and
Christmas trees. The term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with
intact root balls.
Section 235.020. Disposal Programs — Required — Types —
Operational Phases [CC 1970 §12-17; CC 1947 §6-58]
Section 235.030. Control By Director — Supervision — Enforcing
Contracts [CC 1970 §12-18; CC 1947 §6-61(a)]
The Director of Public Works shall direct, supervise and control the
accumulation and storage of all refuse in this City and the collection,
removal and final disposition of all refuse by the City refuse collector
or private refuse collectors from households, business establishments and
public or private institutions in this City in full conformity with the
provisions of this Article and he/she shall enforce the terms of the contracts
between the City and the City refuse collectors.
Section 235.040. Control By Director — Supplementary Rules and
Regulations [CC 1970 §12-19; CC 1947 §6-61(b)]
The Director of Public Works shall have power to establish, in addition to
the provisions of this Article, such supplementary rules and regulations on
A. The City shall plan, organize, implement and enforce to the extent and
in the manner prescribed by this Article a City-wide refuse disposal
program providing for the accumulation, storage, removal and final
disposition by the City refuse collector or private refuse collectors of all
garbage and rubbish produced by and in households, business
establishments and public or private institutions within this City. This
refuse disposal program shall be of sufficient scope to assure the
preservation of the public health, welfare and safety in this City. The
disposal operations financed by the City shall be known as the City's
refuse disposal service. The disposal operations which are paid for
directly by householders, business establishments, public or private
institutions shall be known as the private refuse disposal service. Each
of these services shall be divided into the following phases of
operations:
1. The accumulation and storage of refuse on the premises served.
This operation shall be the responsibility of the owner, user or
operator of the premises concerned.
2. The collection and removal of refuse from the premises served. This
operation shall be the responsibility of the City refuse collector or
the licensed private collector.
3. The final disposition of the refuse on sites and by methods
approved by the Director of Health. This operation shall be the
combined responsibility of the respective refuse collectors and the
owner and operator of the disposal site.
Section
235.010
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
235.040
AO:312
all phases of the refuse disposal program which he/she deems necessary,
provided such rules and regulations shall not be inconsistent with this
Article and, provided further, they shall have as their purpose the
clarification or enforcement of the provisions of this Article and the health
and sanitation laws of the United States, State, this County and other
Counties, Cities, Towns and Villages which may be affected by the refuse
disposal operations of this City.
Section 235.050. Control By Director — Right of Entry of Enforcing
Officer [CC 1970 §12-20; CC 1947 §6-61(c)]
The Director of Public Works, his/her assistants and agents shall have
the right to request admission to any premises on which refuse is being
accumulated and stored pending removal provided such a request is made
for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of this Article are
being fulfilled and, provided further, that requests for such inspections shall
be made at reasonable times and upon presentation of proper credentials.
Any person who refuses to grant such an inspection under the conditions
prescribed may be charged with a violation of this Article.
Section 235.060. Compliance By Owner and Occupant [CC 1970
§12-21; CC 1947 §6-62(a)]
Section 235.070. Lawful Disposal Operations [CC 1970 §12-22; CC
1947 §6-59(a)]
A. Any person who owns, operates or maintains a household, business
establishment or a public or private institution in this City shall be
responsible to the City for the orderly and sanitary accumulation and
storage of refuse pending removal in full conformity with the provisions
of this Article.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate, deposit or store
refuse on his/her premises or any other place within or beyond this City
in any other manner or for a longer period than prescribed in this
Article.
A. The disposal of refuse shall be considered lawful if it is performed by:
1. The City collectors under contract with the City to render refuse
disposal service to households, business establishments and public
or private institutions to the extent and by the procedures
prescribed in such contracts and this Article.
2. Any private refuse collector who has been licensed for such work
by the City and who has been employed by one (1) or more
householders, business establishments, public or private
institutions to collect, remove and to effect final disposition of
refuse from the premises concerned in full conformity with the
provisions of this Article and at no expense to the City.
Section
235.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.070
AO:313
Section 235.080. License — Required — Application — Certificate —
Fee — Renewal [CC 1970 §12-23; CC 1947 §6-59(b)]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a private
refuse collector within the City without first obtaining a license to engage
in such business. Persons desiring a license to conduct such business shall
apply to the Director of Public Works who, upon satisfactory proof of the
qualifications and fitness of the applicant and of his/her ability to comply
with all of the provisions of this Article, shall issue a certificate of
qualification together with a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) to the Director of
Finance, the applicant shall be entitled to a license to engage in business
as a private refuse collector; said license shall expire on December thirtyfirst
(31st) of the calendar year of issuance and may be renewed thereafter
annually upon payment of said fee of ten dollars ($10.00) to the Director
of Finance. The Director of Public Works shall have the right to direct the
Director of Finance to refuse to renew any such license if he/she shall
determine that the holder thereof no longer qualifies for a license under the
provisions of this Section.
Section 235.090. Illegal Methods of Disposition — Burning,
Burying, Etc. [CC 1970 §12-24; Ord. No. 3359, 1-13-1970]
3. Any other person provided he/she effects the disposal of garbage
on his/her own premises by means of a garbage grinding and
disposal unit and the disposal of rubbish by means of an incinerator
located within or outside of a building on his/her premises and such
incinerator is equipped with an electrical or mechanical device to
eliminate smoke-producing gases and solids and, provided further,
that these disposal facilities and their operation conform with the
provisions of this Article and have been approved by the Director of
Health, Fire Chief and the Director of Public Works.
4. By the City's own refuse disposal department, if available.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to store, remove or dispose of refuse
by burning or by burying or depositing it in an ash pit except as noted
below or by burying or depositing it in any alley, street, roadway, vacant
lot, ditch, gully, stream, creek, body of water or any other private or
public property or any other place within or beyond this City whose use
for refuse storage or disposal has not been approved by the Board of
Aldermen.
B. The provision which prohibits depositing of refuse in ash pits shall not
apply to ashes resulting from the combustion of standard fuel materials,
provided such ash pits are operated and maintained as prescribed in
Section 235.180(4).
Section
235.070
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
235.100
AO:314
Section 235.100. Scope of Service — Householders [CC 1970
§12-25; CC 1947 §6-60(a)(2)]
The City's services to householders under its contract with the City refuse
collector shall include the collection, removal and final disposition of all
garbage and rubbish which is stored in accordance with the provisions of
Section 235.030 except for ashes stored in ash pits and such items which
shall exceed four (4) feet in length or be of a weight or volume which cannot
be handled by two (2) men.
Section 235.110. Scope of Service — Others [CC 1970 §12-26; CC
1947 §6-60(a)(3)]
The City's services to business establishments and public or private
institutions under its contract with the City refuse collector shall include
the collection, removal, final disposition of the same types of garbage and
rubbish as from households, but in amount and volume these services shall
be limited to a level which in the opinion and judgment of the Director of
Public Works is not in excess of the production and accumulation of garbage
and rubbish in the average household in this City.
Section 235.120. Private Disposal Contracts Authorized [CC 1970
§12-27; CC 1947 §6-60(b)]
It shall not be mandatory for householders, business establishments and
private or public institutions to use the City's refuse disposal service but at
their discretion they may have this work performed at their own expense by
entering into a contract with any private refuse collector who is licensed in
this City.
Section 235.130. Application For Service By Business or Institution
— Agreement As To Excess Refuse — Performance By Private
Contractor [CC 1970 §12-28; CC 1947 §6-60(b)]
In the event a business establishment or a public or private institution
decides to avail itself of the limited scope of the refuse disposal services
supplied by the City, it shall make a written application for such services and
submit evidence to the Director of Public Works that it has made adequate
arrangement with a licensed private collector to effect at its expense the
collection, removal and final disposition of that part of its refuse which in
type or amount is not eligible for City service under the terms of this Article.
All such private collectors shall perform their work in full conformity with
the provisions of this Article.
Section 235.140. Prohibited Accumulations [CC 1970 §12-29; CC
1947 §6-62(b)(1)]
Liquid food wastes and urine or feces of whatever origin shall not be
accumulated or stored for removal by either the City Collector or a private
collector but shall be disposed of promptly through the sewer system by the
person concerned.
Section
235.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.150
AO:315
Section 235.150. Normal Storage Methods [CC 1970 §12-30; CC
1947 §6-62(b)(2)(a)]
Section 235.160. Special Storage Methods [CC 1970 §12-31; CC
1947 §6-62(b)(2)(b)]
A. All items of refuse which accumulate in households, business
establishments and public or private institutions shall be stored, insofar
as possible and except as noted below, pending collection by either the
City refuse collector or a private refuse collector, in the following
manner:
1. If the City's refuse disposal program provides for the separate
collection of garbage and rubbish, such wastes shall be stored in
separate containers of the standard type.
2. If the City's refuse disposal program provides for the combined
collection of garbage and rubbish, such wastes shall be stored
together in the same standard container but the garbage shall be
bundled and wrapped in paper of sufficient thickness to minimize
leakage.
3. Cord wood intended for heating purposes may be stored on
premises, provided it is piled neatly and not less than eighteen (18)
inches above the ground.
4. Ashes resulting from the combustion of standard heating materials
may be stored either in standard containers or in ash pits. In case
the latter are used, the user shall operate and maintain them as
prescribed in Section 235.180(4) and shall have them emptied at
his/her own expense.
A. Use Of Special Containers. In the event that the garbage or rubbish of a
business establishment or public or private institution cannot be stored
satisfactorily and efficiently in the prescribed standard containers, the
Director of Public Works may authorize the use of trailer tanks or other
containers for service by private refuse collectors.
B. Storage Of Large Items Of Rubbish. In the event that a householder,
business establishment or public or private institution requires removal
of large items of rubbish which are constructed of material that cannot
be broken up to permit storage in standard containers, such items of
rubbish may be stored on the outside of the premises concerned
without placement into containers, provided that the number of such
items is reasonable and that such rubbish is kept at least eighteen (18)
inches above the ground and, provided further, that such storage will
not produce conditions which in the opinion and judgment of the
Director of Health, the Fire Chief and the Police Chief will tend to
create a sanitary nuisance or a hazard to the public health, welfare or
safety.
Section
235.150
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
235.170
AO:316
Section 235.170. Storage Periods [CC 1970 §12-32; CC 1947
§6-62(b)(2)(c)]
Garbage and rubbish which under the terms of this Article are eligible in
type and the amount for collection by the City refuse collector shall not be
stored on the inside or outside of premises for a period longer than the
time interval between collection days prescribed by the City. Garbage and
rubbish which on account of type or amount require the services of a private
refuse collector shall not be stored on the inside or outside of premises for
more than eighteen (18) hours pending collection.
Section 235.180. Types of Containers [CC 1970 §12-33; CC 1947
§6-62(b)(2)(d); Ord. No. 3360, 1-13-1970; Ord. No. 3361, 1-13-1970;
Ord. No. 3362, 1-13-1970; Ord. No. 3858 §1, 12-28-1976; Ord. No.
4833 §1, 10-22-1991]
A. In order to assure that the accumulation and storage of refuse shall be
performed in an orderly, clean, sanitary and safe manner, the containers
which are used for these purposes shall be of the following types:
1. Standard container. Insofar as possible and except as noted in
Section 235.160 and Subparagraph (4) of this Section, garbage and
rubbish shall be stored between collection periods at collection
points in standard containers which have a capacity of not less than
twenty-five (25) gallons nor more than thirty-two (32) gallons,
provided garbage and rubbish may be stored at other than
collection points between collection periods in standard containers
which have a capacity of not less than five (5) gallons nor more than
thirty-two (32) gallons. These containers shall be constructed of
galvanized iron or similar durable material of not less than twentysix
(26) gauge in thickness. These containers shall be equipped
with tight-fitting lids and suitable bails or handles.
2. Reserved.
3. Bundles. Items of rubbish such as trimmings from bushes and trees
may be tied into bundles which shall not exceed four (4) feet in
length and are of a weight and volume which can be handled by not
more than two (2) men.
4. Ash pits. Ash pits may be used for the storage of ashes resulting
from the combustion of standard heating materials provided that
such pits shall not be used for any other purposes, that they are
kept rodent tight and that when not in use they are tightly covered
with wood or metal lid and, provided further, that they are not filled
to more than four (4) inches from the top and that when full the
owner or user of the pit shall have it emptied promptly at his/her
own expense. Ash pits, the condition or use of which violate any of
these provisions, shall be ordered closed by the Director of Public
Works pending corrections. If such infractions occur frequently or
if they are not corrected promptly upon notification from the
Section
235.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.180
AO:317
Section 235.190. Number of Containers [CC 1970 §12-34; CC 1947
§6-62(b)(2)(e)]
Any person who accumulates and stores refuse shall provide the number
of containers which in the opinion and judgment of the Director of Public
Works are necessary for the orderly, clean and sanitary storage of refuse
on the premises concerned in the interim between the prescribed collection
days.
Section 235.200. Container Cleanliness and Sanitation [CC 1970
§12-35; CC 1947 §6-62(b)(2)(f)]
Any person who owns or uses refuse containers of any kind, or in whose
behalf they are used by others, shall keep them at all times in a dry, sanitary,
rodent, insect and leakproof condition and shall clean, sanitize and repair
them as often as necessary for proper compliance with this Article. The level
of the contents of standard containers, baskets, bags and ash pits shall be
kept at least four (4) inches from the top. The owner or user of containers
and the refuse collectors shall be careful to avoid spillage of contents and if
it occurs, they shall clean it up promptly and restore the premises to a clean
and sanitary condition.
Section 235.210. Placement of Refuse For Collection [CC 1970
§12-36; CC 1947 §6-63(a)(1)]
Director of Public Works, he/she shall condemn the ash pit and
order it removed.
5. Tank type containers for multiple dwellings, business
establishments and institutions. When, in the opinion of the
Director of Health, it is determined necessary to expedite refuse
storage and collection because of the accumulation of refuse
requiring an excessive number of containers, which constitute
either an unsightly, unsanitary or hazardous condition, in
connection with any multiple dwelling, business establishment or
institution within the City, the owner of said dwelling, business
establishment or institution shall furnish a tank type container or
containers of a size and number sufficient to contain refuse
between collections as determined by the Director of Health and
such container shall be compatible with the garbage and rubbish
contract hauler's equipment and maintained in a hygienic and
satisfactory condition.
A. Location Generally. All refuse which is accumulated in the City and
offered for disposal shall be collected from the rear of the premises.
Refuse containers and items of refuse which are too large for placement
in containers shall be kept at all times at a point on the premises which
is not visible from the street. The person who is responsible for the
proper storage of refuse on the premises concerned and the collector
serving him/her shall confer and shall designate a collection point at
Section
235.180
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
235.210
AO:318
Section 235.220. Handling of Containers By Collectors [CC 1970
§12-37; CC 1947 §6-63(a)(2)]
Refuse collectors shall perform their duties in a quiet, orderly and sanitary
manner. After emptying the containers, the collector shall replace their lids
and shall return the covered containers to the designated collection point
on the premises. In case of spillage during collection, the refuse collector
shall pick up the spillage and restore the premises to a clean and sanitary
condition. In the event the City refuse collector damages a container or
its lid to an extent that it is subject to condemnation by the Director of
Health, it shall be the responsibility of the City refuse collector to replace
the container or the lid with a new container or lid of the same type, quality
and size.
Section 235.230. Separate or Combined Garbage and Rubbish
Collection [CC 1970 §12-38; CC 1947 §6-63(a)(3)]
The collection and removal of garbage and rubbish shall be effected either
by a combined or a separate operation as prescribed by the Board of
Aldermen.
Section 235.240. Collection Frequency and Time Limitation [CC
1970 §12-39; CC 1947 §6-63(a)(4); Ord. No. 4230 §1 5-25-1982; Ord.
No. 4833 §2, 10-22-1991; Ord. No. 4970 §1, 5-11-1993]
which prior to 7:00 A.M. on collection days all the containers and items
of refuse which are to be removed from the premises shall be placed.
B. Location As To Alleys Or Building Where No Alley. If the premises do not
abut an alley and the premises must be served from the street, the
designated collection point shall be as close to the rear line of the
building as possible and at a place which is easily accessible to the
collector. If the premises are accessible from an alley, the designated
collection point shall be at a point of the rear boundary of the premises
which is easily accessible from the alley to the collector and which is
agreeable to all concerned.
C. Placing On Collection Days—No Collection Inside Building. On
collection days all refuse containers and items of refuse shall be placed
at the designated collection point. The City refuse collector shall not be
required to collect refuse from the inside of buildings.
D. Placing Ineligible Refuse. When refuse containers contain both eligible
refuse and other items, the City refuse collector shall not be obligated
to collect and remove their contents. When such violation occurs, the
City refuse collector shall report it to the person concerned and the
Director of Health. In case of controversy as to the eligibility or
ineligibility of refuse, the decision of the Director of Health shall be
final.
Section
235.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.240
AO:319
Section 235.250. Collection and Removal Equipment [CC 1970
§12-40; CC 1947 §6-63(a)(5)]
All refuse, including garbage, shall be collected and removed in vehicles
with solid metal bodies or liners and which have leakproof bottoms and
sides. Open top vehicles shall be permitted only during a specified period
with written permission granted by the Director of Health. All vehicles and
other equipment used in these operations shall be kept at all times in a
clean, sanitary and safe condition and in good repair by the operator. All
vehicles and other equipment used in these operations shall be subject to
the approval and periodic inspections by the Director of Public Works.
Section 235.260. Collection and Removal Personnel [CC 1970
§12-41; CC 1947 §6-63(a)(6)]
The City refuse collector shall conduct his/her operations with personnel
who are capable of operating the required equipment in a safe, efficient and
satisfactory manner. They must be courteous, neat and clean at all times.
Section 235.270. Disposal Methods and Sites — Compliance With
Article [CC 1970 §12-42; CC 1947 §6-63]
It shall be unlawful for any person or collector to dispose of refuse on his/
her premises or on any other place within or beyond this City or County or
in any other manner than as prescribed in this Article.
Section 235.280. Disposal Methods and Sites — Approval —
Compliance With Law [CC 1970 §12-43; CC 1947 §6-63]
The methods and the sites which the City refuse collector proposes to use or
uses for the final disposition of refuse collected in this City shall be subject
to the approval of the Board of Aldermen and shall be in full conformity
with the provisions of this Article and the Statutes of the Federal or State
Governments and the ordinances, rules and regulations which have been
A. Collection and removal of refuse by the City's refuse collection
contractor shall be made not less than once weekly and shall be as often
as prescribed in the contract between the City and its refuse collector
and such collections shall be made on the days designated by the
Director of Public Works.
B. Collections and removal of refuse by private, licensed collectors shall
be made as often as deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works
to prevent the development on the premises concerned of conditions
which tend to create a sanitary nuisance or a hazard to the public
health, welfare and safety. No collections shall be made before 7:00
A.M. or after 5:00 P.M. except for the collection of City-owned refuse
containers by the City's refuse collection contractor which shall be
collected according to the time limitations established by the Director
of Public Works. No collections shall be made from any types of
premises on Sundays.
Section
235.240
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
235.280
AO:320
enacted by this City, the County or other Counties, Cities, Towns or Villages
which may be affected by the refuse disposal operations of this City.
Section 235.290. Violation — By Recipient of Service A
Misdemeanor [CC 1970 §12-44; CC 1947 §6-73(a)]
The violation of any provision of this Article by householders, business
establishments or public or private institutions shall be deemed a
misdemeanor and each day of such violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
Section 235.300. Violation — By Contractor — Penalties [CC 1970
§12-45; CC 1947 §6-73(b); Ord. No. 4230 §2, 5-25-1982]
A. For Failure To Empty A Container On Collection Day. In the event the
contractor fails on a collection day to empty a container which a
householder or other person entitled to refuse disposal service at City
expense has placed at the designated collection point on his/her
premises and which contains refuse eligible for collection at City
expense, the contractor shall forfeit to the City, for each container
whose contents have not been removed by the contractor, the sum of
one dollar ($1.00).
B. For Other Violations. Whenever the contractor fails to comply with a
provision of this Article or his/her contract with the City, unless
otherwise specified in the contract with the City, he/she shall forfeit the
sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) as liquidated damages to the City for
each day of such non-compliance and said forfeited amounts shall be
deducted out of any sums of money that may be due or shall become
due to the contractor under his/her agreement with the City.
C. For Private Refuse Collector Violations. Any person who violates the
provisions of this Article relating to private refuse collectors shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Section
235.280
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.300
AO:321

ARTICLE II
Recycling
Section 235.310. Recycling Solid Waste [CC 1970 §12-70; Ord. No.
4813 §1, 6-25-1991; Ord. No. 4834 §1, 10-22-1991; Ord. No. 4920 §1,
9-22-1992; Ord. No. 5977, 6-26-2007]
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the
respective meanings ascribed to them:
COMPOSTABLES — Yard waste such as grass clippings, leaves, vines,
hedge and shrub trimmings, tree trimming and tree limbs less than
one (1) inch in diameter that will fit in a lidded trash can. Tree limbs
larger than one (1) inch in diameter and larger than four (4) feet are
considered bulk rubbish.
MAJOR APPLIANCES — Washers and dryers, water heaters, trash
compactors, dishwashers, microwave ovens, conventional ovens,
ranges, stoves, wood stoves, air conditioners, refrigerators, freezers,
dehumidifiers and humidifiers.
RECYCLABLES — Newsprint; brown, clear and green glass containers;
aluminum and metal cans; plastic milk jugs and plastic soda bottles, all
rinsed and reasonably free of food, dirt and other contaminants. Also
included as a recyclable is any other material that the City and collector
may hereafter mutually agree to collect as a recyclable. For the purpose
of this Section, recyclables shall not include other solid waste, bulk
rubbish or special waste as defined in this Chapter.
RECYCLABLES CONTAINER — A container furnished by the residence,
City or collector for storage of recyclables.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to require mandatory separation
of recyclable items to aid and promote collection thereof and disposal
by means other than deposit in a sanitary landfill or by burning.
C. Separation And Storage Of Recyclables.
1. Every resident of every premise shall separate the recyclables from
their respective premises from all other refuse, garbage, rubbish,
waste matter, and compostables and shall store the recyclables in a
recyclable container. Except for additional containers purchased by
residents, recyclables containers shall be the property of the City
or the collector and shall remain on the premises when residents
relocate. Residents who need additional recyclables containers
may purchase the same from the collector. If in the opinion of the
Director of Public Works adequate and sufficient recyclable
containers for the storage of recyclables between the prescribed
collection days are not provided, it shall be the responsibility of the
property owner to arrange with the collector for adequate
recyclable containers.
2. Recyclables shall be collected at the rear of the building or alley.
Section
235.310
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.310
AO:323
3. The deposit of unauthorized materials into a recyclables container
or bin, or removal of another person's recyclables from a
recyclables container or bin, or conversion of a recyclables
container, or removal of a recyclables container from another
person's premises for the deposit of compostables into any
container containing refuse, recyclables, garbage, rubbish or waste
material, shall be deemed a violation of this Section.
4. All containers for recyclables and compostables stored out of doors
shall be stored behind any building located on the tract of land.
D. Separation And Storage Of Compostables.
1. Every resident of every premise shall separate compostables from
their respective premises from all other refuse, garbage, rubbish,
waste matter and recyclables. Compostables to be collected by the
City or the collector shall be stored in containers which are either
biodegradable paper bags, thirty (30) gallon reusable metal or
plastic containers, or ninety (90) gallon heavy plastic portable tote
containers. Containers for compostables must be tightly sealed to
prevent nuisance odors.
2. Plastic bag containers shall not be used for compostables
collection.
3. All compostables may be placed together in the same compostables
container as described in Subsection (A) above. Small limbs (no
longer than four (4) feet long and less than one (1) inch in
diameter) and branches may also be placed in a compostable
container.
4. Compostables shall be collected at the rear of the building or alley
on the same collection day as recyclables.
E. Collection Of Recyclables/Compostables.
1. Collection of recyclables and compostables from premises shall be
by a hauler selected by the City, which hauler shall be duly licensed
by the City. Also, such collection shall be done in compliance with
all other applicable ordinances of the City, now or hereafter in
effect. The recyclables and compostables shall be collected from
the premises covered by such contract by the collector under
contract with the City and on terms and conditions set out in such
contract.
2. The collection of recyclables and compostables by any private
hauler not authorized by the City is expressly prohibited.
3. The contractor shall collect all recyclables and compostables on the
same day once each week in accordance with schedules of and
routes for collection as determined by the Director.
Section
235.310
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
235.310
AO:324
4. Neither the foregoing provisions of this Section nor any other
provisions of this Section shall prevent any resident from
discarding that resident's recyclables by personally delivering
them to a centralized recycling collection site, manufacturer, or
other vendor, or donating the same to non-profit civic, charitable,
or service organizations.
F. Disposal Of Recyclables/Compostables.
1. Recyclables shall not, in any event:
a. Be deposited in any landfill;
b. Be burned in any incinerator; or
c. Be deposited or distributed in any way or manner which is
contrary to the then applicable law, Statute, ordinance, rule or
regulation.
Provided however, that the restrictions in (a) and (b)
above shall not apply to any recyclables or
compostables which are deposited in a landfill or
burned pursuant to specific prior written approval
granted by the City.
2. Residents shall take such action as is reasonable under the
circumstances to determine that recyclables and compostables are
not disposed of contrary to the provisions of this Section.
G. Ownership Of Recyclables/Compostables. All recyclable and
compostable materials shall be owned by and be the responsibility of
the residents of premises until they are collected by the collector. Upon
collection of the recyclable and/or compostable materials by the
collector, the recyclable and/or compostable materials, with the
exception of recyclable containers and/or compostable containers
which are reusable, become the property and responsibility of the
contractor.
H. Care Of Recyclable Containers. Each resident shall be responsible for
the cleanliness and proper care of each recyclable container in his/her
possession. Abuse of the container will cause the forfeit of a resident's
right to a free replacement container when necessary.
I. Replacement Of Recyclable Containers. The contractor's employees
shall evaluate the condition of recyclable containers for possible reuse.
If reusable, they will be left with the resident for the next week's
collection. In the event the recyclable container is determined to be
unserviceable, due to usual wear and tear, for another week, a new
recyclable container furnished by the collector, at no charge, will be left
with the resident and the old recyclable container will be collected and
recycled. Recyclable containers will be exchanged on a one-for-one
basis as determined by condition at collection time. Owners of large
Section
235.310
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.310
AO:325
multi-family buildings have the option of exchanging the smaller
recyclable container for a larger bin to be supplied by the collector.
J. Disposal Of Recyclables/Compostables. The contractor shall dispose of
recyclables at a local recycling and/or composting facility, if available;
otherwise, contractor may sell recyclables and/or compostables to any
purchaser of contractor's choosing, unless otherwise directed by the
City. Contractor shall be entitled to retain the proceeds of any sale
thereof.
K. Major Appliance Collection. Major appliances as defined in this Section
can be picked up by the collector, with prior notification, for a fee.
Section
235.310
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
235.310
AO:326
ARTICLE III
Composting
Section 235.320. Composting [CC 1970 §12-6; Ord. No. 4844 §1,
12-10-1991; Ord. No. 6102 §1, 4-13-2010]
A. Definition. As used in this Section, the following term shall have the
respective meaning ascribed to it:
COMPOSTING — A controlled biological reduction of organic waste to
humus.
B. Maintenance. All compost piles shall be maintained using approved
composting procedures to comply with the following requirements:
1. All compost piles shall be enclosed in a freestanding compost bin.
Each compost bin shall be no larger in volume than one hundred
fifty (150) cubic feet for properties ten thousand (10,000) square
feet and less in lot size, with an additional one hundred fifty (150)
cubic feet permitted for each additional ten thousand (10,000)
square feet of lot size. Compost bins shall be no taller than five (5)
feet.
2. All compost piles shall be maintained so as to prevent the
harborage of rodents and pests. The presence of rodents in or near
a compost pile shall be cause for the City to issue a complaint.
3. All compost piles shall be maintained so as to prevent unpleasant,
rotten egg-like, putrefactive, sweet, sour or pungent odors.
4. Unless written permission has been granted by the adjoining
property owner, no compost pile shall be located less than three (3)
feet from the rear or side property line or within twenty (20) feet of
any home, patio, pool or similar structure on the adjacent property.
All compost piles shall be at least three (3) feet behind the front
building setback line.
5. No compost pile shall be located where it will impede the natural
free flow of storm water drainage.
6. Any vegetables, fruit and their remains, egg shells, fruit peels and
rinds and hair must be composted in such a way that these
materials are buried in the center of the pile at all times and so that
none of these materials are exposed or visible.
C. Ingredients.
1. No compost pile shall contain any of the following:
a. Animal carcasses, fish, fowl, meat or other animal products;
b. Manure;
c. Used litter box remains;
Section
235.320
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.320
AO:327
d. Milk, cheese, sour cream or other dairy products;
e. Lard, oils or oil-based foods;
f. Mayonnaise;
g. Salad dressing;
h. Whole grains (rice, wheat, barley, etc.);
i. Peanut butter;
j. Items not normally composted;
k. Items not biodegradable.
2. Permitted ingredients shall include:
a. Yard waste, including leaves, sod and grass clippings;
b. Untreated wood, wood chips and sawdust;
c. Paper;
d. Straw;
e. Vegetables, fruits and their remains, including peels and rinds;
f. Empty egg shells;
g. Aquatic weeds;
h. Coffee grounds and tea leaves;
i. Evergreen needles;
j. Hair;
k. Drier lint;
l. Vacuum cleaner dust;
m. Organic garden waste;
n. Commercial compost additives.
D. Private Use Only. Compost piles established in accordance with this
Article are for private use only. There shall not be commercial provision
of material to be composted or commercial use of the product of such
composting.
E. Owner Responsibility. Every owner or operator shall be responsible for
maintaining all property under his/her control in accordance with the
requirements of this Article.
Section
235.320
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
235.320
AO:328
ARTICLE IV
Yard By-Product Compost Facilities
Section 235.330. Definitions [CC 1970 §12-85; Ord. No. 5629 §1,
6-12-2001]
For the purposes of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
COMPOST — The biological decomposition of organic constituents under
controlled conditions.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works.
YARD BY-PRODUCT — The source separated leaves, grass clippings, tree
trimmings and limbs, yard and garden vegetation and Christmas trees.
YARD BY-PRODUCT COMPOST FACILITY — A non-residential premise
which collects and/or accepts recovered yard by-product generated off-site
for the purpose of controlled biological decomposition.
Section 235.340. Purpose of This Article [CC 1970 §12-86; Ord. No.
5629 §1, 6-12-2001]
The purpose of this Article is to fully regulate all yard by-product compost
facilities within the boundaries of the City. It is the intent of the City that
such facilities be exempt from the provisions of Subchapter T, Sections
607.1005 through 607.1170 of the St. Louis County Revised Ordinances,
which pertain to yard by-product compost facilities.
Section 235.350. Facilities To Which Article Applies [CC 1970
§12-87; Ord. No. 5629 §1, 6-12-2001]
This Article shall apply to all areas of yard by-product composting within
the jurisdiction of the City, including the existing natural composting area
located at the south end of South Gay Avenue which was operational prior
to the passage of the St. Louis County Ordinance No. 17291, Chapter 607.
Section 235.360. Designations and Duties of The Director [CC 1970
§12-88; Ord. No. 5629 §1, 6-12-2001]
A. The Director of Public Works is appointed to administer and implement
the provisions of this Article. Duties and responsibilities of the Director
shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Notifying the County Department of Health Director of the City's
adoption of regulations as strict as those stated in Subchapter T,
Sections 607.1005 through 607.1170 of the St. Louis County
Revised Ordinances that relate to the construction, operation and
closure of a yard by-product compost facility in order to retain full
regulatory authority over privately and municipally owned and/or
operated yard by-product compost facilities within the City's
boundaries and supplying the Director with a copy of this Article.
Section
235.330
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.360
AO:329
Section 235.370. Yard By-Product Compost Facility Management
[CC 1970 §12-89; Ord. No. 5629 §1, 6-12-2001]
Section 235.380. Standards For Operation of A Yard By-Product
Compost Facility [CC 1970 §12-90; Ord. No. 5629 §1, 6-12-2001]
2. Filing a statement with the County Department of Health Director
at least once per year registering each yard by-product compost
facility regulated by the City. The statement shall contain the
following information:
a. Volume of yard by-product in cubic yards received by the
facility during the previous year.
b. Volume of end-use product produced.
A. The construction, operation and closure of a yard by-product facility
shall be consistent with the provisions of this Article. Duties and
responsibilities of the Department of Public Works for yard by-product
compost facility management shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Developing, reviewing and/or approving a plan for the construction
and operation of a yard by-product compost facility which includes:
a. A description of the type of materials the yard by-product
compost facility will accept.
b. The maximum storage capacity of material which allow for
proper management of the material.
c. The technology utilized to process and store the materials.
d. Drawings detailing the operation of the yard by-product
compost facility.
e. Location of the nearest available water source.
f. A description of window construction (or other approved
methodology) to achieve a marketable finished compost
product.
g. A description of construction of processing and storage bases.
Bases shall be designed to shed stormwater and maintain
integrity through continued use of heavy equipment.
h. Developing, reviewing and/or approving a closure plan for the
facility consistent with Section 235.390 of this Article.
A. Yard by-product compost facilities within the jurisdiction of the City
shall adhere to the following requirements:
1. A facility shall not accept material beyond that which can be
properly managed.
Section
235.360
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
235.380
AO:330
Section 235.390. Closure Procedures For A Yard By-Product
Compost Facility [CC 1970 §12-91; Ord. No. 5629 §1, 6-12-2001]
2. Materials for composting shall be stored in a manner that will
minimize the generation of odor and aesthetic problems, prevent
spontaneous combustion and the harborage of vectors and not
create a public health nuisance.
3. Vector control programs shall be implemented to prevent or rectify
vector problems.
4. Surface watercourses and runoff shall be diverted to storm sewers,
detention ponds or other approved collection methods.
5. Materials easily moved by wind shall be stored in such a manner so
as to prevent such material from becoming airborne and scattered.
6. Fire extinguishers shall be provided and accessible.
7. Persons not authorized shall not be permitted to remove or
scavenge in the materials deposited at the facility.
8. Compliance with handling, storage and disposal requirements for
materials regulated under Federal, State and/or local jurisdictions
shall be met.
A. The Director shall inspect the yard by-product compost areas when
notified by an operator that a yard by-product compost facility area has
been closed. The operator shall comply with the following:
1. Remove or cause to be removed all yard by-product material from
the yard by-product compost facility site.
2. Restore the site by planting grass and trees as determined
necessary by the Department of Public Works.
3. Notify the Director in writing at least ninety (90) days prior to the
closure date (the date in which material for composting will no
longer be accepted).
4. At least thirty (30) days prior to the closure date, notify all regular
suppliers and haulers of organic material (yard by-products and
bulky agents) and regular recipients/customers of compost of its
intent to close.
5. At least thirty (30) days prior to the closure date, post a legible sign
with letters not less than three (3) inches in height which states the
yard by-product compost facility's intent to close. The sign shall
also state the final date and yard by-product or other organic
materials used in the compost process will be received by the
facility and the final date compost may be obtained from the facility.
The sign shall be located at all facility access gates and shall be
visible to all customers entering the facility.
Section
235.380
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.390
AO:331
6. Initiate implementation of the closure plan within ninety (90) days
of the closure date.
7. Not later than thirty (30) days following the closure date, a sign will
be posted which must read: "This facility is closed for all
composting activities and receipt of yard by-product. No dumping
allowed. Violators are subject to fines and imprisonment in the City
Jail". This sign must have lettering no less than three (3) inches in
height. Signs must be maintained in legible condition until
certification of completion of closure is issued for the facility by the
Director.
8. Unless otherwise authorized, within one hundred eighty (180) days
of the closure date, final closure shall be completed.
9. A yard by-product compost facility shall be considered finally
closed upon final inspection of the facility and certified closed by
the Director. If determined that closure has complied with this
closure plan, the Director shall, within thirty (30) days of the
inspection date, issued written certification of such to the operator
of the facility.
Section
235.390
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
235.390
AO:332
Chapter 300
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Cross References — As to aircraft use permit, Art. V of ch. 605; as to
parades and assemblies, Art. IV of ch. 605.
Section
235.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.390
AO:333

ARTICLE I
Definitions
Section 300.010. Definitions73 [CC 1970 §21-1; CC 1947 §§10-99,
10-109, 11-1; Ord. No. 3881 §1, 4-12-1977; Ord. No. 5860 §1,
1-25-2005]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the respective
meanings ascribed to them:
ALLEY OR ALLEYWAY — Any street with a roadway of less than twenty-four
(24) feet in width that serves the side or rear of a building or residence.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE — A vehicle publicly owned and
operated as an ambulance or a vehicle publicly owned and operated by the
State Highway Patrol, Police or Fire Department, Sheriff or Constable or
Deputy Sheriff, traffic officer or any privately owned vehicle operated as an
ambulance when responding to emergency calls.
AUTOCYCLE — A three-wheeled motor vehicle which the drivers and
passengers ride in a partially or completely enclosed non-straddle seating
area, that is designed to be controlled with a steering wheel and pedals, and
that has met applicable Department of Transportation National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration requirements or Federal Motorcycle Safety
Standards.[Ord. No. 6562, 11-13-2018]
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A vehicle designed, maintained or used
primarily for the transportation of property or merchandise.
CONGESTED DISTRICT — Any district lawfully designated by ordinance as
a congested district.
CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY — A highway, street or roadway in
respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons
have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only
and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over the highway, street or roadway.
CROSSWALK — That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of curb and property lines at intersections or
any portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines
or other markings on the surface.
CURB — The lateral boundaries of that portion of the street designated for
the use of vehicles, whether marked with curbstones or not.
DRIVER — Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Is a vehicle of any of the following types:
A vehicle operated by the State Highway Patrol, the State Water Patrol,
the Missouri Capitol Police, or a State Park Ranger, those vehicles
1.
73.Cross References—Definitions under parking meter regulations, §350.130. State Law
Reference—For similar provisions, §300.010, RSMo.
Section
300.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
300.010
AO:335
EQUIPMENT TRAILER — Any flat bed or enclosed trailer designed or
commonly used for storage or transportation of grounds keeping,
landscaping, earthmoving, construction or other mechanical or electronic
equipment or vehicles, including storage or transportation of motorcycles,
off-road vehicles and recreational vehicles of any sort.
HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
HORSE OR ANIMAL TRUCK OR TRAILER — Any vehicle or trailer designed
or commonly used for transportation of horses or other animals.
IMPROVED STREET OR HIGHWAY — A street or highway which has been
paved with gravel, macadam, concrete, brick or asphalt or improved in any
manner by adding material or substance so as to present a surface other
than the original earth surface.
operated by enforcement personnel of the State Highways and
Transportation Commission, Police or Fire Department, Sheriff,
Constable or Deputy Sheriff, Federal Law Enforcement Officer
authorized to carry firearms and to make arrests for violations of the
laws of the United States, Traffic Officer or Coroner or by a privately
owned emergency vehicle company;
A vehicle operated as an ambulance or operated commercially for the
purpose of transporting emergency medical supplies or organs;
2.
Any vehicle qualifying as an emergency vehicle pursuant to Section
307.175, RSMo.;
3.
Any wrecker, or tow truck or a vehicle owned and operated by a
public utility or public service corporation while performing emergency
service;
4.
Any vehicle transporting equipment designed to extricate human
beings from the wreckage of a motor vehicle;
5.
Any vehicle designated to perform emergency functions for a civil
defense or emergency management agency established pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 44, RSMo.;
6.
Any vehicle operated by an authorized employee of the Department of
Corrections who, as part of the employee's official duties, is responding
to a riot, disturbance, hostage incident, escape or other critical
situation where there is the threat of serious physical injury or death,
responding to mutual aid call from another criminal justice agency, or
in accompanying an ambulance which is transporting an offender to a
medical facility;
7.
Any vehicle designated to perform hazardous substance emergency
functions established pursuant to the provisions of Sections 260.500 to
260.550, RSMo.
8.
Section
300.010
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
300.010
AO:336
INTERSECTION —
LANED ROADWAY — A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
LIVE LOAD — The weight of the cargo of a commercial vehicle in addition
to that of the chassis and body of the vehicle.
MOTORBUS — A motor vehicle seating eight (8) or more persons which
is offered for or engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire,
without regard to the time consumed or distance traveled, on a route
not controlled by the passenger and for a charge based on transporting
passengers from one designated place to another along a definite route
over, along or upon any public street, alley or other public place in the City.
MOTORCYCLE — A motor vehicle regularly operated on two (2) wheels.
MOTORTRICYCLE — A motor vehicle regularly operated on three (3)
wheels, including a motorcycle, when operated with any conveyance,
temporarily or otherwise, requiring the use of a third wheel.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle as herein defined which is self-propelled.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named herein,
they shall mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current
use in the City.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE — A sign, signal, marking or device
not inconsistent with this Chapter placed or erected by authority of the
public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — A signal, not inconsistent with
this Chapter, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official
having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGN — A sign, marking or device, other than a signal,
not inconsistent with this Chapter, placed or erected by authority of a public
body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning
or guiding traffic.
ONE-WAY STREET — A street where vehicles are by law required to move
in one (1) direction only.
The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral
curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at,
right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
1.
Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by
an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
In the event such intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways
thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways
of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
2.
Section
300.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
300.010
AO:337
OPERATOR — See "DRIVER" herein.
PARK OR PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
upon a roadway, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading in obedience to traffic regulations
or traffic signs or signals.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot.
PNEUMATIC TIRE — A tire of rubber or other substance and fabric inflated
with air.
POLICE OFFICER — An officer of the Police Department or any other officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrest for violation of a
traffic regulation.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY — A road or driveway not open to the use of
the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
RAILROAD TRAIN — A carrier of persons or property upon cars, operated
on stationary rails and the prime mover or any car separately.
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT — As used in this Chapter, "recreational
equipment" is defined as and shall include the following:
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right of one (1) vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a
lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching
under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise
to danger of collision unless one yields to the other.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street or highway between the regularly
established curb lines or that portion improved and intended to be used for
vehicular travel.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational
and vacation uses, permanently identified "travel trailer" by the
manufacturer.
1.
PICKUP CAMPER — A structure designed primarily to be mounted on
a pickup or truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it
suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and
vacation uses.
2.
MOTORIZED HOME — A portable dwelling designed and constructed
as an integral part of self-propelled vehicle.
3.
FOLDING TENT TRAILER — A canvas folding structure, mounted on
wheels and designed for travel and vacation use.
4.
Boats and boat trailers shall include boats, floats, wave runners, rafts,
personal watercraft and other watercraft of any kind plus the normal
equipment to transport the same on the highway.
5.
6. Vehicles licensed by a State authority as recreational vehicles.
Section
300.010
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
300.010
AO:338
SAFETY ZONE — The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked
or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
SCHOOL ZONE — A space in any street lawfully designated by ordinance
for the safety of persons going to and returning from public, private or
parochial schools.
SOLID TIRE — A tire of rubber or other resilient material, other than a
pneumatic tire.
STAND OR STANDING — The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving
or discharging passengers.
STATE HIGHWAY — A highway maintained by the State as a part of the
State highway system.
STOP — When required, complete cessation from movement.
STOP OR STOPPING — When prohibited, any halting even momentarily of
a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a Police Officer or
traffic control sign or signal.
STREET OR HIGHWAY — A way or place open for vehicular travel by the
public, regardless of its legal status and regardless of whether it has been
legally established by a constituted authority or by user for the statutory
period of time as a public highway.
TAXICAB — Any motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying persons
for hire on the streets of the City, whether the same is operated from a
street stand or from a garage, where no regular or specific route is traveled,
but passengers are taken to and from such places as they may designate;
whether the charge therefor is made on the basis of distance traveled as
indicated by a taximeter or speedometer attached thereto or by any other
method of determining distance, such as by zoning system or otherwise
or the time consumed in traveling or on any other basis whatever. This
definition shall not include motorbuses.
THROUGH HIGHWAY — Every highway or portion thereof on which
vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way and at the entrances to
which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to
yield the right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to
either a stop sign or a yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided
in this Chapter.
TRACTOR — A motor vehicle designed primarily for agricultural use or
used as a traveling power plant or for drawing other vehicles or farm
or road building implements and having no provision for carrying loads
independently.
Section
300.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
300.010
AO:339
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances either singly or together while using any street for purposes of
travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device, whether manually, electrically
or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
to proceed.
TRAILER — Any vehicle without motive power designed for carrying
passengers or property on its own structure for being drawn by any vehicle,
except those running exclusively on tracks, including a semi-trailer or
vehicle of the trailer type, so designed and used in connection with any
vehicle that a considerable part of its own weight rests upon and is carried
by the towing vehicle.
VEHICLE — A device upon, in or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except a device moved by
human power, a motorized wheelchair or used exclusively upon stationary
rails or tracks.
Section
300.010
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
300.010
AO:340
ARTICLE II
Closing of Streets
Section 300.020. Closing Streets To Traffic [CC 1970 §21-8; CC
1947 §11-69]
The Director of Public Works is authorized to close any street, alley, public
place or highway and withdraw the same from public use temporarily and
during such period as public work thereon or other public emergency
or expediency shall make such action necessary. No person shall use or
attempt to use said street, alley, public place or highway so withdrawn from
public use or drive or attempt to drive any vehicle or animal thereon.
Section
300.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
300.020
AO:341
Chapter 305
TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
Section
300.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
300.020
AO:342
ARTICLE I
In General
Section 305.010. Officers — Powers and Duties [CC 1970 §21-2; CC
1947 §11-2; Ord. No. 5439 §1, 7-14-1998]
Section 305.020. Traffic Engineer — Office Created — Duties
Generally74 [CC 1970 §21-7; Ord. No. 5439 §2, 7-14-1998]
A. It shall be the duty of the Police Department to enforce the provisions of
this Chapter. Officers of the Police Department are authorized to direct
all traffic either in person or by means of visible or audible signal in
conformance with the provisions of this Chapter; provided, in the event
of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police and Fire Department may direct
traffic, as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this
Chapter.
B. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to restrict parking or to
establish such other emergency measures as conditions may require to
control traffic during such emergency conditions.
A. The office of City Traffic Engineer is established. The Director of Public
Works or other designated City Official shall serve as Traffic Engineer
in addition to his/her other functions and shall exercise the powers and
duties with respect to traffic as provided in this Chapter.
B. The Traffic Engineer shall determine the installation and proper timing
and maintenance of traffic control devices, conduct engineering
analyses of traffic accidents and devise remedial measures, conduct
engineering investigation of traffic conditions, plan the operation of
traffic on the streets and highways of the City and cooperate with other
City Officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic
conditions and carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by
this Code and other ordinances of the City.
C. The Director of Public Works is authorized to install new traffic control
devices or modify existing installations for a period not to exceed ninety
(90) days. All installations that remain in place after the initial period
require that they be authorized by ordinance.
74.State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §300.060, RSMo.
Section
305.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
305.020
AO:343

ARTICLE II
Fire Lanes
Section 305.030. Fire Lanes and Fire Lane Posting [CC 1970
§21-164; Ord. No. 3734 §1, 5-13-1975; Ord. No. 5690 §3, 4-23-2002]
A. The Chief of the Fire Department is authorized to designate fire lane
areas on such portions of public or private streets, alleys, roadways or
any area accessible to vehicles as the Chief of the Fire Department may
deem necessary to provide unobstructed access for Fire Department
and other emergency vehicles.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave a motor vehicle
in or upon or to obstruct in any manner any fire lane so designated by
the Chief of the Fire Department.
C. Fire lanes so legally designated by the Chief of the Fire Department
shall be posted with appropriate signs or markings as specified by the
Chief of the Fire Department so that the public will be aware of the
existence of such fire lanes. In cases of fire lanes established on private
property, the owner thereof shall provide such signs or markings at his/
her expense.
Section
305.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
305.030
AO:345
Chapter 310
ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS
Cross Reference — As to restricted commercial vehicles or truck use, sch.
VI.
Section 310.010. Obedience To Police Officers and Fire Department
Officials75 [CC 1970 §21-3]
No person shall knowingly fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a Police Officer or Fire Department official.
Section 310.020. Persons Propelling Pushcarts or Riding Animals
To Obey Traffic Regulations
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway,
and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the
provisions of this Title applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this Title which by their very nature can have no application.
Section 310.030. Use of Skateboards, Roller Skates, In-Line Skates,
Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Devices and Similar Devices
Restricted [CC 1970 §21-26; CC 1947 §11-50; Ord. No. 5267 §1,
8-13-1996; Ord. No. 5796 §1, 11-11-2003]
A. As used in this Section, "electric personal assistive mobility device
(EPAMD)" shall mean a self-balancing, two-non-tandem-wheeled device
designed to transport only one (1) person, with an electric propulsion
system with an average power of seven hundred fifty (750) watts (one
(1) horsepower), whose maximum speed on a paved level surface, when
powered solely by such a propulsion system while ridden by an operator
who weighs one hundred seventy (170) pounds, is less than twenty (20)
miles per hour. Persons under sixteen (16) years of age shall not
operate an electric personal assistive mobility device, except for an
operator with a mobility-related disability.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person upon a skateboard, electric personal
assistive mobility device, roller skates, in-line skates, coaster, sled, toy
vehicle or similar device to:
1. Go upon any roadway which has more than one (1) traffic lane
running in the same direction (including, but not limited to, Clayton
Road, Brentwood Boulevard, Forsyth Boulevard, Central Avenue,
Big Bend Boulevard, Maryland Avenue, Bemiston Avenue,
Bonhomme Avenue, Carondelet Avenue and Meramec Avenue),
except while crossing a street in a crosswalk.
75.State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §300.080, RSMo.
Section
305.030
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
310.030
AO:346
Section 310.040. Public Employees To Obey Traffic Regulations [CC
1970 §21-4; CC 1947 §11-5]
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the operator of any vehicle
owned by or used in the service of the U.S. Government, this State, County
or City and it shall be unlawful for any such operator to violate any of the
provisions of this Chapter.
Section 310.050. Emergency Vehicles — Use of Lights and Sirens —
Right-Of-Way — Stationary Vehicles, Procedure — Penalty
2. Ride in or upon any public property (other than sidewalks) or
private property of another, to include steps, staircases, ramps,
banisters, courtyards, fountains, foyers, plazas and other improved
areas associated with real property, without specific permission
from the property owner or an agent thereof.
3. Ride in or upon any school playground, parking garage or paved
lot, if the area has been posted to prohibit such devices or without
specific permission from the property owner or an agent thereof.
4. Use such devices in a crowd or during a public event, except that a
person with a demonstrable mobility-related disability may use an
electric personal assistive mobility device unless such use would
pose a hazard to public safety.
5. To latch onto a motor vehicle with the intent to secure a tow or ride.
C. Skateboards, electric personal assistive mobility devices, roller skates,
in-line skates, coasters, toy vehicles, sleds and similar devices, etc., will
be permitted on public sidewalks (other than as prohibited in
Subsection (B)(4) above) provided that such devices are operated in a
safe and prudent manner. In addition, those persons operating such
devices shall be required to yield the right-of-way to any and all
pedestrians who may be utilizing the same sidewalk.
D. In the event a person is operating a skateboard, electric personal
assistive mobility device, roller skates, in-line skates, coasters, sleds,
toy vehicles or similar devices in contradiction to this Section and the
individual is seventeen (17) years of age or younger, responding Police
Officers may impound the item and retain possession of same until such
time as the parent or guardian of the violator shall appear at the Police
Department and claim the impounded device.
E. Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of the provisions of this
Section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as
provided in Section 100.110 of this Code of ordinances.
A. Upon the immediate approach of an emergency vehicle giving audible
signal by siren or while having at least one (1) lighted lamp exhibiting
red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance
of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle or a flashing blue
Section
310.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
310.050
AO:347
light authorized by Section 307.175, RSMo., the driver of every other
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a
position parallel to, and as far as possible to the right of, the traveled
portion of the highway and thereupon stop and remain in such position
until such emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise
directed by a police or traffic officer.
B. Upon approaching a stationary emergency vehicle displaying lighted
red or red and blue lights, the driver of every motor vehicle shall:
1. Proceed with caution and yield the right-of-way, if possible with due
regard to safety and traffic conditions, by making a lane change
into a lane not adjacent to that of the stationary vehicle, if on a
roadway having at least four (4) lanes with not less than two (2)
lanes proceeding in the same direction as the approaching vehicle;
or
2. Proceed with due caution and reduce the speed of the vehicle,
maintaining a safe speed for road conditions, if changing lanes
would be unsafe or impossible.
C. Responsibilities Of Driver Of Emergency Vehicle.
1. The driver of any "emergency vehicle" defined in Section 300.010
of this Code shall not sound the siren thereon or have the front red
lights or blue lights on except when such vehicle is responding to
an emergency call or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected law
violator, or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire.
2. The driver of an emergency vehicle may:
a. Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of Sections 304.014
to 304.025, RSMo., and the provisions of this Code;
b. Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
c. Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as the driver does
not endanger life or property;
d. Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions.
3. The exemptions granted to an emergency vehicle pursuant to
Subsection (C)(2) of this Section shall apply only when the driver of
any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell,
siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when
the vehicle is equipped with at least one (1) lighted lamp displaying
a red light or blue light visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of
such vehicle.
Section
310.050
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
310.050
AO:348
Section 310.060. Leaving The Scene of A Motor Vehicle Accident
Chapter 315
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES, SIGNS, SIGNALS AND
MARKINGS
Section 315.010. Authority To Install Traffic Control Devices
The City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain traffic control signs,
signals and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of
the City to make effective the provisions of said ordinances and may place
and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he/she may deem
necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of the City or
under State law or to guide or warn traffic.
Section 315.020. Manual and Specifications For Traffic Control
Devices
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to recognized
standards and specifications. All signs or signals required hereunder for
a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and
location throughout the City. All traffic control devices so erected and not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Title shall be official traffic control
devices.
D. No person shall purchase an emergency light as described in this
Section without furnishing the seller of such light an affidavit stating
that the light will be used exclusively for emergency vehicle purposes.
E. Violation of this Section shall be deemed an ordinance violation.
A. A person commits the offense of leaving the scene of a motor vehicle
accident when, being the operator or driver of a vehicle on the
highways, streets or roads of the City or on any publicly or privately
owned parking lot or parking facility within the City generally open for
use by the public and knowing that an injury has been caused to a
person or damage has been caused to property due to his/her
culpability or to accident, he/she leaves the place of the injury, damage
or accident without stopping and giving his/her name, residence,
including City and street number, motor vehicle number and driver's
license number, if any, to the injured party or to a Police Officer, or if no
Police Officer is in the vicinity, then to the nearest Police station or
judicial officer.
B. For the purposes of this Section, all Peace Officers shall have
jurisdiction, when invited by an injured person, to enter the premises of
any such privately owned parking lot or parking facility for the purpose
of investigating an accident and performing all necessary duties
regarding such accident.
Section
310.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
315.030
AO:349
Section 315.030. Obedience Required76 [CC 1970 §21-45]
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic
control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions
of this Chapter, unless otherwise directed by a Police Officer, subject to the
exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this
Chapter.
Section 315.040. When Official Traffic Control Devices Required For
Enforcement Purposes
No provision of this Title for which official traffic control devices are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and
place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever
a particular Section does not state that official traffic control devices are
required, such Section shall be effective even though no devices are erected
or in place.
Section 315.050. Official Traffic Control Devices — Presumption of
Legality
Section 315.060. Traffic Control Signals — Legend — Observance77
[CC 1970 §21-46; Ord. No. 3579 §§1—2, 1-23-1973; Ord. No. 3646
§1, 4-23-1974; Ord. No. 3681 §1, 11-12-1974]
A. Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position
approximately conforming to the requirements of this Title, such
devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or
direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by
competent evidence.
B. Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of
this Title and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements
pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the
requirements of this Title, unless the contrary shall be established by
competent evidence.
A. Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting
different colored lights or colored lighted arrows, successively one (1)
at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall
be used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend
and the lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and
pedestrians as follows:
1. Green indication.
76.State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §300.140, RSMo.
77.State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §300.155, RSMo.
Section
315.030
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
315.060
AO:350
a. Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place
prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to
other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
b. Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in
combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow or such other movement as is permitted by other
indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an
adjacent crosswalk and to other indications shown at the same
time. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other
traffic lawfully using the intersection.
c. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as
provided in this Chapter, pedestrians facing any green signal,
except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed
across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
2. Steady yellow indication.
a. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby
warned that the related green movement is being terminated
or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately
thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection.
b. Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise
directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in this
Chapter, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to
cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no
pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway.
3. Steady red indication.
a. The driver of a vehicle which is stopped as close as practicable
at the entrance to the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, then at the entrance to the intersection
in obedience to a red signal may cautiously enter the
intersection to make a right turn but shall yield the right-ofway
to pedestrians and other traffic proceeding as directed by
the signal at the intersection, except that the State Highways
and Transportation Commission with reference to an
intersection involving a State highway, and local authorities
with reference to an intersection involving other highways
under their jurisdiction, may prohibit any such right turn
against a red signal at any intersection where safety conditions
Section
315.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
315.060
AO:351
Section 315.065. Violation of Public Safety At Intersections and The
Automated Photo Enforcement of Traffic Control Signal
Regulations78 [Ord. No. 5954 §1, 10-24-2006]
so require, said prohibition shall be effective when a sign is
erected at such intersection giving notice thereof.
b. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as
provided in this Chapter, pedestrians facing a steady red signal
alone shall not enter the roadway. Provided further, that
pedestrians shall have the right-of-way over such right turning
traffic.
4. In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of
this Section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which
by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be
made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the
stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking,
the stop shall be made at the signal.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
AUTOMATED PHOTO TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM — A system
that:
MUNICIPAL COURT — The Municipal Court of the City.
OPERATOR — Any person who operates or drives a motor vehicle and
has the same meaning as "driver".
OWNER — The owner(s) of a motor vehicle as shown on the motor
vehicle registration records of the Missouri Department of Revenue or
the analogous department or agency of another State or Country.
Consists of camera(s) and vehicle sensor(s), installed to work in
conjunction with an electrically operated traffic control signal; and
1.
Is capable of producing high resolution color digital recorded
images that show:
The traffic control signal while it is emitting a steady red signal
for a direction of travel through an intersection;
a.
A motor vehicle entering or in the intersection in that direction
of travel; and
b.
c. The license plate and number of the motor vehicle; and
2.
Is not designed to take recorded images of the faces of occupants
of a motor vehicle.
3.
78.State Law Reference—For statutory definitions of owner and operator, §301.010, RSMo.
Section
315.060
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
315.065
AO:352
RECORDED IMAGE — A still image digitally recorded by an Automated
Photo Traffic Enforcement System.
SYSTEM LOCATION — An intersection at which an Automated Photo
Traffic Enforcement System has been installed.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — A traffic control device that displays
alternating red, yellow, and green lights intended to direct traffic when
to stop at or proceed through an intersection.
B. Violation Of Public Safety At Intersections. Except as otherwise
provided in this Section, a person commits the infraction of violation of
public safety at an intersection when a motor vehicle of which that
person is an owner is present in an intersection while the traffic control
signal for the intersection is emitting a steady red signal for the
direction of travel or orientation of that vehicle in or through the
intersection, unless the motor vehicle is in the process of making a
lawful right turn. Provided however, that an infraction shall be excused
upon submission of a sufficient sworn statement that the presence of
the motor vehicle in the intersection was justified because:
1. The traffic control signal was not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to an ordinarily observant person;
2. The operator of the motor vehicle was acting in compliance with
the lawful order or direction of a Police Officer;
3. The operator of the motor vehicle violated the instruction of the
traffic control signal in order to yield the right-of-way to an
immediately approaching authorized emergency vehicle;
4. The motor vehicle was being operated as part of a funeral
procession pursuant to Section 194.503, RSMo.;
5. The motor vehicle was being operated as an authorized emergency
vehicle as defined and in compliance with Section 304.022, RSMo.;
6. The motor vehicle was a stolen vehicle and being operated by a
person other than the owner without the effective consent of the
owner (but this shall not be a justification for such an operator) and
the theft was timely reported to the appropriate law enforcement
agency;
7. The license plate and/or tags depicted in the recorded image(s)
were stolen and being displayed on a motor vehicle other than the
motor vehicle for which they were issued (but this shall not be a
justification for the operator of the motor vehicle) and the theft was
timely reported to the appropriate law enforcement agency;
8. Ownership of the motor vehicle had in fact been transferred prior
to the violation (provided state records substantiate this
statement);
Section
315.065
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
315.065
AO:353
9. The motor vehicle was present in the intersection because it was
inoperable.
Liability hereunder is based on ownership, without regard to
whether the owner was operating the motor vehicle at the time
of the violation, except that, as provided in Section 304.120.4,
RSMo., no liability shall be imposed on the owner of a motor
vehicle when the vehicle is being permissively used by a lessee
if the owner furnishes the name, address, and operator's
license number of the person renting or leasing the motor
vehicle at the time the violation occurred to the City within ten
(10) days from the time of receipt of written request for such
information.
C. Automated Photo Traffic Enforcement System Authorized. An
Automated Photo Traffic Enforcement System is hereby authorized to
be installed and operated within the City for the purpose of detecting
violations of public safety at intersections. Specific system locations
shall be determined from time to time by the City Manager. Recorded
images shall constitute sufficient basis for citation if alone or in
combination they clearly show that the traffic control signal for an
intersection is emitting a steady red signal for the direction of travel or
orientation of a motor vehicle in or through the intersection, the motor
vehicle present in the intersection, and the license plate and license
number of the motor vehicle. Recorded images may also be used as
evidence of other violations to the extent permitted by applicable law.
D. Enforcement Procedures.
1. Except as otherwise provided herein, upon review of recorded
image(s) showing an infraction under this Section, a Police Officer
of the City Police Department shall complete a citation in a form
approved by the City Manager (which form may be completed
electronically or online) and the City shall cause the completed
citation to be mailed to the owner at its last known address by first
class U.S. Mail, postage prepaid, within thirty (30) days after the
date the recorded image(s) were taken.
a. Based upon the information obtained from the recorded image,
the Police Officer may obtain any additional information about
the owner, which is necessary to complete or mail the citation,
from the records of the Missouri Department of Revenue or any
other legal means; or, if the motor vehicle is registered in
another State or Country, from the motor vehicle registration
records of the department or agency of the other State or
Country analogous to the Missouri Department of Revenue or
any other legal means.
b. If there is more than one (1) owner of the motor vehicle, a
citation may be completed and addressed to any or all of them,
and such owner shall be jointly and severally liable hereunder.
Section
315.065
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
315.065
AO:354
c. The citation shall direct the owner to respond within ten (10)
days of the date of mailing of the citation either by paying the
fine specified in this Section at the appropriate time and place
in the City or by providing a sufficient sworn statement of
applicability of one (1) of the justifications for presence of the
motor vehicle in the intersection set forth in this Section.
d. A copy of the recorded image(s) upon which the citation is
based shall be sent to the owner with the citation.
e. The citation shall include a request that the name, address and
operator's license number of any person renting or leasing the
motor vehicle at the time the violation occurred be furnished to
the City within ten (10) days of receipt of the request.
2. Any sworn statement provided by an owner shall be examined by
the City Prosecuting Attorney. If the City Prosecuting Attorney
determines that a statement is sufficient, then the citation shall be
withdrawn and a letter to that effect shall be sent to the owner by
the City. If the City Prosecuting Attorney determines that a
statement is insufficient, including but not limited to a
determination based upon a comparison of the statement to the
recorded image(s), then a letter shall be sent to the owner (any or
all of them) at its last known address by first class U.S. Mail,
postage prepaid by the City indicating that the statement was
insufficient and the fine specified in this Section must be paid at the
appropriate time and place in the City within ten (10) days of the
date of the letter. If the statement timely provides the name,
address and operator's license number of any person renting or
leasing the motor vehicle at the time the violation occurred, then
the citation shall be withdrawn, a letter to that effect shall be sent
to the owner by the City, and a new citation shall be issued to the
identified person together with a copy of the identifying statement,
which person shall be liable hereunder as if an owner. If the
operator of a stolen vehicle or a vehicle bearing stolen license
plates or tags that violates this Section is identified, such person
shall be liable as if an owner.
3. In lieu of completing a citation, the Police Department may send a
warning notice to the owner if the system location was established
within one (1) week of the violation, or if the reviewing officer
determines that the recorded images are inconclusive or that it is
more likely than not that a justification applies to the violation.
E. Fine. Notwithstanding any other provision of the City Code of
Ordinances, the fine for the infraction of violation of public safety at an
intersection shall be equal to the applicable fine for failure to obey
electric signal as set by the Municipal Court from time to time for the
traffic violations bureau (TVB) and under no circumstances may a
person be imprisoned for such an infraction.
Section
315.065
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
315.065
AO:355
Section 315.070. Display of Unauthorized Signs and Signals [CC
1970 §21-47; CC 1957 §11-11]
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain or to display upon
or in view of any street any unofficial sign, signal or device which purports
to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic sign or signal or
which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view
or interferes with the effectiveness of any official sign or signal. Every such
prohibited sign, signal or device is declared to be a public nuisance and the
Chief of Police is empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed
without notice.
Section 315.080. Interference With Official Traffic Control Devices
or Railroad Signs or Signals
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any
railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon or any
other part thereof.
Section 315.090. Pedestrian Control Signals
Section 315.100. Flashing Signals
F. Warning Signs. An Automated Photo Traffic Enforcement System may
be identified by advance warning signs posted at entrances to the City
and/or at specific system locations, if the City Manager determines that
such signs will enhance the efficacy of the system. Absence of such
signs shall not provide justification for a violation.
G. Failure To Respond To Citation. Any person who shall fail to respond to
a citation or letter issued under this Section by timely payment of fine
or by timely and sufficient statement as described herein, or who shall
submit a false sworn statement hereunder shall be subject to
prosecution for Failure to Respond to Citation in the Municipal Court
for violation of this Section subject to the general penalty provisions of
Section 100.110 of the Municipal Code, in addition to any other
applicable liabilities or sanctions.
A. Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words
"Walk" or "Don't Walk" or appropriate symbols are in place, such signals
shall indicate as follows:
1. "WALK": Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the rightof-
way by the drivers of all vehicles.
2. "DON'T WALK": No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in
the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially
completed his/her crossing when the flashing signal begins shall
proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone during the flashing signal.
Section
315.065
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
315.100
AO:356
Section 315.110. Establishment of Traffic Lanes — Observance
Required79 [CC 1970 §21-62; Ord. No. 4299 §1, 7-12-1983]
Chapter 320
SPEED REGULATIONS
Cross Reference — As to designated speed limits on streets, sch. I.
Section 320.010. General Provisions [CC 1970 §21-108; CC 1947
§11-52]
A. Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic
sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
1. Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when
marked or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and the
right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after
making a stop at a stop sign.
2. Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.
B. This Section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be
governed by the rules as set forth in Section 300.295, RSMo.
A. The Director of Public Works is authorized to mark traffic lanes upon
the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of
traffic is necessary.
B. Where traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another
vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
C. Where traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to cause such vehicle to be moved from such
traffic lane until the operator of such vehicle shall have first ascertained
that such movement can be made with safety and then only after having
given an appropriate hand or mechanical signal.
A. No person shall operate or drive a vehicle (except emergency vehicles
on emergency runs) on any street, boulevard or thoroughfare in the
City at any time at a rate of speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per
hour unless a higher maximum rate of speed applicable to certain
designated streets or portions of specific streets is fixed by ordinance
79.State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §300.200, RSMo.
Section
315.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
320.010
AO:357
Section 320.020. Slow Speed — Regulations
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. Peace
Officers may enforce the provisions of this Section by directions to drivers,
and in the event of apparent willful disobedience to this provision and
refusal to comply with direction of an officer in accordance herewith, the
continued slow operation by a driver is an ordinance violation.
Chapter 325
TURNING MOVEMENTS
Cross Reference — As to prohibited left and right turns, sch. IV.
Section 325.010. Required Position and Method of Turning At
Intersection [CC 1970 §21-85; CC 1947 §11-57]
and marked by signs erected at the beginning and end of such
designated streets or portions of such streets.
B. No person shall operate or drive a vehicle in a legally designated school
zone at a rate of speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour.
A. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
1. Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge
of the roadway, except where multiple turn lanes have been
established.
2. Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that
portion of the right-half of the roadway nearest the centerline
thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it
enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the
centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable,
the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the
left of the center of the intersection.
3. Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection
where traffic is restricted to one (1) direction on one (1) or more of
the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any
such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme
left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of
travel of such vehicle and after entering the intersection the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as
practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving
Section
320.010
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
325.010
AO:358
Section 325.020. Hand and Mechanical Signals
in such direction upon the roadway being entered, except where
multiple turn lanes have been established.
4. Designated two-way left turn lanes. Where a special lane for
making left turns by drivers proceeding in opposite directions have
been indicated by official traffic control devices:
a. A left turn shall not be made from any other lane;
b. A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane except when preparing
for or making a left turn from or into the roadway or when
preparing for or making a U-turn when otherwise permitted by
law; and
c. A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane for a distance more
than five hundred (500) feet.
B. The operator of a vehicle shall not drive through private property or
other open way to circumvent either a stop sign or stop light.
A. No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of or turn a vehicle
from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and
until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only
after the giving of an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein.
1. An operator or driver when stopping, or when checking the speed
of the operator's vehicle if the movement of other vehicles may
reasonably be affected by such checking of speed, shall extend
such operator's arm at an angle below horizontal so that the same
may be seen in the rear of the vehicle.
2. An operator or driver intending to turn the vehicle to the right shall
extend such operator's arm at an angle above horizontal so that the
same may be seen in front of and in the rear of the vehicle and shall
slow down and approach the intersecting highway as near as
practicable to the right side of the highway along which such
operator is proceeding before turning.
3. An operator or driver intending to turn the vehicle to the left shall
extend such operator's arm in a horizontal position so that the
same may be seen in the rear of the vehicle and shall slow down
and approach the intersecting highway so that the left side of the
vehicle shall be as near as practicable to the centerline of the
highway along which the operator is proceeding before turning.
4. The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the
hand and arm or by a signal light or signal device in good
mechanical condition of a type approved by the State Highway
Patrol; however, when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a
hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear
Section
325.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
325.020
AO:359
Section 325.030. Limitations On Turning Around [CC 1970 §21-74;
CC 1947 §11-43; Ord. No. 5608 §1, 1-9-2001; Ord. No. 6135 §1,
1-11-2011]
Chapter 330
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
of such vehicle, then such signals shall be given by such light or
device. A vehicle shall be considered as so constructed or loaded
that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front
and rear when the distance from the center of the top of the
steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load
exceeds twenty-four (24) inches, or when the distance from the
center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body
or load thereon exceeds fourteen (14) feet, which limit of fourteen
(14) feet shall apply to single vehicles or combinations of vehicles.
The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to any trailer
which does not interfere with a clear view of the hand signals of the
operator or of the signaling device upon the vehicle pulling such
trailer; provided further, that the provisions of this Section as far
as mechanical devices on vehicles so constructed that a hand and
arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such
vehicle as above provided shall only be applicable to new vehicles
registered within this State after the first (1st) day of January,
1954.
A. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a U-turn or
otherwise turn such vehicle within any roadway or intersection so as to
proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement can be made in
safety and without backing or otherwise interfering with other traffic,
provided, however, that the operator of any vehicle shall not make a Uturn
or otherwise turn the same so as to proceed in the opposite
direction upon:
1. Brentwood Boulevard;
2. Hanley Road;
3. Within the area bounded on the north by the north side of Maryland
Avenue, on the west by the west side of Brentwood Boulevard, on
the south by the south side of Forest Park Expressway and on the
east by the east side of Hanley Road except from 9:00 P.M. to 6:30
A.M. and on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays;
4. On any street in a congested district; or
5. At any street intersection where traffic control signals have been
installed.
Section
325.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
330.010
AO:360
Section 330.010. One-Way Streets Designated
Upon the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule V, vehicular
traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when proper signs
indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every
intersection.
Section 330.020. Signs Erected — Moving in Direction Indicated
[CC 1970 §21-68; CC 1947 §11-37]
A sign indicating the direction of traffic shall be erected and maintained at
every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited,
which signs shall be obeyed by all operators of vehicles.
Chapter 335
STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS
Cross Reference — As to designated stop intersections, crosswalks and yield
intersections, sch. II.
Section 335.010. Stop or Yield Right-Of-Way On Entering A Major
Street Intersection — Compliance [CC 1970 §21-94; CC 1947
§11-36]
A. Certain entrances to major street intersections shall be designated as
"Stop" or "Yield Right-of-Way" entrances by ordinance.
B. The Director of Public Works is authorized and required to place and
maintain at each such entrance an appropriate sign bearing the legend
"Stop" or "Yield Right-of-Way" in accordance with the designating
ordinance, such sign to be located in such position and to be provided
with letters of such size as to be clearly legible for a distance of at least
one hundred (100) feet from said entrance. All such signs shall be
illuminated at night or so placed as to be illuminated by the headlights
of approaching vehicles or by street lights.
C. The operator of a vehicle entering a major street intersection by way of
an entrance designated by ordinance as a "Stop" entrance shall stop
such vehicle or streetcar opposite the "Stop" sign at such entrance or at
such other place as might be designated by markings on the street.
Such operator shall yield to other vehicles within the intersection or
approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard but may
then proceed across said intersection.
D. The operator of a vehicle entering a major street intersection by way of
an entrance designated by ordinance as a "Yield Right-of-Way" entrance
shall slow to a reasonable speed for existing conditions of traffic and
visibility, yielding right-of-way to all traffic on the intersecting street
which is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard. Proceeding past
such sign with resultant collision or other interference with traffic on
Section
330.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
335.010
AO:361
Section 335.020. Stop Intersections — Street Intersections With
Traffic Control Signals [CC 1970 §21-95; CC 1947 §11-92]
Where traffic control signals have been installed and at all times when such
signals are not in operation, the streets meeting or crossing at such places
shall be deemed stop intersections within the meaning of this Code.
Section 335.030. Emerging From Driveway, Alley or Building80 [CC
1970 §21-76]
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall
stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway and shall yield
the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid a collision
and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the roadway.
Section 335.040. Obstructing Intersections, Crosswalks81 [CC 1970
§21-86]
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there
is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he/she is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed.
Chapter 340
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
Section 340.010. Following Fire Apparatus [CC 1970 §21-70; CC
1947 §11-39; Ord. No. 5690 §1, 4-23-2002]
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on official
emergency business, to follow closer than three hundred (300) feet from
any fire apparatus or other emergency vehicle traveling in response to a
fire alarm or other emergency or to drive any vehicle within the block or
immediate area where a fire apparatus or other emergency vehicle has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm or other emergency.
the intersecting street shall be deemed prima facie in violation of this
Chapter.
80.State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §300.285, RSMo.
81.State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §300.290, RSMo.
Section
335.010
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
340.020
AO:362
Section 340.020. Crossing Fire Hose [CC 1970 §21-71; CC 1947
§11-40; Ord. No. 5690 §2, 4-23-2002]
A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose of
the Fire Department when laid down on any street, alleyway, private drive
or any other vehicular roadway without the consent of the fire official in
command of said operation.
Section 340.030. Funeral Processions [CC 1970 §21-73; CC 1947
§11-42; Ord. No. 5548 §1, 1-11-2000]
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
FUNERAL DIRECTOR — A person licensed as a funeral director
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 333, RSMo.
FUNERAL LEAD VEHICLE OR LEAD VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle
equipped with at least one (1) lighted circulating lamp exhibiting an
amber or purple light or lens or alternating flashing headlamps visible
under normal atmospheric conditions for a distance of five hundred
(500) feet from the front of the vehicle. A hearse or coach properly
equipped may be a lead vehicle.
ORGANIZED FUNERAL PROCESSION — Two (2) or more vehicles
accompanying the remains of a deceased person from a funeral
establishment, church, synagogue or other place where a funeral
service has taken place to a cemetery, crematory or other place of
final disposition or a funeral establishment, church, synagogue or other
place where additional funeral services will be performed, if directed
by a licensed funeral director from a licensed establishment.
B. Driving Rules.
1. Except as otherwise provided for in this Section, pedestrians and
operators of all other vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle which is a part of an organized funeral procession.
2. Notwithstanding any traffic control device or right-of-way provision
prescribed by State or local law, when the funeral lead vehicle in an
organized funeral procession lawfully enters an intersection, all
vehicles in the procession shall follow the lead vehicle through the
intersection. The operator of each vehicle in the procession shall
exercise the highest degree of care toward any other vehicle or
pedestrian on the roadway.
3. An organized funeral procession shall have the right-of-way at all
intersections regardless of any traffic control device at such
intersections, except that operators of vehicles in an organized
funeral procession shall yield the right-of-way to any approaching
emergency vehicle pursuant to the provisions of law or when
directed to do so by a Law Enforcement Officer.
Section
340.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.030
AO:363
Section 340.040. Limitations On Backing
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can
be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
Section 340.050. Opening Vehicle Doors82 [CC 1970 §21-32]
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available
to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall
any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to
moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.
4. All vehicles in an organized funeral procession shall follow the
preceding vehicle in the procession as closely as is practical and
safe under the conditions.
5. No person shall operate any vehicle as part of an organized funeral
procession without the flashing emergency lights of such vehicle
being lighted.
6. Any person who is not an operator of a vehicle in an organized
funeral procession shall not:
a. Drive between the vehicles comprising an organized funeral
procession while such vehicles are in motion and have the
flashing emergency lights lighted pursuant to Subparagraph
(5) above, except when required to do so by a Law
Enforcement Officer or when such person is operating an
emergency vehicle giving an audible or visual signal;
b. Join a funeral procession for the purpose of securing the rightof-
way; or
c. Attempt to pass any vehicle in an organized funeral procession,
except where a passing lane has been specifically provided.
7. When an organized funeral procession is proceeding through a red
signal light as permitted herein, a vehicle not in the organized
funeral procession shall not enter the intersection unless such
vehicle may do so without crossing the path of the funeral
procession.
8. No ordinance, regulation or any other provision of law shall
prohibit the use of a motorcycle utilizing flashing amber lights to
escort an organized funeral procession on the highway.
9. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this Section shall
be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
82.State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §300.340, RSMo.
Section
340.030
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
340.060
AO:364
Section 340.060. Riding Bicycles, Sleds, Roller Skates By Attaching
To Another Vehicle, Prohibited — Pulling A Rider Behind Vehicle
Prohibited
No person riding upon any bicycle, motorized bicycle, coaster, roller skates,
sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself/herself to any vehicle
upon a roadway. Neither shall the driver of a vehicle knowingly pull a rider
behind a vehicle.
Section 340.070. Riding On Motorcycles — Additional Passenger —
Requirements83
Section 340.080. Operation Of Motor Vehicles, Motorcycles,
Motortricycles Or Autocycles In Public Parks. [CC 1970 §21-98; Ord.
No. 3638 §§1—4, 3-12-1974; Ord. No. 6562, 11-13-201884]
A. A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent
and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any
other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless
such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one (1) person, in which
event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if
designed for two (2) persons or upon another seat firmly attached to the
rear or side of the operator.
B. The operator of a motorized bicycle shall ride only astride the
permanent and regular seat attached thereto and shall not permit more
than one (1) person to ride thereon at the same time, unless the
motorized bicycle is designed to carry more than one (1) person. Any
motorized bicycle designed to carry more than one (1) person must be
equipped with a passenger seat and footrests for the use of a passenger.
A. The operation of motor vehicles, motorcycles, motortricycles, or
autocycles in the public parks of the City is hereby prohibited except
upon those areas designated and set aside for such operation, such as
parking areas and public streets, roads and driveways.
B. The operation of City vehicles for use in emergency, Police,
administrative and maintenance and construction uses are specifically
exempted from the prohibitions provided for in Subsection (A) of this
Section.
C. The City Manager of the City is authorized to allow, on a temporary
basis, the operation of motor vehicles, motorcycles, motortricycles, or
autocycles anywhere in the public parks of the City for specific
emergency, repair, maintenance and construction of convenience uses.
D. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.
83.Cross Reference—Protective headgear, §360.190.
84.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 6562 also changed the title of this Section to include autocycles.
Section
340.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.090
AO:365
Section 340.090. Drive On Right of Highway — Traffic Lanes —
Signs [CC 1970 §21-81; CC 1947 §11-53; Ord. No. 6061 §1,
3-10-2009]
A. All vehicles not in motion shall be placed with their right side as near
the right-hand side of the highway as practicable, except on streets of
the City where vehicles are obliged to move in one (1) direction only or
parking of motor vehicles is regulated by ordinance.
B. Upon all public roads or highways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be
driven upon the right-half of the roadway, except as follows:
1. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction under the rules governing such movement;
2. When placing a vehicle in position for and when such vehicle is
lawfully making a left turn in compliance with the provisions of
Sections 304.014 to 304.025, RSMo., or traffic regulations
thereunder or of the City;
3. When the right-half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair; or
4. Upon a roadway designated as a one-way street and marked or
signed for one-way traffic.
C. It is unlawful to drive any vehicle upon any highway or road which has
been divided into two (2) or more roadways by means of a physical
barrier or by means of a dividing section or delineated by curbs, lines or
other markings on the roadway, except to the right of such barrier or
dividing section or to make any left turn or semicircular or U-turn on
any such divided highway, except at an intersection or interchange or at
any signed location designated by the State Highways and
Transportation Commission or the Department of Transportation. The
provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to emergency vehicles, law
enforcement vehicles or to vehicles owned by the Commission or the
department.
D. The authorities in charge of any highway or the State Highway Patrol
may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic
moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the
highway and all members of the State Highway Patrol and other Peace
Officers may direct traffic in conformance with such signs. When
authorized signs have been erected designating off-center traffic lanes,
no person shall disobey the instructions given by such signs.
E. Whenever any roadway has been divided into three (3) or more clearly
marked lanes for traffic, the following rules in addition to all others
consistent herewith shall apply:
Section
340.090
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
340.090
AO:366
1. A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver
has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety;
2. Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes, a vehicle shall
not be driven in the center lane, except when overtaking and
passing another vehicle where the roadway ahead is clearly visible
and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in
preparation for a left turn or where such center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is
proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such allocation;
3. Upon all highways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal
speed of traffic thereon shall be driven in the right-hand lane for
traffic or as close as practicable to the right-hand edge or curb,
except as otherwise provided in Sections 304.014 to 304.025,
RSMo.;
4. Official signs may be erected by the Highways and Transportation
Commission or the Highway Patrol may place temporary signs
directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or allocating
specified lanes to traffic moving in the same direction and drivers
of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign;
5. Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right and except when a roadway has been
divided into traffic lanes, each driver shall give to the other at least
one-half (½) of the main traveled portion of the roadway whenever
possible.
F. All vehicles in motion upon a highway having two (2) or more lanes of
traffic proceeding in the same direction shall be driven in the righthand
lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle or when
preparing to make a proper left turn or when otherwise directed by
traffic markings, signs or signals.
G. All trucks registered for a gross weight of more than forty-eight
thousand (48,000) pounds shall not be driven in the far left-hand lane
upon all interstate highways, freeways or expressways within urbanized
areas of the State having three (3) or more lanes of traffic proceeding in
the same direction. This restriction shall not apply when:
1. It is necessary for the operator of the truck to follow traffic control
devices that direct use of a lane other than the right lane; or
2. The right-half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair.
H. As used in Subsection (G) of this Section, "truck" means any vehicle,
machine, tractor, trailer or semi-trailer or any combination thereof
propelled or drawn by mechanical power and designed for or used in
the transportation of property upon the highways. The term "truck" also
Section
340.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.090
AO:367
Section 340.100. Passing Regulations
includes a commercial motor vehicle as defined in Section 301.010,
RSMo.
I. Any driver who violates this Section is guilty of an infraction and upon
conviction may be punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars
($200.00) unless:
1. Such violation causes an immediate threat of an accident, in which
case such violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor and upon
conviction may be punished by a fine not to exceed three hundred
dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed fifteen (15)
days or by both such fine and imprisonment; or
2. An accident results from such violation, in which case such
violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor and upon conviction may
be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days or
by both such fine and imprisonment as provided in Section 100.110
of this Code.
A. The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to the limitations and
exceptions hereinafter stated:
1. The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and
shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely
clear of the overtaken vehicle; and
2. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of
the overtaking vehicle and shall not increase the speed of such
driver's vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
B. The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
1. When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
2. Upon a City street with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width
for two (2) or more lanes of vehicles in each direction; or
3. Upon a one-way street.
Section
340.090
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
340.100
AO:368
Section 340.110. Right-Of-Way At Intersection — Signs At
Intersections85
The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass another
vehicle upon the right only under the foregoing conditions
when such movement may be made in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the paved or
main traveled portion of the roadway. The provisions of this
Subsection shall not relieve the driver of a slow-moving vehicle
from the duty to drive as closely as practicable to the righthand
edge of the roadway.
C. Except when a roadway has been divided into three (3) traffic lanes, no
vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the centerline of a highway or
public road in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of
oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such
overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with
the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction or any vehicle overtaken.
D. No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:
1. When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve of the
highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance
as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach
from the opposite direction.
2. When the view is obstructed upon approaching within one hundred
(100) feet of any bridge, viaduct, tunnel or when approaching
within one hundred (100) feet of or at any intersection or railroad
grade crossing.
A. The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the rightof-
way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
highway, provided however, there is no form of traffic control at such
intersection.
B. When two (2) vehicles enter an intersection from different highways at
approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall
yield the right-of-way to the driver of the vehicle on the right. This
Subsection shall not apply to vehicles approaching each other from
opposite directions when the driver of one (1) of such vehicles is
attempting to or is making a left turn.
C. The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the
left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the
85.State Law Reference—This Section has additional penalties based on certain
circumstances, §304.351, RSMo.
Section
340.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.110
AO:369
Section 340.120. Distance At Which Vehicle Must Follow
The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than
is reasonably safe and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the roadway. Vehicles being
driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residence district in a
caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing other vehicles, shall be so
operated, except in a funeral procession or in a duly authorized parade, so
as to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or combination of
vehicles as to enable any other vehicle to overtake or pass such vehicles
in safety. This Section shall in no manner affect Section 304.044, RSMo.,
relating to distance between trucks traveling on the highway.
Section 340.130. Vehicle Shall Not Be Driven On A Sidewalk —
Prohibition On Obstruction of Bicycle Lanes — Drivers To Yield To
Bicycles in Designated Bicycle Lanes [CC 1970 §21-77; CC 1947
§11-46]
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except on a
permanent or temporary driveway. A vehicle may be driven in a designated
bicycle lane only for the purpose of a lawful maneuver to cross the lane
or to provide for safe travel. In making an otherwise lawful maneuver that
requires traveling in or crossing a designated bicycle lane, the driver of
a vehicle shall yield to any bicycle in the lane. As used in this Section,
the term "designated bicycle lane" shall mean a portion of the roadway or
highway that has been designated by the City Traffic Engineer or Governing
Body having jurisdiction over such roadway or highway by striping with
signing or striping with pavement markings for the preferential or exclusive
use of bicycles.
Section 340.140. Obstruction To Operator's View or Driving
Mechanism [CC 1970 §21-78; CC 1947 §11-47]
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive the same when
such vehicle is so loaded or is in such physical condition or when there are
in the front seat of such vehicle such number of persons as to obstruct the
opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto
as to constitute an immediate hazard.
D. The driver of a vehicle intending to make a left turn into an alley, private
road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching
from the opposite direction when the making of such left turn would
create a traffic hazard.
E. The City may, on any section of road where construction or major
maintenance operations are being effected, fix a speed limit in such
areas by posting of appropriate signs, and the operation of a motor
vehicle in excess of such speed limit in the area so posted shall be
deemed prima facie evidence of careless and imprudent driving and a
violation of Section 340.210.
Section
340.110
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
340.140
AO:370
view of the operator to the front or sides or to interfere with the operator's
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
Section 340.150. Observance of Controlled Access Entrances86 [CC
1970 §21-93]
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled access roadway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
Section 340.160. Aggressive Driving Prohibited [CC 1970 §21-102;
Ord. No. 5533 §1, 10-12-1999]
Section 340.170. No Passing Zones [CC 1970 §21-100; Ord. No.
5170 §1, 7-25-1995]
No motor vehicle shall be driven so as to overtake and pass another where
appropriate signs and/or lane markings on the roadway indicate the
beginning and end of no passing zones and such signs and markings are in
place and clearly visible.
Section 340.180. Boarding or Alighting From Vehicles [CC 1970
§21-22; CC 1947 §11-23]
It shall be unlawful for any person to board or alight from any vehicle while
such vehicle is in motion.
A. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle intentionally to
harass or alarm another person who is inside a motor vehicle by
intentionally or knowingly:
1. Increasing or decreasing the speed of his/her vehicle; or
2. Changing lanes; or
3. Following the other person's vehicle more closely than is
reasonable and prudent under the totality of the circumstances; or
4. Impeding or obstructing the operation of the other person's
vehicle; or
5. Operating his/her vehicle in a manner that endangers or would be
likely to endanger any person or property.
B. Any person convicted of violating this provision shall be punished by a
fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by detention in the County Jail for not
more than one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
86.State Law Reference— For similar provisions, §300.355, RSMo.
Section
340.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.190
AO:371
Section 340.190. Unlawful Riding [CC 1970 §21-23; CC 1947
§11-24]
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on any vehicle upon any portion
thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers when the vehicle
is in motion. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the
necessary discharge of a duty or to persons riding within truck bodies in
space intended for merchandise.
Section 340.200. Advertising From or With Vehicle [CC 1970
§21-24; CC 1947 §11-35]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park on any street any vehicle for the
primary purpose of displaying advertising.
Section 340.210. Manner of Operation of Motor Vehicles — Careful
and Prudent
Every person operating a motor vehicle on the highways of this City shall
drive the vehicle in a careful and prudent manner and at a rate of speed so
as not to endanger the property of another or the life or limb of any person
and shall exercise the highest degree of care.
Section 340.220. Stopping For School Bus
A. The driver of a vehicle upon a highway upon meeting or overtaking
from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the highway
for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children and
whose driver has in the manner prescribed by law given the signal to
stop shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus and shall not
proceed until such school bus resumes motion or until signaled by its
driver to proceed.
B. Every bus used for the transportation of school children shall bear upon
the front and rear thereon a plainly visible sign containing the words
"School Bus" in letters not less than eight (8) inches in height. Each bus
shall have lettered on the rear in plain and distinct type the following:
"State Law: Stop While Bus is Loading and Unloading". Each school bus
subject to the provisions of Sections 304.050 to 304.070, RSMo., shall
be equipped with a mechanical and electrical signaling device approved
by the State Board of Education which will display a signal plainly
visible from the front and rear and indicating intention to stop.
C. Every school bus operated to transport students in the public school
system which has a gross vehicle weight rating of more than ten
thousand (10,000) pounds, which has the engine mounted entirely in
front of the windshield and the entrance door behind the front wheels,
and which is used for the transportation of school children shall be
equipped with a crossing control arm. The crossing control arm, when
activated, shall extend a minimum of five (5) feet six (6) inches from the
face of the front bumper. The crossing control arm shall be attached on
Section
340.190
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
340.220
AO:372
Section 340.230. Golf Carts. [Ord. No. 6537, 5-22-2018]
the right side of the front bumper and shall be activated by the same
controls which activate the mechanical and electrical signaling devices
described in Subsection (B) of this Section. This Subsection may be
cited as "Jessica's Law" in commemoration of Jessica Leicht and all
other Missouri school children who have been injured or killed during
the operation of a school bus.
D. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the driver of a school bus
in the process of loading or unloading students upon a street or
highway shall activate the mechanical and electrical signaling devices,
in the manner prescribed by the State Board of Education, to
communicate to drivers of other vehicles that students are loading or
unloading. A public school district has the authority pursuant to Section
304.050, RSMo., to adopt a policy which provides that the driver of a
school bus in the process of loading or unloading students upon a
divided highway of four (4) or more lanes may pull off of the main
roadway and load or unload students without activating the mechanical
and electrical signaling devices in a manner which gives the signal for
other drivers to stop and may use the amber signaling devices to alert
motorists that the school bus is slowing to a stop; provided that the
passengers are not required to cross any traffic lanes and also provided
that the emergency flashing signal lights are activated in a manner
which indicates that drivers should proceed with caution and, in such
case, the driver of a vehicle may proceed past the school bus with due
caution. No driver of a school bus shall take on or discharge passengers
at any location upon a highway consisting of four (4) or more lanes of
traffic, whether or not divided by a median or barrier, in such manner as
to require the passengers to cross more than two (2) lanes of traffic; nor
shall any passengers be taken on or discharged while the vehicle is
upon the road or highway proper unless the vehicle so stopped is
plainly visible for at least five hundred (500) feet in each direction to
drivers of other vehicles in the case of a highway with no shoulder and a
speed limit greater than sixty (60) miles per hour and at least three
hundred (300) feet in each direction to drivers of other vehicles upon
other highways, and on all highways, only for such time as is actually
necessary to take on and discharge passengers.
E. The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need
not stop upon meeting or overtaking a school bus which is on a different
roadway, which is proceeding in the opposite direction on a highway
containing four (4) or more lanes of traffic, or which is stopped in a
loading zone constituting a part of, or adjacent to, a limited or
controlled access highway at a point where pedestrians are not
permitted to cross the roadway.
A. As used in this Section "golf cart" means a motor vehicle constructed
and configured substantially like vehicles primarily designed and
Section
340.220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.230
AO:373
Section 340.240. Low-Speed Vehicle. [Ord. No. 6537, 5-22-2018]
As used in Sections 340.240 through 340.290, the term "low-speed vehicle"
means the same as "low-speed vehicle" in Section 304.029, RSMo., 2016,
and 49 CFR, Section 571.3, as amended.
Section 340.250. Operation Of Low-Speed Vehicles On Streets
Permitted. [Ord. No. 6537, 5-22-2018]
Section 340.260. Low-Speed Vehicle Standards. [Ord. No. 6537,
5-22-2018]
manufactured for operation on a golf course for sporting or recreational
purposes.
B. No person may operate or ride a golf cart on any roadway, street,
whether publicly or privately owned, right-of-way, vehicular easement,
including any associated berm or shoulder, sidewalk, trail, walkway or
park property within the City of Clayton.
C. The operation of golf carts exclusively on private property owned by the
vehicle owner, and the use of golf carts on pedestrian ways and streets
substantially closed to vehicular access by governmental agencies for
emergency, public safety, administrative, maintenance, construction
and similar public purposes, are specifically exempted from the
prohibitions provided for in Subsection (B) of this Section.
A. A low-speed vehicle may be operated upon the streets of the City of
Clayton if it meets the requirements of Sections 340.240 through
340.290. Every person operating a low-speed vehicle shall be granted
all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to the
driver of any other motor vehicle except as to the special regulations in
Sections 340.240 through 340.290.
B. The operator of a low-speed vehicle shall observe all State and City
traffic laws and rules of the road.
C. A low-speed vehicle shall not be operated on a street or highway with a
posted speed limit greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour. This
provision shall not be construed to prohibit a low-speed vehicle from
crossing, at an intersection or permitted crossing point, a street or
highway with a posted speed limit greater than thirty-five (35) miles per
hour.
A. A low-speed vehicle shall:
1. Meet the definitional requirements contained in Section 340.240;
2. Be manufactured in compliance with the National Traffic Safety
Administration and comply with the standards in 49 CFR 571.500;
and
Section
340.230
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
340.260
AO:374
Section 340.270. Low-Speed Vehicles — Driver's License And
Insurance Required. [Ord. No. 6537, 5-22-2018]
Section 340.280. Low-Speed Vehicles — Title And Registration.
[Ord. No. 6537, 5-22-2018]
3. Be equipped with:
a. Headlamps;
b. Front and rear turn signals;
c. Stop lamps;
d. Reflex reflectors; one (1) red on each side as far to the rear as
practicable and one (1) red on the rear;
e. An exterior mirror mounted on the driver's side and either an
exterior mirror on the passenger side or an interior rearview
mirror;
f. A parking brake;
g. A windshield that conforms to the requirements of the Federal
motor vehicle safety standard of glazing materials (49 CFR
571.205);
h. A serial number, manufacturer's code, or vehicle identification
number; and
i. A type 1 or type 2 seatbelt assembly conforming to 49 CFR
571.209 and Federal Motor Vehicle Standard 209 for each
designated seating position.
A. Every operator of a low-speed vehicle shall:
1. Possess a valid driver's license issued by the State pursuant to
Chapter 302, RSMo., or a valid license issued by the operator's
home State; and
2. Maintain financial responsibility as required by Chapter 303,
RSMo.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the operator and owner of a low-speed
vehicle to comply with State titling or registration requirements. The
City of Clayton additionally imposes the requirement that any lowspeed
vehicle be properly registered with the Missouri Department of
Revenue.
B. Low-Speed Vehicles owned and operated by governmental entities shall
be exempt from this requirement.
Section
340.260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.290
AO:375
Section 340.290. Penalty. [Ord. No. 6537, 5-22-2018]
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of Sections 340.230
through 340.280 shall be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars
($50.00) for each violation.
Chapter 342
ALCOHOL-RELATED TRAFFIC OFFENSES
Section 342.010. Intoxication-Related Driving Offenses [CC 1970
§21-88; CC 1947 §11-60; Ord. No. 3875 §§1—2, 3-8-1977; Ord. No.
5649 §1, 9-11-2001]
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the
meanings hereinafter stated:
DRIVE, DRIVING, OPERATES OR OPERATING — Physically driving or
operating a motor vehicle.
INTOXICATED CONDITION — A person is in an intoxicated condition
when he/she is under the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance or
drug, or any combination thereof.
B. Driving While Intoxicated. A person commits the offense of driving
while intoxicated if he/she operates a motor vehicle while in an
intoxicated or drugged condition. No person convicted of or pleading
guilty to the offense of driving while intoxicated shall be granted a
suspended imposition of sentence for such offense, unless such person
shall be placed on probation for a minimum of two (2) years.
C. Driving With Excessive Blood Alcohol Content.
1. A person commits the offense of driving with excessive blood
alcohol content if such person operates a motor vehicle in this City
with eight-hundredths of one percent (.08%) or more by weight of
alcohol in such person's blood.
2. As used in this Section, percent by weight of alcohol in the blood
shall be based upon grams of alcohol per one hundred (100)
milliliters of blood or two hundred ten (210) liters of breath and
may be shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood, breath,
saliva or urine. For the purposes of determining the alcoholic
content of a person's blood under this Section, the test shall be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of State law.
Section
340.290
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
342.020
AO:376
Section 342.020. Recoupment of Costs — Violations Involving
Alcohol or Drug-Related Traffic Offenses87 [CC 1970 §21-88.1; Ord.
No. 4950 §§1—2, 1-12-1993; Ord. No. 5649 §1, 9-11-2001]
Section 342.030. Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages and
Transporting Open Alcohol Containers in A Vehicle Prohibited [CC
1970 §21-88.2; Ord. No 5539 §1, 11-9-99]
A. Upon a plea of guilty, a finding of guilty or a suspended imposition of
sentence (SIS), for any offense violating the provisions of Section
342.010 of this Code for an intoxication-related driving offense, the
court shall, in addition to imposition of any penalties provided by law,
order the defendant to reimburse the City for the costs relating to the
investigation, arrest, processing and incarceration of said defendant.
B. The City Police Department shall establish, maintain and provide a
schedule of costs to the Municipal Court for its consideration in
recouping those costs related to this Section. The court has the
authority to order any costs reduced if determined to be excessive.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Includes intoxicating liquor and nonintoxicating
beer.
INTOXICATING LIQUOR — Any alcoholic beverage containing in excess
of one-half of one percent (.5%) alcohol by volume as defined by Section
311.020, RSMo.
NON-INTOXICATING BEER — Beer having an alcohol content of not
less than one-half of one percent (.5%) nor more than three and twotenths
percent (3.2%) by volume as defined by Section 312.020, RSMo.
RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle designed,
constructed or substantially modified so that it may be used for the
purpose of temporary housing quarters, including sleeping and eating
facilities, which are permanently attached to the motor vehicle.
B. No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage while operating a
motor vehicle upon a public street, highway or alley or while they are
passengers in a motor vehicle upon a public street, highway or alley
unless otherwise exempted in this Section.
C. No person shall knowingly transport any alcoholic beverage, except in
the original container which shall not have been opened and the seal
upon which shall not have been broken and from which the original
cork or cap shall not have been removed while operating a motor
vehicle upon any public street, highway or alley.
87.State Law Reference—Recoupment of costs as a result of judicial findings related to
violations of municipal ordinances involving alcohol- or drug-related traffic offenses,
§488.5334, RSMo.
Section
342.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
342.030
AO:377
Chapter 345
PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES
Section 345.010. Pedestrians' Right-Of-Way in Crosswalks
Section 345.020. Pedestrians Prohibited From Soliciting in
Roadways [CC 1970 §21-20; Ord. No. 5891 §1, 8-23-2005]
D. Nothing is this Section shall be construed as to prohibit the otherwise
legal consumption of an alcoholic beverage by passengers on a
privately or publicly owned transit bus, minibus, van or similar vehicle
that has been chartered and is not being utilized for conveyance of the
general public. However, the driver of such motor vehicle may not
possess, have ready access to or consume any alcoholic beverage while
operating the motor vehicle on any public street, highway or alley.
E. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the otherwise
legal consumption of an alcoholic beverage by passengers riding in the
living quarters of a recreational motor vehicle. However, the driver of
such motor vehicle may not possess, have ready access to or consume
any alcoholic beverage while operating the motor vehicle on any public
street, highway or alley.
F. Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of any provision of this
Section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
A. When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping
if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a
crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon
which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so
closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger.
B. No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is
impossible for the driver to yield.
C. Subsection (A) shall not apply under the conditions stated in Subsection
(2) of Section 300.390, RSMo.
D. Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross
the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear
shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
A. Definitions. For purposes of this Section only, the following terms shall
be defined as follows:
ROADWAY — The portion of a street or highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel and extending from one (1) curb or
edge of pavement to the opposite curb or edge of pavement, including
Section
342.030
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
345.020
AO:378
Chapter 350
PARKING REGULATIONS
Cross References — As to parking restrictions, sch. III.
lanes commonly used for parking and including center medians and
lane dividers.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a public right-of-way between the curb
lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines
intended for use by pedestrians.
B. Prohibited Conduct. No person shall stand in or enter upon a roadway
for the purpose of soliciting rides, employment, business or charitable
contributions from, or distribute anything to, the occupant of any
vehicle, except from the occupants of motor vehicles parked off the
traveled portion of a roadway adjacent to a sidewalk if the solicitor is on
a sidewalk.
Section
345.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
345.020
AO:379

ARTICLE I
Method of Parking
Section 350.010. Standing or Parking Close To Curb [CC 1970
§21-143; CC 1947 §11-33]
A. Except when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic
signs or signals, the operator of a vehicle shall not stop, stand or park
such vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the
roadway, heading in the direction of traffic and with the curbside
wheels of the vehicle within one (1) foot of the edge of the roadway,
except as provided in the following Subparagraphs:
1. Upon those streets which have been marked or posted with signs
for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb
indicated by such marks or signs.
2. In places where and at hours when stopping for the loading or
unloading of merchandise or materials is permitted, vehicles used
for the transportation of merchandise or materials may back into
the curb to take on or discharge loads, when the owner of such
vehicle holds a permit granting him/her such special privilege and,
provided further, that such permit shall be either in the possession
of the operator or on the vehicle at the time such vehicle is backed
against the curb to take on or discharge a load and it shall be
unlawful for any owner or operator to violate any of the special
terms or conditions of any such special permit.
B. The Director of Public Works shall determine upon what streets angle
parking shall be permitted and shall mark or post signs on such streets.
C. The Chief of Police is authorized to issue to any owner of a vehicle used
to transport merchandise or materials a special permit, in no event to
be for a period longer than one (1) day, and to state therein the terms
and conditions thereof, allowing the operator of such vehicle the
privilege of loading and unloading while the vehicle is backed against
the curb, if in the opinion of the Chief of Police such privilege is
reasonably necessary in the conduct of the owner's business and will
not seriously interfere with traffic.
Section
350.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
350.010
AO:381

ARTICLE II
Prohibited and Restricted Parking
Section 350.020. Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited in
Specified Places88 [CC 1970 §21-141; CC 1947 §11-26; Ord. No. 4263
§1, 9-14-1982; Ord. No. 4917 §§1—2, 9-8-1992; Ord. No. 4982 §1,
7-13-1993]
A. It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park
such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
Police Officer or traffic control sign or signal:
1. Within an intersection.
2. On a crosswalk.
3. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30)
feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety
zone, unless the Director of Public Works shall indicate a different
length by signs or markings.
4. Within twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of curb lines or, if
none, within fifteen (15) feet of the intersection of property lines at
an intersection.
5. Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing signal,
stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of the roadway.
6. Within fifty (50) feet of the intersection of property lines at an
intersection where traffic is controlled by a traffic control signal.
7. Within fifteen (15) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station.
8. Within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant. [Ord. No. 6404 §1,
12-15-2015]
9. In front of a public or private driveway.
10. On a sidewalk.
11. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
12. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of the street.
13. At any place where official traffic signs have been erected
prohibiting parking, standing and/or stopping.
14. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.
88.State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §300.440, RSMo.
Section
350.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
350.020
AO:383
Section 350.025. Owner Prima Facie Responsible For Illegal
Parking [CC 1970 §21-17; CC 1947 §11-72]
If any vehicle is found upon a street or highway in violation of any provision
of this Chapter regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, the
owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held
prima facie responsible for such violation.
Section 350.030. Parking So As To Obstruct Traffic or in
Unauthorized Places [CC 1970 §21-142; CC 1947 §11-31]
Section 350.040. No Parking, Standing or Stopping Areas [CC 1970
§21-154.2; Ord. No. 4982 §2, 7-13-1993]
The following districts or streets, alleys and places or parts thereof are
designated as places where the parking, standing or stopping of vehicles is
prohibited at the times indicated or, if no time is indicated, at all times:
15. Within six (6) feet of any United States mailbox.
16. Within twenty-five (25) feet of a crosswalk.
17. At any place where yellow painted stripes on the street curb have
been placed prohibiting standing and parking.
A. It shall be unlawful for any operator to stop, stand or park any vehicle
upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the
roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic, except that an operator
may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of
passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or
traffic signs or signals or a Police Officer.
B. It shall be unlawful for any operator to park a vehicle within an alley in
such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than
ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of
vehicular traffic or create an unsafe condition in the alley.
C. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any street, municipally
operated parking lot or in any district lawfully designated by ordinance
as a place where parking is prohibited, restricted or regulated by
permit or in any other manner for a longer time than is permitted or
without permit, if required, or in any manner other than is permitted in
such ordinance.
D. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to park the
same or allow the same to be parked upon any lot, tract or parcel of
ground within the City, if said lot, tract or parcel of ground is not
constructed, maintained and established in compliance with the
provisions of the zoning ordinance.
Section
350.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
350.040
AO:384
Meramec Avenue:
On the east side between a point three hundred thirty-seven (337)
feet south of the south line of Kingsbury Boulevard and a point five
hundred seven (507) feet south of the south line of Kingsbury
Boulevard.
On the east side between a point five hundred sixty-five (565) feet
south of the south line of Kingsbury Boulevard and a point six hundred
thirty-five (635) feet south of the south line of Kingsbury Boulevard.
Brentwood Boulevard:
On the west side between the I-170 off ramp and Clayton Road.
Section 350.050. Prohibited or Restricted Parking — Erecting Signs
[CC 1970 §21-146; CC 1947 §11-137; Ord. No. 4262 §1, 9-14-1982]
The Director of Public Works shall erect and maintain official signs in the
districts and on the streets where the parking of vehicles is prohibited or
limited as to time indicating prohibition or stating the time limits of such
parking or shall by use of painted stripes on the street where the parking of
vehicles is prohibited indicate the prohibition of such parking.
Section 350.060. Physically Disabled Parking
Section 350.070. Parking of Recreational Equipment, Commercial
Vehicles and Certain Other Vehicles Prohibited — Exceptions [CC
1970 §21-144.1; Ord. No. 3882 §§1—4, 4-12-1977; Ord. No. 3927 §1,
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand any vehicle in any
stall or space designated or reserved for physically disabled persons, as
defined in Section 301.142, RSMo., as amended, whether upon public
or private property open to public use, unless the vehicle bears the
State of Missouri license plate or placard for the disabled as provided
for in Sections 301.071 or 301.142, RSMo., as amended. The space
shall be indicated by an upright sign whether on a pole or attached to a
building upon which shall be inscribed the international symbol of
accessibility and may also include any appropriate wording to indicate
that the space is reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles which display
a distinguishing license plate or card. The sign described in this
Subsection shall also state, or an additional sign shall be posted below
or adjacent to the sign stating, the following: "$50 to $300 fine".
B. Any vehicle operator who is not physically disabled shall not use the
handicapped parking space unless there is a physically disabled person
in the vehicle or while the vehicle is being used to transport a physically
disabled person.
C. Any person convicted of violating this Section is guilty of an offense and
shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than three hundred dollars ($300.00). Every day upon which such
violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
Section
350.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
350.070
AO:385
11-22-1977; Ord. No. 4622 §1, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 5860 §2,
1-25-2005]
A. No recreational equipment, horse or animal truck or trailer, equipment
trailer or commercial vehicle shall be parked on any public property
within the City unless posted for such use or otherwise authorized by
the Clayton Police Department.
B. For the purposes of loading and unloading, recreational equipment,
horse or animal trucks or trailers, equipment trailers or commercial
vehicles may be parked on any public or private street immediately
adjacent to property owned or occupied by the owner of such vehicles
or being serviced by such vehicles in accordance with any posted
restrictions. In no case shall such parking exceed twenty-four (24)
hours in any seven (7) day period.
C. No recreational equipment, horse or animal truck or trailer, equipment
trailer, commercial vehicle, or antique or historic vehicle shall be
parked or stored on residential private property other than in a fully
enclosed garage, except under the following conditions:
1. The recreational equipment, horse or animal truck or trailer,
equipment trailer, or antique or historic vehicle is not in excess of
twenty-seven (27) feet in overall length, or the commercial vehicle
is of the pickup variety having a weight rate not in excess of one (1)
ton. Such equipment and/or vehicle may be parked on an
established driveway surfaced with asphalt or concrete for up to
seventy-two (72) hours in any seven (7) day period. Such equipment
may also be stored indefinitely on residential private property if it
meets all of the following conditions:
a. It does not have any connection to electricity, water, gas or
sanitary sewer facilities; and
b. It is not used for living or housekeeping purposes; and
c. It is parked or stored on an improved driveway surfaced with
asphalt or concrete:
(1) Behind the front building line, or
(2) If there is no driveway or alley that accesses an improved
driveway to the rear of the front building line, then parking
in front of the front building line may be allowed; and
d. No part of such vehicle overhangs the limits of such
established driveway.
2. It is a moving van or service vehicle providing direct service to the
premises and is not covered by Subsection (C)(1). In such case,
parking shall not exceed twenty-four (24) hours in any seven (7)
day period.
Section
350.070
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
350.070
AO:386
Section 350.080. Parking Vehicle For Sale Prohibited [CC 1970
§21-144; CC 1947 §11-34]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon a street any vehicle
displayed for sale.
Section 350.090. Motor Vehicles Left Unattended — Brakes To Be
Set and Engine Stopped [CC 1970 §21-145; CC 1947 §11-51]
No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such
vehicle to stand on any street unattended without first setting the brakes
thereon and stopping the motor of said vehicle and, when standing upon a
perceptible grade, without turning the wheels of such vehicle to the curb or
the side of the roadway.
Section 350.100. Designation of Parking Spaces On Municipal
Parking Lots and Structures [CC 1970 §21-166; Ord. No. 4290 §1,
4-26-1983]
The Director of Public Works, subject to the supervision of the City
Manager, is directed and authorized to cause to be marked off individual
spaces on municipal parking lots and structures; said parking spaces to be
designated by lines painted or durably marked on the curbing or surface of
the lot or structure. At each space so marked off, it shall be unlawful to park
any vehicle in such a way that said vehicle shall not be entirely within the
limits of the space so designated.
Section 350.110. Residential Parking Zone [CC 1970 §21-167; Ord.
No. 4357 §1, 3-13-1984]
D. Residential property shall not be used for the repair of vehicles in
excess of seventy-two (72) hours in any seven (7) day period, other than
in fully enclosed garages. Any such vehicles to be repaired which are
not within a fully enclosed garage must be parked on an established
driveway surfaced with asphalt or concrete.
E. All recreational equipment, horse or animal trucks or trailers,
equipment trailers and commercial vehicles must be kept in good
repair.
F. Any person, firm or corporation which violates the provisions of this
Section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the
meanings ascribed thereto:
RESIDENT — Any person who lives in property abutting a street
designated as a residential parking zone.
RESIDENTIAL PARKING ZONE — Any street or part thereof in one (1)
of the hereinafter defined residential zones which is designated as such
with a specified parking time limit.
Section
350.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
350.110
AO:387
Section 350.120. Washington University Permit Parking Zone [CC
1970 §21-168.1; Ord. No. 4908 §1, 8-25-1992]
A permit parking zone is hereby established on the north side of Forsyth
Boulevard from the City limits westwardly to 6414 Forsyth Boulevard. Said
permit parking zone to be administered by Washington University under
contract with the City of Clayton. The City shall retain sovereignty over the
area covered by the permit parking zone as provided in Section 70.270,
RSMo. Nothing herein shall in any manner limit the jurisdiction of the City
to enforce its ordinances.
RESIDENTIAL ZONE — The residential areas of the City shall be
divided into such number and such locations as are shown on the
official map kept on file in the office of the City Clerk.
VISITOR — Any person who is a household guest, a visitor, a workman
performing services for, or domestic help for, a resident.
B. Residential Parking Permit. On any street which is designated a
residential parking zone, parking in excess of the prescribed parking
time limit will be permitted by a resident or a visitor with a valid
resident or visitor parking permit.
C. Parking Permit. A resident or visitor parking permit issued in any of the
numbered residential zones of the City shall not be valid in any other
numbered residential zone.
D. Issuance Of Parking Permit. The Director of Finance shall issue resident
parking permits and visitor parking permits for the numbered
residential zones to a resident of any street designated a residential
parking zone.
Section
350.110
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
350.120
AO:388
ARTICLE III
Parking Meters89
Section 350.130. Definitions [CC 1970 §21-169; CC 1947 §11-166.1;
Ord. No. 6014 §1, 4-22-2008; Ord. No. 6070 §1, 4-14-2009]
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the respective
meanings ascribed to them:
COMPACT CAR — A sedan motor vehicle which has:
OPERATOR — Every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner
thereof, or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner, or is in actual
physical control of a vehicle.
PARK or PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
upon a street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while
actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers or loading or
unloading merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or
signals or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond
the control of the operator of the vehicle.
PARKING METER — Any mechanical, electronic or other device or
computer program, software or application used for the purpose of
regulating, managing and controlling the use of parking spaces and
obtaining payment for such use either by deposit of currency, use of a credit
device or other approved payment process approved by the City Manager.
This term shall include: (i) any software or application ("app") by which
parking fees may be paid electronically; and (ii) any mechanical, electronic
or other device or meter of any kind, including "pay and display," "pay by
space," "pay by plate" and similar devices, placed or erected by authority of
this Article on City streets and other parking areas under the jurisdiction of
the City.[Ord. No. 6454 §1, 10-18-2016]
PARKING METER SPACE — Any space within a parking meter zone which
requires the payment of fees for its use and which is designated for use for
parking of a single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on
the curb or on the surface of the street.[Ord. No. 6454 §1, 10-18-2016]
PARKING METER ZONE — An area of the City where parking is regulated
and the payment of fees is required for the use of parking spaces.[Ord. No.
6454 §1, 10-18-2016]
An interior cubic volume of less than one hundred ten (110) cubic feet,
and
1.
2. A height of less than sixty (60) inches, and
Regardless of its chassis construction, is not designated by its
manufacturer as a mini van, van, truck, utility vehicle, sports utility
vehicle (SUV), crossover, station wagon or jeep.
3.
89.Cross Reference—Parking meter removal, §505.050.
Section
350.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
350.130
AO:389
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported upon a highway, except a device which is operated upon
rails or tracks.
Section 350.140. Designation of Parking Spaces [CC 1970 §21-170;
CC 1947 §11-166.3; Ord. No. 6014 §1, 4-22-2008]
The Director of Public Works, subject to the supervision of the City
Manager, is directed and authorized to cause to be marked off individual
spaces in the parking zones designated and described in Section 350.190,
and in such other zones as may be established, said parking spaces to be
designated by lines painted or durably marked on the curbing or surface
of the street. At each space so marked off it shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle in such a way that said vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits
of the space so designated. The Director of Public Works may similarly
restrict or designate parking of vehicles of specific dimensions or character
at parking spaces or parking meter spaces by signage at locations where
parked vehicles restrict sight distance or visibility from driveways, alleys or
side streets.
Section 350.150. Installation of Meters — Legend [CC 1970
§21-171; CC 1947 §11-166.4; Ord. No. 6014 §1, 4-22-2008; Ord. No.
6454 §2, 10-18-2016]
In parking meter zones, the Director of Public Works, subject to the
supervision of the City Manager, shall cause parking meters to be installed
proximate to the parking spaces provided in Section 350.140, and the
Director of Public Works shall be responsible for the regulation, control,
operation, maintenance, and use of such parking meters. If payment may be
made electronically through a computer program, software or application,
instructions for use shall be posted in such locations approved by the
Director of Public Works, subject to the supervision of the City Manager.
Each mechanical parking meter shall be so placed so as to display a signal
showing legal parking duration upon the appropriate payment, for the
period of time prescribed by this Article. Each "Pay and Display," "Pay by
Space" or "Pay by Plate" device shall provide a proof of payment receipt
or indication on the parking payment device of the expiration of the lawful
time for the period of time prescribed by this Article. The right of any
vehicle to occupy any space shall cease and the operator, owner, possessor
or manager thereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to
the provisions, procedure and penalties of this Code if the vehicle occupies
the space beyond the expiration of the lawful time period specified for the
space.
Section 350.160. Meter To Have Legend Thereon [CC 1970 §21-172;
CC 1947 §11-166.1; Ord. No. 6014 §1, 4-22-2008]
Each parking meter installed shall indicate by proper legend the legal
parking time established by the City and when operated shall at all times
Section
350.130
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
350.160
AO:390
indicate the balance of legal parking time, and at the expiration of such
period shall indicate illegal or overtime parking.
Section 350.170. Payment of Parking Fees. [CC 1970 §21-173; CC
1947 §11-166.5; Ord. No. 6014 §1, 4-22-2008; Ord. No. 6454 §3,
10-18-201690]
Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the Fire
or Police Department, or in compliance with the directions of a Police
Officer or traffic control sign or signal, when any vehicle is parked in any
parking meter space, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering the
parking meter space, immediately deposit or make other form of payment
as required for use of that such parking meter space, and when required
by the directions provided, the operator of such vehicle, after making the
proper payment, shall also set in operation the timing mechanism on such
meter in accordance with directions properly appearing thereon, or place
the proof of payment receipt on the driver side window or dashboard, visible
from the adjacent travel lane or take those steps necessary when utilizing
another approved payment system. Failure to deposit such payment, set
the timing mechanism in operation when so required, display the proof of
payment receipt, or follow all steps required when using another approved
payment system shall constitute a violation of this Article. Upon the deposit
or making of such payment and completing the steps required by this
Section, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during
the period of time which has been prescribed for the parking space. If any
person places a vehicle in a parking meter space adjacent to a mechanical
meter which indicates that unused time has been left in the parking meter
by the previous occupant of the space, he or she shall not be required to
deposit additional payment so long as his or her occupancy of said space
does not exceed the indicated unused parking time. If the vehicle shall
remain parked in any such parking space beyond the parking time limit set
for such parking space, or if payment has not been made for the use of such
parking space, such vehicle shall be considered as illegally parked and such
parking shall be deemed a violation of this Article.
Section 350.180. Parking Time Limits and Fees. [CC 1970 §21-174;
CC 1947 §11-166.6; Ord. No. 3432 §1, 1-26-1971; Ord. No. 4147 §1,
10-31-1980; Ord. No. 5217 §2, 2-13-1996; Ord. No. 6014 §1,
4-22-2008; Ord. No. 6040 §§1—2, 10-14-2008; Ord. No. 6120 §1,
9-28-2010; Ord. No. 6454 §4, 10-18-201691]
A. Within the parking meter zones described in Section 350.190, the City
Manager shall establish from time to time, the maximum time limits for
parking within which any given vehicle may be parked within each
parking meter zone and the rates for parking within each parking meter
zone. Time limitations established by the City Manager shall not be less
90.Editor’s Note: Section 3 of Ord. No. 6454 also changed the title of this Section from
“Parking Meter Operation” to “Payment of Parking Fees.”
91.Editor’s Note: Section 4 of Ord. No. 6454 also changed the title of this Section from
“Parking Time Limits” to “Parking Time Limits and Fees.”
Section
350.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
350.180
AO:391
than two (2) hours nor more than ten (10) hours. The Director of Public
Works may authorize daily meter rental at a rate proportionate to the
rates charged for parking within the particular parking meter zone.
B. In establishing the maximum time limits for parking within a parking
meter zone, the City Manager shall consider the following factors:
1. The demand for parking within the particular parking meter zone
so as to accommodate the needs of motorists patronizing
businesses in the vicinity, but also ensuring availability of spaces
for access by a greater number of motorists;
2. The land uses within the parking meter zone and the reasonable
time required to conduct business within such zone; and
3. Availability of other parking alternatives within or near the parking
meter zone.
C. In establishing the rates for parking within each parking meter zone,
the City Manager shall consider the City's costs in providing,
monitoring and maintaining the parking meter zone and rates of other
parking facilities, public or private, in the vicinity and in cities with
similar parking demands. The City Manager may establish a separate
rate for parking for residents provided that such differing rates can be
supported by the approved payment system with sufficient safeguards
to prevent fraud or abuse.
D. The maximum time limit and the parking rates established for a parking
meter zone shall be applied throughout the parking meter zone.
Depending on the parking demands, traffic conditions and other
conditions within a particular parking meter zone, the City Manager
may designate certain parking meter zones to be "park once" zones. In
such zones, the maximum time limit shall apply to all parking meter
spaces throughout the parking meter zone and a vehicle may not park
within a parking meter zone for a longer period of time during any
calendar day simply by moving the vehicle to a different parking meter
space within the same parking meter zone. The City Manager may
establish maximum time limits within a "park once" zone as: (i) a single,
continuous time limit for the entire calendar day; or (ii) time limit
intervals for the calendar day requiring removal of the vehicle from the
zone for a specified period of time between intervals.
E. The parking meters shall be operated in parking meter zones every day
between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M., except weekends and
holidays; provided, however, within the meaning of this Article, the
term "holidays" shall include the following days only: the first day of
January, the last Monday in May, the fourth day of July, the first Monday
in September, the fourth Thursday in November and the twenty-fifth
day of December.
Section
350.180
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
350.190
AO:392
Section 350.190. Parking Meter Zones. [CC 1970 §21-175; CC 1947
§11-166.2; Ord. No. 3438 §1, 3-9-1971; Ord. No. 3832 §1, 8-10-1976;
Ord. No. 4889 §2, 6-23-1992; Ord. No. 6014 §1, 4-22-2008; Ord. No.
6454 §5, 10-18-201692]
A. The City Manager shall, from time to time, establish one (1) or more
parking meter zones which will allow the City to control and manage
parking within each such parking meter zone by providing parking
meter spaces and enforcement of time limits for parking. Of these
parking meter zones, the City Manager shall determine which zones
shall be designated as "park once" zones.
B. In establishing the boundaries of each parking meter zone and
designating "park once" zones, the City Manager shall consider: (i)
existing land uses; (ii) parking demands and parking disparities
between different areas; (iii) traffic conditions, and (iv) available
parking alternatives. The City Manager shall designate parking meter
zones so as to attempt to reasonably balance parking options evenly
throughout the commercial areas of the City and minimize parking
difficulties that are focused in certain areas.
C. The Director of Public Works shall erect and maintain official signs in
each parking meter zone and on the streets where the parking of
vehicles is limited as to time indicating: (i) the parking meter zone; and
(ii) the time limits of such parking. In addition, in "park once" zones, the
official signs shall also provide notice that the time limitation on
parking applies within the entire parking meter zone.
D. The following named and described areas, streets and ways or portions
thereof lying within the City shall be included within a Parking Meter
Zone: [Ord. No. 6543, 6-26-2018]
Bemiston Avenue between Shaw Park Drive and Maryland Avenue.
Bonhomme Avenue between Hanley Road and Brentwood Boulevard.
Brentwood Boulevard between Bonhomme Avenue and Westmoreland
Avenue.
Brighton Way from Maryland Avenue to a point one hundred forty-five
(145) feet north of Maryland Avenue.
Carondelet Avenue between Brentwood Boulevard and Hanley Road.
Carondelet Plaza; south side between a point one hundred fifty (150)
feet east of Hanley Road to the Carondelet Plaza Circle, and north
side from the Carondelet Circle to Forsyth Boulevard.
Central Avenue, between Shaw Park Drive and a point two hundred
(200) feet north of the north line of Maryland Avenue.
92.Editor’s Note: Section 5 of Ord. No. 6454 also changed the title of this Section from
“Zone” to “Parking Meter Zones.”
Section
350.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
350.190
AO:393
Section 350.200. Violations [CC 1970 §21-176; CC 1947 §11-166.7;
Ord. No. 6014 §1, 4-22-2008]
Clayton Road, north side between Hanley Road and Oleta Drive; north
side between a point one hundred sixty (160) feet west of the west
curb line of DeMun Avenue, and DeMun Avenue.
Crandon Drive between Maryland Avenue and the first alley north of
Maryland Avenue.
DeMun Avenue, east and west sides, from Clayton Road to the east
and west alley situated between Clayton Road and Alamo Avenue.
Forest Court from Wydown Boulevard to sixty seven (67) feet south of
Wydown Boulevard.
Forsyth Boulevard between Maryland Avenue and Hanley Road, on
the east side from the alley north of Maryland to Maryland, on the
north side between Hanley Road and Lyle Avenue, on the north side
between Jackson Avenue and Lee Avenue, and on the south side west
of Lyle Avenue.
Francis Place, east side from Clayton Road to Brentwood Boulevard.
Gay Avenue, east side between Maryland Avenue to south of
University Drive.
Hanley Road, east side from Wydown Boulevard to two hundred (200)
feet north of Wydown Boulevard.
Hunter Avenue.
Kingbury Boulevard on the south side east of Meramec Avenue to a
point one hundred fifty (150) feet east of Meramec Avenue.
Lancaster Drive, west side from Maryland Avenue to one hundred
forty-five (145) feet north of Maryland Avenue.
Lyle Avenue.
Maryland Avenue, north side between Gay Avenue and Forsyth
Boulevard, north and south side between Forsyth and Meramec, south
side between Meramec Avenue and North Central Avenue, and north
and south side between North Central Avenue and Hanley Road.
Meramec Avenue between Shaw Park Drive and Kingsbury Boulevard,
and Clayton Road to the alley north of Clayton Road.
Parkside Drive on the east and west side between Forsyth Boulevard
and Topton Way.
Topton Way on the southwest side between Parkside Drive and the
north entrance of Mark Twain Circle.
Wydown Boulevard on the north side between Hanley Road and
Westwood Drive and its prolongation northwardly and on the south
side between Hanley Road and Westwood Drive.
A. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this Article for
any person:
Section
350.190
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
350.200
AO:394
Section 350.210. Use of Proceeds [CC 1970 §21-177; CC 1947
§11-166.10; Ord. No. 6014 §1, 4-22-2008]
The coins deposited in parking meters shall be credited to the general
revenue fund from which shall be defrayed the expense of proper regulation
of traffic, cost of purchasing, operating and maintaining parking meters, the
establishment, improvement and maintenance of off-street parking area or
lots, control of the parking of vehicles in parking meter zones, or as directed
by the Board of Alderman in the annual budget process.
Section 350.220. Regulations Not Exclusive [CC 1970 §21-178; CC
1947 §11-166.11; Ord. No. 6014 §1, 4-22-2008]
Nothing in this Article shall be construed as prohibiting other parking
regulations consistent herewith or the establishment of loading zones, or
bus, taxicab or service car stops or stands in the zones herein designated.
1. To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name
of, or operated by such person to be parked overtime, or beyond
the period of legal parking time established for any parking meter
zone as herein described, or to deposit in any parking meter any
coin for the purpose of parking beyond the maximum legal parking
time for the particular parking meter zone.
2. To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name
of, or operated by such person to remain or be placed in any
parking space adjacent to any parking meter while said meter is
displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle occupying such
parking space has already been parked beyond the period
prescribed for such parking space.
3. To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name
of, or operated by such person to be parked across any line or
marking of a parking meter space or in such position that the
vehicle shall not be entirely within the area designated by such
lines or markings.
4. To deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy, or
impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the
provisions of this Article.
5. To deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slugs,
device or metal substance, or other substitute for lawful coins.
6. To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle other than a compact
car, motorcycle or scooter registered in the name of, or operated by
such person to be parked in a parking meter or parking space
designated as "Parking Compact Cars, Motorcycles or Scooters
Only".
Section
350.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
350.220
AO:395

ARTICLE IV
Valet Parking Zones
Section 350.230. Establishment of Valet Parking Zones [CC 1970
§21-189; Ord. No. 4942 §1, 12-22-1992; Ord. No. 4958 §1, 3-9-1993;
Ord. No. 5334 §1, 5-27-1997; Ord. No. 5775 §1, 8-26-2003; Ord. No.
6231 §1, 9-18-2012; Ord. No. 6278 §1, 6-25-2013]
A. Pursuant to the provisions of this Section, valet parking zones may be
established on such public streets and in such places and for such times
and in such number as shall be determined by the Director of Public
Works to be in the best interest of the City, its citizens and visitors in
order to provide convenient parking near the point of destination in
those portions of the City designated as commercial districts by Title IV,
Zoning Regulations.
B. A valet parking zone shall be created only upon a written valet parking
permit application submitted to the Director of Public Works by the
owner or occupant of the property adjacent to the site of the proposed
valet parking zone setting forth the terms of the proposed operation of
the valet parking zone, which terms shall include, but may not be
limited to, those set forth in this Section. Each such application must be
accompanied by a non-refundable initial permit application fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00). Each permit issued shall obligate the holder
thereof (the "permittee") to operate the valet parking zone and perform
all of the obligations, duties and responsibilities set forth in the permit
and in this Section. The Director of Public Works may impose additional
conditions or restrictions on the operation of a given permit as the
Director may determine to be reasonable and necessary to protect
public safety, avoid disruption or disadvantage to nearby residents or
businesses and in light of the location and surrounding circumstances
at issue. All permits shall be subject to renewal by the Director of Public
Works as of April first (1st) of every calendar year and payment of the
annual fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) payable by the renewal
date. In determining whether to renew a permit, the Director of Public
Works shall consider the manner in which the valet parking zone has
been operated, the degree to which the applicant has complied with the
requirements set forth in this Section and the permit, whether the
operation of the valet parking zone at that location has caused a traffic
impediment, contributed to disruption of safe traffic movements or
posed a safety hazard for motorists, and the best interests of the City
and its citizens and visitors.
C. Valet parking zones shall be established only in those areas designated
as "commercial districts" pursuant to Title IV, Zoning Regulations of the
Code of Ordinances of the City. Valet parking zones shall be established
only on public streets and adjacent sidewalks as specified in the permit
to be issued pursuant to Subsection (B) above. The Director of Public
Works shall determine the location and length of all valet parking zones
Section
350.230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
350.230
AO:397
based on factors including, but not limited to, traffic flow, pedestrian
safety and impact on the overall streetscape and business environment.
D. Valet parking zones shall be restricted for use in conjunction with the
operation of valet parking no earlier than 5:30 P.M. and no later than
11:30 P.M. No valet parking zones may operate and no permits for valet
parking shall be issued after October 1, 2012, for any other time of day
than specified above unless:
1. The zone was established pursuant to a valid written contract
entered into prior to that date; or
2. The applicant can establish, to the satisfaction of the Director of
Public Works, that extraordinary circumstances warrant the
establishment of the proposed zone. The circumstances which the
Director of Public Works may find to be so extraordinary as to
warrant designation of a valet parking zone earlier than 5:30 P.M.
or later than 11:30 P.M. may include, but need not be limited to:
a. Whether multiple businesses and/or residential buildings will
be using the proposed valet zone jointly as opposed to the zone
primarily or exclusively benefiting a single permittee;
b. Whether the proposed valet zone will cause the removal of
access to existing or proposed metered parking, and the
percentage of the reasonably proximate metered parking
spaces to be removed by the proposed zone;
c. Whether establishment of the proposed zone can reasonably be
expected not to have a detrimental effect on other nearby
activities which rely on metered parking;
d. Whether the proposed zone will have a beneficial effect on
vehicular and pedestrian safety; and
e. Such other circumstances as the Director may find relevant.
3. In addition to the annual fee specified above, any valet zone
established for any time earlier than 5:30 P.M. or later than 11:30
P.M. on days when meter use is required pursuant to Section
350.180 above shall require payment of an additional annual fee of
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each metered
parking space to be utilized for valet parking purposes.
4. The Director is also authorized to establish weekend valet parking
extension zones to permit use of an existing valet parking zone
after 8:00 A.M. and before 5:30 P.M. on Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays (as defined in Section 350.180 above) only, if the Director
determines that the criteria in Subparts (c), (d) and (e) of
Subsection (D)(2) above are satisfied. The additional annual fee for
a weekend extension zone permit shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00) in addition to the annual fee specified above.
Section
350.230
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
350.230
AO:398
E. The City shall provide appropriate signage, at its cost, prohibiting
parking in valet parking zones and designating such zones "No Parking,
Valet Only, Tow Away Zone" or "No Parking, Loading and Valet Only,
Tow Away Zone".
F. The permittee shall, at all times the valet zone has been approved for
operation, station a sufficient number of valets at the authorized
curbside location to remove all vehicles to be parked by valets from the
valet parking zone and from any other portion of a public right-of-way
as quickly as possible and in any case within ten (10) minutes. Vehicles
so removed shall not be parked in public streets, alleys or publicly
owned surface parking lots.
G. The permittee, at its own expense and cost, shall keep the valet parking
zone in a neat and clean condition, free from nuisance and filth and
provide for the removal of snow, ice, trash and waste therefrom.
H. The permittee shall operate the valet parking zone, or cause the same
to be operated, in accordance with all requirements of this Section and
any conditions required by the applicable permit. In the event that the
permittee retains the services of a valet parking company, the permittee
shall provide written notice of the name of the company to the Director
of Public Works and to the Chief of Police.
I. The City shall keep and maintain the sidewalk, street and curb of the
valet parking zone in a manner comparable to the rest of the block in
which the valet parking zone is located; provided that this obligation
shall not limit or otherwise affect the City's right and power to specially
assess for the cost of maintaining the same.
J. The permittee shall provide and maintain, at its own expense and cost,
general liability insurance in full force and effect for the valet parking
zones, in standard form generally in use in the State of Missouri with
insurance companies having a current "best" rating of not less than A
and a financial rating not less than Class VII and authorized to do
business in the State of Missouri in an amount determined by the City
Manager from time to time on the basis of liability limits then applicable
to the City and an assessment of the City's risks associated with the
activity involved. Executed copies of said policies of insurance or
certificates thereof shall be delivered to the Director of Public Works
within thirty (30) days of the date on which the Director of Public Works
authorizes the issuance of the permit. No permit shall be issued unless
and until the policy or policies or certificate(s) have been delivered to
the Director of Public Works. Not less than thirty (30) days prior to the
expiration of the term of each such policy, a renewal or replacement
insurance policy or certificate thereof shall be delivered to the Director
of Public Works; failure of the permittee to comply with the
requirements of this Subsection shall be grounds for immediate
termination of the permit notwithstanding any other provision of this
Section or the permit. All said policies of insurance delivered to the City
must contain a provision that the company writing said policy will give
Section
350.230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
350.230
AO:399
the City twenty (20) days' notice in writing in advance of any
cancellation, lapse or reduction in the amount of insurance. All of said
policies of insurance must contain a provision naming the City, its
agents, employees, guests and invitees as an additional insured.
K. Any valet parking zone established or valet parking permit issued
pursuant to this Section is subject to suspension or revocation upon a
finding by the Director of Public Works, after affording the applicant or
permittee an opportunity to be heard thereon, that:
1. Any representation on the permit application was false or
fraudulent; or
2. That valet parking zone has not been fully and consistently staffed
at all times when the zone is in effect; or
3. That the valet parking zone has in any other material way been
operated in violation of the conditions or requirements specified in
this Section or in the permit or contract regarding the zone in
question.
L. Any applicant or permittee aggrieved by a decision of the Director of
Public Works in refusing or disciplining a permit may appeal the
decision to the City Manager by filing with the City Manager a written
request therefor stating wherein and why the Director's decision is in
error and specifying the facts in support of the appellant's position
within five (5) days of the Director's decision. Judicial review of the City
Manager's decision may be had by filing a petition therefor pursuant to
Chapter 536, RSMo., in the Circuit Court for St. Louis County, Missouri,
within ten (10) days of the Manager's decision.
M. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Section, or any
person who shall take part in or assist in the violation of this Section,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each violation. Any vehicle parked in violation of the
restrictions specified on valet parking signs installed pursuant to this
Section may be subject to being ticketed and towed.
Section
350.230
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
350.230
AO:400
ARTICLE V
Penalty For Violations
Section 350.240. Established Fines For Parking Violations. [Ord.
No. 6455 §1, 10-18-2016]
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter shall, for
each offense, be subject to the following fines:
Section
Number Violation
Due in 14
Days
Due in
15-21
Days
Due over
22 Days
350.170 Expired Meter
*50% discount will be
applied to any fines
for an expired meter
if paid within 30
minutes at the Traffic
Violations Bureau
$20.00 $40.00 $60.00
350.200 Exceeded Parking
Time Limit at Meter
or Within Parking
Meter Zone
$25.00 $50.00 $75.00
350.020 Blocked Driveway or
Entrance To Abutting
Property
$25.00 $50.00 $75.00
350.020 Parked at a Place
Where Official Signs
Prohibit Parking
$25.00 $50.00 $75.00
350.020 Parked at a Place
Where Curb Has
Been Painted Yellow
$25.00 $50.00 $75.00
350.030 Parked in City and
Park Patron Lot
Without City Permit
$25.00 $50.00 $75.00
350.030 Parked During
Restricted Hours
$25.00 $50.00 $75.00
350.040 Parked During Hours
Designated For
Street Sweeping
$25.00 $50.00 $75.00
350.010 Improperly Parked $25.00 $50.00 $75.00
350.200 Not Parked Properly
Within a Parking
Space
$25.00 $50.00 $75.00
Section
350.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
350.240
AO:401
Section
Number Violation
Due in 14
Days
Due in
15-21
Days
Due over
22 Days
215.310 Parked Without
Consent
$25.00 $50.00 $75.00
350.010 Heading Wrong
Direction
$40.00 $80.00 $120.00
350.030 Double Parked $40.00 $80.00 $120.00
350.020 Parked in Bus Zone $40.00 $80.00 $120.00
350.020 Parked in Fire Lane $40.00 $80.00 $120.00
350.020 Parked on Sidewalk $40.00 $80.00 $120.00
350.020 Parked Within 5 Ft. of
Fire Hydrant
$40.00 $80.00 $120.00
350.030 Parked In Alley $40.00 $80.00 $120.00
350.230 Parked in a Valet
Zone
$40.00 $80.00 $120.00
350.110 Exceeded Parking
Limit in Residential
Area
$40.00 $80.00 $120.00
350.060 Parked in Designated
Accessible Parking
Area or Space (Total
Fine and Costs)
$100.00 $150.00 $225.00
B. Any violation of Chapter 350 which is not listed above shall be subject
to the general penalty set forth in Title I of this Code.
Section
350.240
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
350.240
AO:402
Chapter 355
STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY - LOADING
ZONES - BUS STOPS - TAXICAB STANDS
Cross Reference — As to taxicabs and business regulations, ch. 620.
Section 355.010. Loading Zones As Designated [CC 1970 §21-147;
CC 1947 §11-120]
Loading zones are those spaces which may hereafter be designated as such.
Section 355.020. Standing For Loading or Unloading — Only in
Certain Places [CC 1970 §21-148; CC 1947 §11-27(a,b)]
Section 355.030. Standing For Loading or Unloading — Time [CC
1970 §21-149; CC 1947 §11-27(c)]
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park said
vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers or for the unloading and delivery or
pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a loading zone. In no
case shall the stop for loading and for unloading of materials exceed fifteen
(15) minutes. The provisions of this Section shall not be applicable between
the hours of 6:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M.
Section 355.040. Bus and Taxicab Stands — Designation [CC 1970
§21-150; CC 1947 §11-28; Ord. No. 6210 §1, 6-12-2012]
The Director of Public Works, with the consent of the City Manager, is
authorized and required to establish bus stops and taxicab stands on such
public streets, in such places and in such number as shall be determined
to be of the greatest service and convenience to the public and every such
bus stop and taxicab stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. The
Director may also in the same manner designate limited taxicab stands that
are restricted for use by permitted taxicabs only during specified times as
indicated on the signs identifying such stands.
A. The Director of Public Works shall have authority to determine the
location of passenger zones and loading zones and shall erect and
maintain or cause to be maintained appropriate signs indicating the
same.
B. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or period
of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of
passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone
during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone
are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes.
Section
350.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
355.050
AO:403
Section 355.050. Bus Stands — Stopping, Standing and Parking of
Buses93 [CC 1970 §21-151; CC 1947 §10-103; Ord. No. 6210 §1,
6-12-2012]
Section 355.060. Bus and Taxicab Stands — Other Vehicles
Prohibited From Parking in [CC 1970 §21-153; CC 1947 §11-29; Ord.
No. 6210 §1, 6-12-2012]
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle other than a bus to
stand or park in an officially designated bus stop or for any vehicle other
than a taxicab authorized by a valid taxicab stand permit to stand or park
in any officially designated taxicab stand at a time when the location is
restricted for bus or taxicab use when signs identifying such bus stop or
taxicab stand are erected, except that the operator of any passenger vehicle
may temporarily stop in any such stop or stand for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers.
Section 355.070. Taxicab Stand Permits [Ord. No. 6210 §1,
6-12-2012]
A. The operator of a bus shall not stand or park the vehicle upon any street
at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided in this
Chapter.
B. The operator of a bus shall not stop the vehicle upon any street at any
place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their
baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone
so designated as provided in this Chapter, except in case of an
emergency.
C. The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger
loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus when
stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position
with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen (18)
inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so
as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
A. A taxicab stand permit is a license issued by the Director of Finance of
the City of Clayton which authorizes the licensee to park one (1) taxicab
at a time in any designated taxicab stand in the City of Clayton. Permits
may be issued to an individual or taxicab company having a valid on-call
taxicab permit issued by the Metropolitan Taxicab Commission. If
issued to a taxicab company, the permit authorizes any one (1) taxicab
liveried as or bearing the name of that company to park at each taxi
stand within the City of Clayton. Qualified applicants may seek and be
issued more than one (1) taxicab stand permit (to a maximum of two
(2)) in order to park more than one (1) taxicab simultaneously at the
same taxicab stand. Multiple permits are not required to park
simultaneously at separate taxicab stands.
93.State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §300.510, RSMo.
Section
355.050
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
355.070
AO:404
B. Applications for a taxicab stand permit shall be submitted in writing on
forms provided for that purpose by the Director of Finance. Applicants
shall state the number of permits being applied for and shall submit
proof of a valid on-call taxicab permit at the time of application. Each
application shall be accompanied by an application fee of fifty dollars
($50.00).
C. Each taxicab stand permit shall be valid for a period of one (1) year,
beginning on July first (1st) and ending on June thirtieth (30th), unless
sooner surrendered or terminated as hereinafter provided. The fee for
the first (1st) permit for any applicant shall be four hundred dollars
($400.00). The fee for a second (2nd) permit for a company shall be
eight hundred dollars ($800.00). No company or combination of related
or affiliated drivers or companies may hold more than two (2) permits.
The fee shall not be prorated for partial license years or in the event of
surrender or termination. Taxicab stand permits are not transferable.
D. Permit holders are not entitled to reserved use of any specific taxicab
stand space, nor will the Loading Zones—Bus Stops—Taxicab Stands
number of permits issued be limited by the number of taxicab stands or
taxicab stand parking spaces provided by the City. Taxicabs authorized
by a valid taxicab stand permit may occupy any taxicab stand space on a
first come first served basis.
E. Taxicab stand permits are subject to suspension or revocation upon a
finding by the Director of Finance, after affording the permittee an
opportunity to be heard thereon, that the permittee:
1. Does not have a valid on-call taxicab permit issued by the
Metropolitan Taxicab Commission; or
2. That any representation on the permittee's application was false or
fraudulent; or
3. That the permittee has or has attempted to park more taxicabs than
authorized by the number of permits issued to that permittee; or
4. That the permittee has in any other material way violated the
requirements for issuance of such permit or operation of taxicab
stands.
Any applicant or licensee aggrieved by a decision of the
Director of Finance in refusing or disciplining a permit may
appeal the decision to the City Manager by filing with the
City Manager a written request therefor stating wherein and
why the Director's decision is in error and specifying the facts
in support of the appellant's position within five (5) days of
the Director's decision. Judicial review of the City Manager's
decision may be had by filing a petition therefor pursuant to
Chapter 536, RSMo., in the Circuit Court for St. Louis County,
Missouri, within ten (10) days of the Manager's decision.
Section
355.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
355.070
AO:405
Chapter 360
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT, SIZE AND LOAD
Section
355.070
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
355.070
AO:406
ARTICLE I
Light Regulations
Section 360.010. When Lights Required
Section 360.020. Headlamp On Motor Vehicles
Except as in this Article provided, every motor vehicle other than a motordrawn
vehicle and other than a motorcycle shall be equipped with at least
two (2) approved headlamps mounted at the same level with at least one (1)
on each side of the front of the vehicle. Every motorcycle shall be equipped
with at least one (1) and not more than two (2) approved headlamps. Every
motorcycle equipped with a sidecar or other attachment shall be equipped
with a lamp on the outside limit of such attachment capable of displaying a
white light to the front.
Section 360.030. Multiple-Beam Headlamps — Arrangement
A. "When lighted lamps are required" means at any time from a half (½)
hour after sunset to a half (½) hour before sunrise and at any other time
when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons
and vehicles on the highway at a distance of five hundred (500) feet
ahead. Lighted lamps shall also be required any time the weather
conditions require usage of the motor vehicle's windshield wipers to
operate the vehicle in a careful and prudent manner as defined in
Section 304.012, RSMo. The provisions of this Section shall be
interpreted to require lighted lamps during periods of fog even if usage
of the windshield wipers is not necessary to operate the vehicle in a
careful and prudent manner.
B. When Lights Required—Violation—Penalty.
1. No person shall drive, move, park or be in custody of any vehicle or
combination of vehicles on any street or highway during the times
when lighted lamps are required unless such vehicle or
combination of vehicles displays lighted lamps and illuminating
devices as hereinafter in this Article required. No person shall use
on any vehicle any approved electric lamp or similar device unless
the light source of such lamp or device complies with the conditions
of approval as to focus and rated candlepower.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 307.120, RSMo., or any
other provision of law, violation of this Section shall be deemed an
infraction and any person who violates this Section as it relates to
violations of the usage of lighted lamps required due to weather
conditions or fog shall only be fined ten dollars ($10.00) and no
court costs shall be assessed.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, the headlamps or the auxiliary driving
lamp or the auxiliary passing lamp or combination thereof on motor
vehicles other than motorcycles or motor-driven cycles shall be so
Section
360.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
360.030
AO:407
Section 360.040. Dimming of Lights — When
Every person driving a motor vehicle equipped with multiple-beam road
lighting equipment, during the times when lighted lamps are required, shall
use a distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and
of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a safe distance
in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements and
limitations: Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming
vehicle within five hundred (500) feet or is within three hundred (300) feet
to the rear of another vehicle traveling in the same direction, the driver
shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that the
glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the other driver, and in no
case shall the high-intensity portion which is projected to the left of the
prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle be aimed higher than the
center of the lamp from which it comes at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet
ahead, and in no case higher than a level of forty-two (42) inches above the
level upon which the vehicle stands at a distance of seventy-five (75) feet
ahead.
Section 360.050. Taillamps — Reflectors
arranged that the driver may select at will between distributions of
light projected to different elevations and such lamps may, in addition,
be so arranged that such selection can be made automatically, subject
to the following limitations:
1. There shall be an uppermost distribution of light, or composite
beam, so aimed and of such intensity as to reveal persons and
vehicles at a distance of at least three hundred fifty (350) feet
ahead for all conditions of loading.
2. There shall be a lowermost distribution of light, or composite beam,
so aimed and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles
at a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet ahead; and on a
straight level road under any condition of loading none of the highintensity
portion of the beam shall be directed to strike the eyes of
an approaching driver.
A. Every motor vehicle and every motor-drawn vehicle shall be equipped
with at least two (2) rear lamps, not less than fifteen (15) inches or more
than seventy-two (72) inches above the ground upon which the vehicle
stands, which when lighted will exhibit a red light plainly visible from a
distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear. Either such rear lamp or
a separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with
a white light the rear registration marker and render it clearly legible
from a distance of fifty (50) feet to the rear. When the rear registration
marker is illuminated by an electric lamp other than the required rear
lamps, all such lamps shall be turned on or off only by the same control
switch at all times.
Section
360.030
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
360.050
AO:408
Section 360.060. Auxiliary Lamps — Number — Location
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed three (3) auxiliary
lamps mounted on the front at a height not less than twelve (12) inches
nor more than forty-two (42) inches above the level surface upon which the
vehicle stands.
Section 360.070. Cowl, Fender, Running Board and Backup Lamps
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two (2) side cowl
or fender lamps which shall emit a white or yellow light without glare.
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one (1) running
board courtesy lamp on each side thereof which shall emit a white or yellow
light without glare. Any motor vehicle may be equipped with a backup lamp
either separately or in combination with another lamp, except that no such
backup lamp shall be continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in
forward motion.
Section 360.080. Spotlamps
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed one (1) spotlamp but
every lighted spotlamp shall be so aimed and used so as not to be dazzling
or glaring to any person.
B. Every motorcycle registered in this State, when operated on a highway,
shall also carry at the rear, either as part of the rear lamp or separately,
at least one (1) approved red reflector which shall be of such size and
characteristics and so maintained as to be visible during the times
when lighted lamps are required from all distances within three
hundred (300) feet to fifty (50) feet from such vehicle when directly in
front of a motor vehicle displaying lawful undimmed headlamps.
C. Every new passenger car, new commercial motor vehicle, motor-drawn
vehicle and omnibus with a capacity of more than six (6) passengers
registered in this State after January 1, 1966, when operated on a
highway shall also carry at the rear at least two (2) approved red
reflectors, at least one (1) at each side, so designed, mounted on the
vehicle and maintained as to be visible during the times when lighted
lamps are required from all distances within five hundred (500) to fifty
(50) feet from such vehicle when directly in front of a motor vehicle
displaying lawful undimmed headlamps. Every such reflector shall meet
the requirements of this Article and shall be mounted upon the vehicle
at a height not to exceed sixty (60) inches nor less than fifteen (15)
inches above the surface upon which the vehicle stands.
D. Any person who knowingly operates a motor vehicle without the lamps
required in this Section in operable condition is guilty of an infraction.
Section
360.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
360.090
AO:409
Section 360.090. Colors of Various Lamps — Restriction of Red
Lights
Headlamps, when lighted, shall exhibit lights substantially white in color;
auxiliary lamps, cowllamps and spotlamps, when lighted, shall exhibit lights
substantially white, yellow or amber in color. No person shall drive or
move any vehicle or equipment, except a school bus when used for school
purposes or an emergency vehicle, upon any street or highway with any
lamp or device thereon displaying a red light visible from directly in front
thereof.
Section 360.100. Limitations On Lamps Other Than Headlamps —
Flashing Signals Prohibited Except On Specified Vehicles
Any lighted lamp or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle other than
headlamps, spotlamps, front direction signals or auxiliary lamps which
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than three hundred (300)
candlepower shall be so directed that no part of the beam will strike the
level of the roadway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more
than seventy-five (75) feet from the vehicle. Alternately flashing warning
signals may be used on school buses when used for school purposes and on
motor vehicles when used to transport United States mail from post offices
to boxes of addressees thereof and on emergency vehicles as defined in
Section 300.010 of this Title and on buses owned or operated by churches,
mosques, synagogues, temples or other houses of worship and on
commercial passenger transport vehicles or railroad passenger cars that
are stopped to load or unload passengers, but are prohibited on other
motor vehicles, motorcycles and motor-drawn vehicles except as a means
for indicating a right or left turn.
Section 360.110. Limitation On Total of Lamps Lighted At One Time
At the times when lighted lamps are required, at least two (2) lighted
lamps shall be displayed, one (1) on each side of the front of every motor
vehicle except a motorcycle and except a motor-drawn vehicle except when
such vehicle is parked subject to the provisions governing lights on parked
vehicles. Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlamps as in this
Article required is also equipped with any auxiliary lamps or a spotlamp
or any other lamp on the front thereof projecting a beam of an intensity
greater than three hundred (300) candlepower, not more than a total of four
(4) of any such lamps on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at any one
time when upon a highway.
Section 360.120. Other Vehicles — How Lighted
All vehicles, including agricultural machinery or implements, road
machinery, road rollers, traction engines and farm tractors not in this
Article specifically required to be equipped with lamps, shall be equipped
during the times when lighted lamps are required with at least one (1)
lighted lamp or lantern exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of five
Section
360.090
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
360.120
AO:410
hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle and with a lamp or lantern
exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to
the rear, and such lamps and lanterns shall exhibit lights to the sides of such
vehicle.
Section 360.130. Animal-Driven Vehicles — Lighting Requirements
— Penalty
A. Any person who shall place or drive or cause to be placed or driven
upon or along any State highway of this City any animal-driven vehicle
whatsoever, whether in motion or at rest, shall after sunset to one-half
(½) hour before sunrise have attached to every such vehicle at the rear
thereof a red taillight or a red reflecting device of not less than three (3)
inches in diameter of effective area or its equivalent in area. When such
device shall consist of reflecting buttons, there shall be no less than
seven (7) of such buttons covering an area equal to a circle with a three
(3) inch diameter. The total subtended effective angle of reflection of
every such device shall be no less than sixty degrees (60°) and the
spread and efficiency of the reflected light shall be sufficient for the
reflected light to be visible to the driver of any motor vehicle
approaching such animal-drawn vehicle from the rear of a distance of
not less than five hundred (500) feet.
B. In addition, any person who operates any such animal-driven vehicle
during the hours between sunset and one-half (½) hour before sunrise
shall have at least one (1) light flashing at all times the vehicle is on any
highway of this City. Such light or lights shall be amber in the front and
red in the back and shall be placed on the left side of the vehicle at a
height of no more than six (6) feet from the ground and shall be visible
from the front and the back of the vehicle at a distance of at least five
hundred (500) feet.
C. Any person operating an animal-driven vehicle during the hours
between sunset and one-half (½) hour before sunrise may, in lieu of the
requirements of Subsection (B) of this Section, use lamps or lanterns
complying with the rules promulgated by the Director of the
Department of Public Safety.
D. Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation.
Section
360.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
360.130
AO:411

ARTICLE II
Other Vehicle Equipment
Section 360.140. Other Equipment of Motor Vehicles
A. Signaling Devices. Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a horn,
directed forward, or whistle in good working order capable of emitting
a sound adequate in quantity and volume to give warning of the
approach of such vehicle to other users of the highway and to
pedestrians. Such signaling device shall be used for warning purposes
only and shall not be used for making any unnecessary noise, and no
other sound-producing signaling device shall be used at any time.
B. Muffler Cutouts. Muffler cutouts shall not be used and no vehicle shall
be driven in such manner or condition that excessive and unnecessary
noises shall be made by its machinery, motor, signaling device, or other
parts, or by any improperly loaded cargo. The motors of all motor
vehicles shall be fitted with properly attached mufflers of such capacity
or construction as to quiet the maximum possible exhaust noise as
completely as is done in modern gas engine passenger motor vehicles.
Any cutout or opening in the exhaust pipe between the motor and the
muffler on any motor vehicle shall be completely closed and
disconnected from its operating lever and shall be so arranged that it
cannot automatically open, or be opened or operated, while such
vehicle is in motion.
C. Brakes. All motor vehicles, except motorcycles, shall be provided at all
times with two (2) sets of adequate brakes kept in good working order,
and motorcycles shall be provided with one (1) set of adequate brakes
kept in good working order.
D. Mirrors. All motor vehicles which are so constructed or loaded that the
operator cannot see the road behind such vehicle by looking back or
around the side of such vehicle shall be equipped with a mirror so
adjusted as to reveal the road behind and be visible from the operator's
seat.
E. Projections On Vehicles. All vehicles carrying poles or other objects,
which project more than five (5) feet from the rear of such vehicle,
shall, during the period when lights are required by this Chapter, carry
a red light at or near the rear end of the pole or other object so
projecting. At other times a red flag or cloth, not less than sixteen (16)
inches square, shall be displayed at the end of such projection.
F. Towlines. When one vehicle is towing another, the connecting device
shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. During the time that lights are
required by Sections 307.020 to 307.120, RSMo., the required lights
shall be displayed by both vehicles. Every towed vehicle shall be
coupled to the towing vehicle by means of a safety chain, cable or
equivalent device in addition to the primary coupling device, except
that such secondary coupling device shall not be necessary if the
Section
360.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
360.140
AO:413
Section 360.150. Loads Which Might Become Dislodged To Be
Secured — Failure — Penalty
Section 360.160. Seat Belts [Ord. No. 6562, 11-13-2018]
connecting device is connected to the towing vehicle by a centerlocking
ball located over or nearly over the rear axle and not supported
by the rear bumper of the towing vehicle. Such secondary safety
connecting devices shall be of sufficient strength to control the towed
vehicle in the event of failure of the primary coupling device. The
provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to wreckers towing
vehicles or to vehicles secured to the towing vehicle by a fifth-wheel
type connection. The provisions of this Subsection shall also not apply
to farm implements or to any vehicle which is not required to be
registered.
G. Commercial Motor Vehicles And Trailers. When being operated on any
highway, street or road of this City, commercial motor vehicles and
trailers shall be equipped with adequate and proper brakes, lighting
equipment, signaling devices, steering mechanisms, horns, mirrors,
windshield wipers, tires, wheels, exhaust system, glazing, air pollution
control devices, fuel tank and any other safety equipment required by
the State in such condition so as to obtain a certificate of inspection and
approval as required by the provisions of Section 307.360, RSMo.
H. Devices attached to or towed by motor vehicles for the purpose of
transporting hay shall have the protruding parts raised or retracted
when not in use to a position which will not cause injury or damage to
persons or property in the vicinity of such device when on the highways,
streets or roads of this City.
A. All motor vehicles and every trailer and semi-trailer operating upon the
public highways, streets or roads of this City and carrying goods or
material or farm products which may reasonably be expected to
become dislodged and fall from the vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer as a
result of wind pressure or air pressure and/or by the movement of the
vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer shall have a protective cover or be
sufficiently secured so that no portion of such goods or material can
become dislodged and fall from the vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer while
being transported or carried.
B. Operation of a motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer in violation of this
Section shall be an ordinance violation, and any person convicted
thereof shall be punished as provided by Section 100.110 of this Code.
A. As used in this Section, the term "truck" means a motor vehicle
designed, used or maintained for the transportation of property.
B. As used in this Section, the term "passenger car" means every motor
vehicle designed for carrying ten (10) persons or less and used for the
transportation of persons; except that the term "passenger car" shall
Section
360.140
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
360.160
AO:414
Section 360.170. Transporting Children Under Sixteen Years of Age
— Restraint Systems
not include motorcycles, motorized bicycles, motortricycles, autocycles
and trucks with a licensed gross weight of twelve thousand (12,000)
pounds or more.
C. Each driver, except persons employed by the United States Postal
Service while performing duties for that Federal agency which require
the operator to service postal boxes from their vehicles or which
require frequent entry into and exit from their vehicles, and front seat
passengers of a passenger car manufactured after January 1, 1968,
operated on a street or highway in the City, and persons less than
eighteen (18) years of age operating or riding in a truck, as defined in
Subsection (A) of this Section, on a street or highway of this City shall
wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt that meets Federal
National Highway, Transportation and Safety Act requirements. No
person shall be stopped, inspected or detained solely to determine
compliance with this Subsection. The provisions of this Section and
Section 360.170 of this Chapter, shall not be applicable to persons who
have a medical reason for failing to have a seat belt fastened about their
body, nor shall the provisions of this Section be applicable to persons
while operating or riding a motor vehicle being used in agricultural
work-related activities. Non-compliance with this Subsection shall not
constitute probable cause for violation of any other provision of law. The
provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to the transporting of
children under sixteen (16) years of age, as provided in Section 360.170
of this Chapter.
D. Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child less than sixteen
(16) years of age shall secure the child in a properly adjusted and
fastened restraint under Section 360.170 of this Chapter.
E. Except as otherwise provided for in Section 360.170 of this Chapter,
each person found guilty of violating the provisions of Subsection (B) of
this Section is guilty of an infraction for which a fine not to exceed ten
dollars ($10.00) may be imposed. All other provisions of law and court
rules to the contrary notwithstanding, no court costs shall be imposed
on any person due to a violation of this Section.
F. If there are more persons than there are seat belts in the enclosed area
of a motor vehicle, then the passengers who are unable to wear seat
belts shall sit in the area behind the front seat of the motor vehicle
unless the motor vehicle is designed only for a front-seated area. The
passenger or passengers occupying a seat location referred to in this
Subsection is not in violation of this Section. This Subsection shall not
apply to passengers who are accompanying a driver of a motor vehicle
who is licensed under Section 302.178, RSMo.
A. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
Section
360.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
360.170
AO:415
CHILD BOOSTER SEAT — A seating system which meets the Federal
Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in 49 C.F.R 571.213, as
amended, that is designed to elevate a child to properly sit in a
Federally approved safety belt system.
CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINT SYSTEM — A seating system which
meets the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in 49 C.F.R.
571.213, as amended, and which is either permanently affixed to a
motor vehicle or is affixed to such vehicle by a safety belt or a universal
attachment system.
DRIVER — A person who is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle.
B. Every driver transporting a child under the age of sixteen (16) years
shall be responsible, when transporting such child in a motor vehicle
operated by that driver on the streets or highways of this City, for
providing for the protection of such child as follows:
1. Children less than four (4) years of age, regardless of weight, shall
be secured in a child passenger restraint system appropriate for
that child.
2. Children weighing less than forty (40) pounds, regardless of age,
shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system appropriate
for that child.
3. Children at least four (4) years of age but less than eight (8) years
of age, who also weigh at least forty (40) pounds but less than
eighty (80) pounds, and who are also less than four (4) feet nine (9)
inches tall, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system or
booster seat appropriate for that child.
4. Children at least eighty (80) pounds or children more than four (4)
feet, nine (9) inches in height shall be secured by a vehicle safety
belt or booster seat appropriate for that child.
5. A child who otherwise would be required to be secured in a booster
seat may be transported in the back seat of a motor vehicle while
wearing only a lap belt if the back seat of the motor vehicle is not
equipped with a combination lap and shoulder belt for booster seat
installation.
6. When transporting children in the immediate family when there are
more children than there are seating positions in the enclosed area
of a motor vehicle, the children who are not able to be restrained by
a child safety restraint device appropriate for the child shall sit in
the area behind the front seat of the motor vehicle unless the motor
vehicle is designed only for a front seat area. The driver
transporting children referred to in this Subsection is not in
violation of this Section.
Section
360.170
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
360.170
AO:416
Section 360.180. Vision-Reducing Material Applied To Windshield
or Windows Without Permit Prohibited — Penalty — Rules —
Procedure
This Subsection shall only apply to the use of a child passenger
restraint system or vehicle safety belt for children less than
sixteen (16) years of age being transported in a motor vehicle.
C. Any driver who violates Subdivision (1), (2), or (3) of Subsection (B)
herein, is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction may be punished
by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) and court costs. Any
driver who violates Subdivision (4) of Subsection (B) herein, is guilty of
an infraction and, upon conviction, may be punished by a fine of not
more than fifty dollars ($50.00) and court costs. Any driver who violates
Subdivision (4) of Subsection (B) herein, shall be subject to the penalty
in Subsection (E) of Section 360.160 of this Chapter. If a driver receives
a citation for violating Subdivision (1), (2) or (3) of Subsection (B)
herein, the charges shall be dismissed or withdrawn if the driver prior
to or at his/her hearing provides evidence of acquisition of a child
passenger restraint system or child booster seat which is satisfactory to
the Court or the party responsible for prosecuting the driver's citation.
D. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any public carrier for
hire. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to students four (4)
years of age or older who are passengers on a school bus designed for
carrying eleven (11) passengers or more and which is manufactured or
equipped pursuant to Missouri Minimum Standards for School Buses as
school buses are defined in Section 301.010, RSMo.
A. Any person may operate a motor vehicle with front sidewing vents or
windows located immediately to the left and right of the driver that
have a sun-screening device, in conjunction with safety glazing
material, that has a light transmission of thirty-five percent (35%) or
more plus or minus three percent (3%) and a luminous reflectance of
thirty-five percent (35%) or less plus or minus three percent (3%).
Except as provided in Subsection (C) of this Section, any sun-screening
device applied to front sidewing vents or windows located immediately
to the left and right of the driver in excess of the requirements of this
Section shall be prohibited without a permit pursuant to a physician's
prescription as described below. A permit to operate a motor vehicle
with front sidewing vents or windows located immediately to the left
and right of the driver that have a sun-screening device, in conjunction
with safety glazing material, which permits less light transmission and
luminous reflectance than allowed under the requirements of this
Subsection may be issued by the Department of Public Safety to a
person having a serious medical condition which requires the use of a
sun-screening device if the permittee's physician prescribes its use. The
Director of the Department of Public Safety shall promulgate rules and
regulations for the issuance of the permit. The permit shall allow
operation of the vehicle by any titleholder or relative within the second
Section
360.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
360.180
AO:417
Section 360.190. Headgear Required — Motorcycles or
Motortricycles [Ord. No. 6562, 11-13-2018]
Section 360.200. Studded Tires — Prohibited When
No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon any road or highway of this
City between the first (1st) day of April and the first (1st) day of November
while the motor vehicle is equipped with tires containing metal or carbide
studs.
Section 360.210. Restriction On Use of Metal-Tired Vehicles
degree of consanguinity or affinity, which shall mean a spouse, each
grandparent, parent, brother, sister, niece, nephew, aunt, uncle, child
and grandchild of a person who resides in the household. Except as
provided in Subsection (B) of this Section, all sun-screening devices
applied to the windshield of a motor vehicle are prohibited.
B. This Section shall not prohibit labels, stickers, decalcomania or
informational signs on motor vehicles or the application of tinted or
solar-screening material to recreational vehicles as defined in Section
700.010, RSMo., provided that such material does not interfere with the
driver's normal view of the road. This Section shall not prohibit factoryinstalled
tinted glass, the equivalent replacement thereof or tinting
material applied to the upper portion of the motor vehicle's windshield
which is normally tinted by the manufacturer of motor vehicle safety
glass.
C. Any vehicle licensed with a historical license plate shall be exempt from
the requirements of this Section.
D. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section is guilty of an
ordinance violation.
A. Every person operating or riding as a passenger on any motorcycle or
motortricycle, as defined in this Title, upon any highway of this City
shall wear protective headgear at all times the vehicle is in motion. The
protective headgear shall meet reasonable standards and specifications
established by the Director of Revenue.
B. This Section shall not apply to a person operating or riding on an
autocycle.
C. The penalty for failure to wear protective headgear as required by
Subsection (A) of this Section shall be deemed an infraction for which a
fine not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) may be imposed.
Notwithstanding all other provisions of law and court rules to the
contrary, no court costs shall be imposed upon any person due to such
violation. No points shall be assessed pursuant to Section 302.302,
RSMo., for a failure to wear such protective headgear.
Section
360.180
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
360.210
AO:418
Section 360.220. Passengers in Trucks
A. No metal-tired vehicle shall be operated over any of the improved
highways of this City, except over highways constructed of gravel or
claybound gravel, if such vehicle has on the periphery of any of the road
wheels any lug, flange, cleat, ridge, bolt or any projection of metal or
wood which projects radially beyond the tread or traffic surface of the
tire unless the highway is protected by putting down solid planks or
other suitable material or by attachments to the wheels so as to prevent
such vehicles from damaging the highway, except that this prohibition
shall not apply to tractors or traction engines equipped with what is
known as caterpillar treads when such caterpillar does not contain any
projection of any kind likely to injure the surface of the road. Tractors,
traction engines and similar vehicles may be operated which have upon
their road wheels "V" shaped, diagonal or other cleats arranged in such
manner as to be continuously in contact with the road surface if the
gross weight on the wheels per inch of width of such cleats or road
surface, when measured in the direction of the axle of the vehicle, does
not exceed eight hundred (800) pounds.
B. No tractor, tractor engine or other metal-tired vehicle weighing more
than four (4) tons, including the weight of the vehicle and its load, shall
drive onto, upon or over the edge of any improved highway without
protecting such edge by putting down solid planks or other suitable
material to prevent such vehicle from breaking off the edges of the
pavement.
C. Any person violating this Section, whether operating pursuant to a
permit or not, or who shall willfully or negligently damage a highway,
shall be liable for the amount of such damage caused to any highway,
bridge, culvert or sewer, and any vehicle causing such damage shall be
subject to a lien for the full amount of such damage, which lien shall not
be superior to any duly recorded or filed chattel mortgage or other lien
previously attached to such vehicle; the amount of such damage may be
recovered in any action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. As used in this Section, the term "truck" means a motor vehicle
designed, used or maintained for the transportation of property.
B. No person shall operate any truck, as defined in Subsection (A) of this
Section, with a licensed gross weight of less than twelve thousand
(12,000) pounds on any highway which is part of the State or Federal
highway system or when such truck is operated within the corporate
limits of the City when any person under eighteen (18) years of age is
riding in the unenclosed bed of such truck. No person under eighteen
(18) years of age shall ride in the unenclosed bed of such truck when
the truck is in operation.
C. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to:
Section
360.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
360.220
AO:419
Section 360.230. Altering Passenger Motor Vehicle By Raising
Front or Rear of Vehicle Prohibited, When — Bumpers Front and
Rear Required, When Certain Vehicles Exempt
1. Any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of the
employee's duties where it is necessary to ride in the unenclosed
bed of the truck;
2. Any person while engaged in agricultural activities where it is
necessary to ride in the unenclosed bed of the truck;
3. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck while such truck
is being operated in a parade, caravan or exhibition which is
authorized by law;
4. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck has
installed a means of preventing such person from being discharged
or such person is secured to the truck in a manner which will
prevent the person from being thrown, falling or jumping from the
truck;
5. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is
being operated solely for the purpose of participating in a special
event and it is necessary that the person ride in such unenclosed
bed due to a lack of available seating. "Special event", for the
purposes of this Section, is a specific social activity of a definable
duration which is participated in by the person riding in the
unenclosed bed;
6. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is
being operated solely for the purposes of providing assistance to,
or ensuring the safety of, other persons engaged in a recreational
activity; or
7. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is
the only legally titled, licensed and insured vehicle owned by the
family of the person riding in the unenclosed bed and there is
insufficient room in the passenger cab of the truck to accommodate
all passengers in the truck. For the purposes of this Section, the
term "family" shall mean any persons related within the first
degree of consanguinity.
A. No person shall operate any passenger motor vehicle upon the public
streets or highways of this City, the body of which has been altered in
such a manner that the front or rear of the vehicle is raised at such an
angle as to obstruct the vision of the operator of the street or highway
in front or to the rear of the vehicle.
B. Every motor vehicle which is licensed in this State and operated upon
the public streets or highways of this City shall be equipped with front
and rear bumpers if such vehicle was equipped with bumpers as
standard equipment. This Subsection shall not apply to motor vehicles
Section
360.220
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
360.230
AO:420
designed or modified primarily for off-highway purposes, while such
vehicles are in tow, or to motorcycles or motor-driven cycles, or to
motor vehicles registered as historic motor vehicles when the original
design of such vehicles did not include bumpers nor shall the provisions
of this Subsection prohibit the use of drop bumpers. Maximum bumper
heights of both the front and rear bumpers of motor vehicles shall be
determined by weight category of gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)
measured from a level surface to the highest point of the bottom of the
bumper when the vehicle is unloaded and the tires are inflated to the
manufacturer's recommended pressure. Maximum bumper heights are
as follows:
Maximum
front bumper
height
Maximum rear
bumper
height
Motor vehicles except commercial
motor vehicles
22 inches 22 inches
Commercial motor vehicles (GVWR)
4,500 lbs. and under
24 inches 26 inches
4,501 lbs. through 7,500 lbs. 27 inches 29 inches
7,501 lbs. through 9,000 lbs. 28 inches 30 inches
9,001 lbs. through 11,500 lbs. 29 inches 31 inches
Section
360.230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
360.230
AO:421

ARTICLE III
Vehicle Size and Load
Section 360.240. Size and Weight Restrictions — Tire Projections —
Damage Liability [CC 1970 §21-129; CC 1947 §11-64; Ord. No. 3410
§1, 10-13-1970; Ord. No. 3695 §1, 11-12-1974]
A. It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a truck or any other vehicle
having a licensed weight of more than thirteen thousand (13,000)
pounds on any public street or portion thereof of the City of Clayton
designated as a restricted local traffic street.
B. It shall be unlawful to drive, convey or operate upon, over or across any
improved public street or highway or other public place in the City any
wagon, engine, tractor, truck or vehicle of any kind having on its wheels
any clamps, ridges, extensions, projections, bars, bolts, rods, curves,
gutters or other contrivance that will cut or mash holes, gashes or
crevices into the streets or otherwise tear up, injure or damage said
streets or any part thereof.
C. Any person violating the provisions of this Section, whether operating
under a permit or not, or who shall willfully or negligently damage a
highway of the City shall be liable for the amount of such damage
caused to any highway, street, bridge, culvert or sewer and any vehicle
causing such damage shall be subject to a lien for the full amount of
such damage; provided however, such lien shall not be superior to any
duly recorded or filed chattel mortgage or other lien previously
attached to such vehicle; the amount of such damage may be recovered
in an action in any court of competent jurisdiction, in the name of the
State, to the use of the City.
Section
360.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
360.240
AO:423
Chapter 365
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
Cross Reference — Clinging to vehicle, §340.060.
Section 365.010. Bicycle and Motorized Bicycle — Defined
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall mean:
BICYCLE — Every vehicle propelled solely by human power upon which any
person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, or two (2) parallel wheels
and one (1) or two (2) forward or rear wheels, all of which are more than
fourteen (14) inches in diameter, except scooters and similar devices.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — Any two- or three-wheeled device having an
automatic transmission and a motor with a cylinder capacity of not more
than fifty (50) cubic centimeters, which produces less than three (3) gross
brake horsepower, and is capable of propelling the device at a maximum
speed of not more than thirty (30) miles per hour on level ground. A
motorized bicycle shall be considered a motor vehicle for purposes of any
homeowners' or renters' insurance policy.
Section 365.020. Brakes Required
Every bicycle and motorized bicycle shall be equipped with a brake or
brakes which will enable its driver to stop the bicycle or motorized bicycle
within twenty-five (25) feet from a speed of ten (10) miles per hour on dry,
level, clean pavement.
Section 365.030. Lights and Reflectors — When Required —
Standards To Be Met
A. Every bicycle and motorized bicycle when in use on a street or highway
during the period from one-half (½) hour after sunset to one-half (½)
hour before sunrise shall be equipped with the following:
1. A front-facing lamp on the front or carried by the rider which shall
emit a white light visible at night under normal atmospheric
conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway at five hundred
(500) feet;
2. A rear-facing red reflector, at least two (2) square inches in
reflective surface area, or a rear-facing red lamp on the rear which
shall be visible at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a
straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver
under the lower beams of vehicle headlights at six hundred (600)
feet;
3. Reflective material and/or lights on any part of the bicyclist's
pedals, crank arms, shoes or lower leg visible from the front and
the rear at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a
straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver
Section
360.240
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
365.030
AO:424
Section 365.040. Rights and Duties of Bicycle and Motorized
Bicycle Riders
Every person riding a bicycle or motorized bicycle upon a street or highway
shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to the driver of a vehicle as provided by Chapter 304, RSMo.,
and this Title, except as to special regulations in this Chapter, and except
as to those provisions of Chapter 304, RSMo., and this Title, which by their
nature can have no application.
Section 365.050. Riding To Right — Required For Bicycles and
Motorized Bicycles — Mandatory Use of Bicycle Path By Bicycles
Every person operating a bicycle or motorized bicycle at less than the
posted speed or slower than the flow of traffic upon a street or highway shall
ride as near to the right side of the roadway as safe, exercising due care
when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction,
except when making a left turn, when avoiding hazardous conditions, when
the lane is too narrow to share with another vehicle, or when on a one-way
street. Bicyclists may ride abreast when not impeding other vehicles.
Section 365.060. Bicycle To Operate On The Shoulder Adjacent To
Roadway, When — Roadway Defined
under the lawful lower beams of vehicle headlights at two hundred
(200) feet; and
4. Reflective material and/or lights visible on each side of the bicycle
or bicyclist and visible at night under normal atmospheric
conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a
vehicle driver under the lawful lower beams of vehicle headlights at
three hundred (300) feet. The provisions of this Subsection shall
not apply to motorized bicycles which comply with National
Highway Traffic and Safety Administration regulations relating to
reflectors on motorized bicycles.
A. A person operating a bicycle at less than the posted speed or slower
than the flow of traffic upon a street or highway may operate as
described in Section 365.050 of this Chapter, or may operate on the
shoulder adjacent to the roadway.
B. A bicycle operated on a roadway, or the shoulder adjacent to a roadway,
shall be operated in the same direction as vehicles are required to be
driven upon the roadway.
C. For purposes of this Section, and Section 365.050, "roadway" means
that portion of a street or highway ordinarily used for vehicular travel,
exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
Section
365.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
365.070
AO:425
Section 365.070. Bicycle Required To Give Hand or Mechanical
Signals
The operator of a bicycle shall signal as required in Section 325.020 of
this Title, except that a signal by the hand and arm need not be given
continuously if the hand is needed to control or operate the bicycle. An
operator of a bicycle intending to turn the bicycle to the right shall signal as
indicated in Section 325.020 of this Title, or by extending such operator's
right arm in a horizontal position so that the same may be seen in front and
in rear of the vehicle.
Section 365.080. Penalty For Violation
Any person seventeen (17) years of age or older who violates any provision
of this Chapter is guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor
more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). If any person under seventeen (17)
years of age violates any provision of this Chapter in the presence of a Police
Officer, said officer may impound the bicycle or motorized bicycle involved
for a period not to exceed five (5) days upon issuance of a receipt to the
child riding it or to its owner.
Section 365.090. Motorized Bicycles — License Required
Section 365.100. Equipment Required
No person shall operate a motorized bicycle on any highways, streets or
roads in this City unless it is equipped in accordance with the minimum
requirements for construction and equipment of MOPEDS, Regulation
VESC-17, approved July, 1977, as promulgated by the Vehicle Equipment
Safety Commission.
Section 365.110. Helmet Required For Users of Bicycles and
Certain Other Devices [Ord. No. 5862 §1, 1-25-2005]
A. No person shall operate a motorized bicycle on any highways, streets or
roads in this City unless the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle.
B. No motorized bicycle may be operated on any public thoroughfare
located within this City which has been designated as part of the
Federal interstate highway system.
A. The regulations in this Section apply to persons operating or riding
upon bicycles, scooters, in-line skates, roller skates or skateboards
when such devices are operated upon any highway, roadway, alleyway,
sidewalk or upon any path available for the use of such devices.
B. For purposes of this Section, a "scooter" shall be defined as a device
that typically has one (1) front and one (1) rear wheel with a low
footboard between, is steered by a handlebar, and is propelled either by
Section
365.070
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
365.110
AO:426
pushing one (1) foot against the ground while resting the other foot
on the footboard or by a motor. A scooter may have more than two (2)
wheels.
C. For purposes of this Section, a "bicycle" shall be as defined in Section
365.010.
D. For purposes of this Section, the term "helmet" means a piece of
headgear which meets or exceeds the impact standard for protective
bicycle helmets set by the U.S. Consumer Products Safety Commission
Federal safety standards, those developed by the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI), the Snell Memorial Foundation or the
American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM).
E. Every person under the age of seventeen (17) years operating or being
a passenger on a bicycle or using a scooter, in-line skates, roller skates
or a skateboard shall wear a bicycle helmet of good fit, fastened
securely upon the head with the straps of the helmet.
F. No person operating a bicycle shall allow anyone under the age of
seventeen (17) years to ride as a passenger unless the passenger is
wearing a bicycle helmet; or else is in an enclosed trailer or other
device which meets or exceeds current nationally recognized standards
of design and manufacture for the protection of the passenger's head
from impacts in an accident without the need for a helmet.
G. No parent, custodian or legal guardian of a person under the age of
seventeen (17) years shall knowingly permit said person to operate or
be a passenger on a bicycle or to use a scooter, in-line skates, roller
skates and skateboards without wearing a bicycle helmet.
H. No person operating a bicycle shall allow anyone who is either four (4)
years old or younger or weighing forty (40) pounds or less to ride as a
passenger on the bicycle other than in a seat which shall adequately
retain the passenger in place and protect the passenger from the
bicycle's moving parts.
I. Any operator of or passenger on equipment described in this Section
found to be in violation of this Section may be issued an equipment
violation notice as prescribed on a Missouri Uniform Complaint and
Summons. The person responsible for payment of the violation may
have the violation dismissed, if the person submits a receipt for a proof
of purchase of a bicycle helmet along with the helmet to the Clayton
Police Department within five (5) calendar days of the date of the
violation notice.
J. Fines assessed to juvenile violators (under the age of seventeen (17)
years) will be the legal responsibility of the violator's parent, custodian
or legal guardian; and therefore any summons issued as a result of a
violation committed by such a juvenile shall be issued to said violator's
parent, custodian or legal guardian.
Section
365.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
365.110
AO:427
Chapter 370
LICENSING REQUIREMENTS
K. This Section shall not apply to bicycles, scooters, in-line skates, roller
skates or skateboards operated on private residential property.
Section
365.110
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
365.110
AO:428
ARTICLE I
Operator's Licenses
Section 370.010. Driving While License Suspended or Revoked94
A person commits the offense of driving while revoked if such person
operates a motor vehicle on a highway when such person's license or
driving privilege has been canceled, suspended or revoked under the laws
of this State or any other State and acts with criminal negligence with
respect to knowledge of the fact that such person's driving privilege has
been canceled, suspended or revoked.
Section 370.015. Operation of Motor Vehicle Without Proper
License Prohibited — Motorcycles — Special License95 [Ord. No.
6562, 11-13-2018]
A. Unless otherwise provided for by law, it shall be unlawful for any
person, except those expressly exempted by Section 370.040, to:
1. Operate any vehicle upon any highway in this City unless the
person has a valid license as required by Chapter 302, RSMo., or a
temporary instruction permit issued in compliance with Section
302.130, RSMo., or an intermediate driver's license issued in
compliance with Section 302.178, RSMo., in his/her possession;
2. Operate a motorcycle or motortricycle upon any highway of this
City unless such person has a valid license that shows the person
has successfully passed an examination for the operation of a
motorcycle or motortricycle as prescribed by the Director of
Revenue. The Director of Revenue may indicate such upon a valid
license issued to such person or shall issue a license restricting the
applicant to the operation of a motorcycle or motortricycle if the
actual demonstration, required by Section 302.173, RSMo., is
conducted on such vehicle;
3. Authorize or knowingly permit a motorcycle or motortricycle
owned by such person or under such person's control to be driven
upon any highway by any person whose license does not indicate
that the person has passed the examination for the operation of a
motorcycle or motortricycle or has been issued an instruction
permit therefor;
4. Operate an autocycle upon any highway of this City unless the
person has a valid driver’s license. The operator of an autocycle,
however, shall not be required to obtain a motorcycle or
motortricycle license or endorsement pursuant to Sections 302.010
to 302.340, RSMo.;
94.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
95.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
370.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.015
AO:429
Section 370.020. Intermediate Driver's License [CC 1970 §21-61.1;
Ord. No. 5687 §1, 4-9-2002]
Section 370.025. Effect of Revocation — Penalty
Any resident or non-resident whose license, right or privilege to operate
a motor vehicle in this State has been suspended or revoked as provided
in Sections 302.010—302.540, RSMo., shall not operate a motor vehicle
in this State under a license, permit or registration certificate issued by
any other jurisdiction or otherwise during such suspension or after such
revocation until a new license is obtained when and as permitted under
Sections 302.010—302.540, RSMo. Violation of any provision of this Section
is a misdemeanor and on conviction therefor a person shall be punished as
prescribed by Section 302.321, RSMo.
Section 370.030. Prohibited Uses of License
5. Operate a motor vehicle with an instruction permit, intermediate
driver's license or license issued to another person;
6. Drive a commercial motor vehicle, unless fully licensed in
compliance with Chapter 302, RSMo., except when operating
under an instruction permit as provided for in Section 302.720,
RSMo.
A. No person between the ages of sixteen (16) and eighteen (18) years,
who is qualified to obtain a license pursuant to Chapter 302, RSMo.,
(2000), shall operate any motor vehicle as defined in the Traffic Code of
the City in or upon the streets of the City unless such person has in his/
her possession a valid current intermediate driver's license of the
appropriate class in accordance with the laws of this State.
B. No person having an intermediate driver's license shall operate a motor
vehicle in or upon the streets of the City between the hours of 1:00 A.M.
and 5:00 A.M. unless accompanied by a licensed operator for the type of
motor vehicle being operated who is actually occupying a seat beside
the driver for the purpose of giving driving instruction and who is at
least twenty-one (21) years of age; except such a licensee may operate a
motor vehicle without being so accompanied if the travel is to or from a
school or educational program or activity, a regular place of
employment or in emergency situations as defined by the State Director
of Revenue by regulation.
C. No person having an intermediate driver's license shall operate a motor
vehicle in or upon the streets of the City unless such driver and all
passengers in the licensee's vehicle are wearing safety belts at all
times. This safety belt restriction shall not apply to a person operating a
motorcycle.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
Section
370.015
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
370.030
AO:430
Section 370.035. School Bus Endorsement, Qualifications —
Grounds For Refusal To Issue or Renew Endorsement — Rulemaking
Authority — Reciprocity
1. Display or to permit to be displayed, or to have in his/her
possession, any license knowing the same to be fictitious or to have
been canceled, suspended, revoked, disqualified or altered;
2. Lend to or knowingly permit the use of by another any license
issued to the person so lending or permitting the use thereof;
3. Display or to represent as one's own any license not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
4. Fail or refuse to surrender to the Clerk of any Division of the Circuit
Court or the Director any license which has been suspended,
canceled, disqualified or revoked as provided by law;
5. Use a false or fictitious name or give a false or fictitious address on
any application for a license, or any renewal or duplicate thereof, or
knowingly to make a false statement;
6. Knowingly conceal a material fact or otherwise commit a fraud in
any such application;
7. Authorize or consent to any motor vehicle owned by him/her or
under his/her control to be driven by any person, when he/she has
knowledge that such person has no legal right to do so, or for any
person to drive any motor vehicle in violation of any of the
provisions of Sections 302.010 to 302.780, RSMo.;
8. Employ a person to operate a motor vehicle in the transportation of
persons or property with knowledge that such person has not
complied with the provisions of Sections 302.010 to 302.780,
RSMo., or whose license has been revoked, suspended, canceled or
disqualified or who fails to produce his/her license upon demand of
any person or persons authorized to make such demand;
9. Operate a motor vehicle in any manner in violation of the
restrictions imposed in a restricted license; or
10. Fail to carry his/her instruction permit, valid operator's license
while operating a vehicle and to display instruction permit or said
license upon demand of any Police Officer, court official or any
other duly authorized person for inspection when demand is made
therefor. Failure to exhibit his/her instruction permit or license as
aforesaid shall be presumptive evidence that said person is not a
duly licensed operator.
A. No person shall operate any school bus owned by or under contract
with a public school or the State Board of Education unless such driver
has qualified for a school bus endorsement under this Section and
Section
370.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.035
AO:431
Section 370.040. Exemptions From License Law
complied with the pertinent rules and regulations of the Department of
Revenue and any final rule issued by the secretary of the United States
Department of Transportation or has a valid school bus endorsement
on a valid commercial driver's license issued by another State. A school
bus endorsement shall be issued to any applicant who meets the
following qualifications:
1. The applicant has a valid State license issued under this Chapter;
2. The applicant is at least twenty-one (21) years of age; and
3. The applicant has successfully passed an examination for the
operation of a school bus as prescribed by the Director of Revenue.
The examination shall include any examinations prescribed by the
secretary of the United States Department of Transportation, and a
driving test in the type of vehicle to be operated. The test shall be
completed in the appropriate class of vehicle to be driven. For
purposes of this Section classes of school buses shall comply with
the Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986 (Title XII of Pub.
Law 99-570). For drivers who are at least seventy (70) years of age,
such examination shall be completed annually.
B. The Director of Revenue, to the best of the Director's knowledge, shall
not issue or renew a school bus endorsement to any applicant whose
driving record shows that such applicant's privilege to operate a motor
vehicle has been suspended, revoked or disqualified or whose driving
record shows a history of moving vehicle violations.
C. The Director may adopt any rules and regulations necessary to carry
out the provisions of this Section. Any rule or portion of a rule, as that
term is defined in Section 536.010, RSMo., that is created under the
authority delegated in this Section shall become effective only if it
complies with and is subject to all of the provisions of Chapter 536,
RSMo., and, if applicable, Section 536.028, RSMo. This Section and
Chapter 536, RSMo., are non-severable and if any of the powers vested
with the general assembly pursuant to Chapter 536, RSMo., to review,
to delay the effective date, or to disapprove and annul a rule are
subsequently held unconstitutional, then the grant of rulemaking
authority and any rule proposed or adopted after August 28, 2004, shall
be invalid and void.
D. Notwithstanding the requirements of this Section, an applicant who
resides in another State and possesses a valid driver's license from his
or her State of residence with a valid school bus endorsement for the
type of vehicle being operated shall not be required to obtain a Missouri
driver's license with a school bus endorsement.
A. The following persons are exempt from license hereunder:
Section
370.035
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
370.040
AO:432
1. Any person while operating any farm tractor or implement of
husbandry temporarily operated or moved on a highway;
2. A non-resident who is at least sixteen (16) years of age and who has
in his/her immediate possession a valid license issued to him/her in
his/her home State or country;
3. A non-resident who is at least eighteen (18) years of age and who
has in his/her immediate possession a valid license issued to him/
her in his/her home State or country which allows such person to
operate a motor vehicle in the transportation of persons or
property as classified in Section 302.015, RSMo.; or
4. Convicted offenders of the Department of Corrections who have not
been convicted of a motor vehicle felony as follows—driving while
intoxicated, failing to stop after an accident and disclosing his/her
identity, or driving a motor vehicle without the owner's
consent—may operate State-owned trucks for the benefit of the
correctional facilities, provided that such offender shall be
accompanied by a Correctional Officer or other staff person in such
truck.
Section
370.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.040
AO:433

ARTICLE II
Vehicle Licensing
Section 370.050. State Vehicle License Plates Required
No person shall operate or park any motor vehicle or trailer upon any street
or highway of this City unless such motor vehicle or trailer has properly
displayed a valid license plate or plates or temporary permit issued to the
lawful owner of the vehicle by the Department of Revenue of the State
of Missouri, except that any person who is a non-resident of the State of
Missouri may operate or park any motor vehicle or trailer upon any street
or highway of this City, provided the motor vehicle or trailer has been duly
registered for the current year in the State, country or other place of which
the owner is a resident, provided that at all times such motor vehicle or
trailer is being operated or parked upon the streets or highways of this City,
the valid license plate or plates or temporary permit is properly displayed
on such vehicle or trailer.
Section 370.055. Registration of Motor Vehicles Operated For First
Time in State
Application for registration of a motor vehicle not previously registered in
Missouri, operated for the first time on the public highways of this State,
and previously registered in another State shall be made within thirty (30)
days after the owner of such motor vehicle has become a resident of this
State.
Section 370.060. Method of Displaying License Plates [Ord. No.
6562, 11-13-2018]
No motor vehicle or trailer shall be operated on any highway of this City
unless it shall have displayed thereon the license plate or set of license
plates issued by the Director of Revenue or the State Highways and
Transportation Commission and authorized by Section 301.140, RSMo.
Each such plate shall be securely fastened to the motor vehicle or trailer
in a manner so that all parts thereof shall be plainly visible and reasonably
clean so that the reflective qualities thereof are not impaired. License
plates shall be fastened to all motor vehicles except trucks, tractors, truck
tractors or truck-tractors licensed in excess of twelve thousand (12,000)
pounds on the front and rear of such vehicles not less than eight (8) nor
more than forty-eight (48) inches above the ground, with the letters and
numbers thereon right side up. The license plates on trailers, motorcycles,
motortricycles, autocycles and motor scooters shall be displayed on the rear
of such vehicles, with the letters and numbers thereon right side up. The
license plate on buses, other than school buses, and on trucks, tractors,
truck tractors or truck-tractors licensed in excess of twelve thousand
(12,000) pounds shall be displayed on the front of such vehicles not less
than eight (8) nor more than forty-eight (48) inches above the ground,
with the letters and numbers thereon right side up, or if two (2) plates
are issued for the vehicle pursuant to Subsection (3) of Section 301.130,
Section
370.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.060
AO:435
RSMo., displayed in the same manner on the front and rear of such vehicles.
The license plate or plates authorized by Section 301.140, RSMo., when
properly attached, shall be prima facie evidence that the required fees have
been paid.
Section 370.070. Unauthorized Plates, Tags, Stickers, Signs
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or trailer on which there is
displayed on the front or rear thereof any other plate, tag or placard bearing
any number except the plate furnished by the Director of Revenue or the
placard herein authorized and the official license tag of any municipality
of this State, nor shall there be displayed on any motor vehicle or trailer a
placard, sign or tag bearing the words "license lost", "license applied for"
or words of similar import as a substitute for such number plates or such
placard.
Section 370.080. License Plates On Vehicles Displayed For Sale
No person shall show, exhibit, display or have in possession for the purpose
of sale any motor vehicle bearing or displaying thereon any number or
license plates except those of the dealer or owner so displaying said motor
vehicle; provided however, that where the motor vehicle is placed on
consignment with a dealer by the owner thereof, there may be displayed a
number or license plate issued to the owner thereof.
Section 370.090. Certificate of Ownership Required For Registered
Vehicle
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate in this City a motor vehicle or
trailer required to be registered as provided by law unless a certificate of
ownership has been applied for as provided in Section 301.190, RSMo.
Section 370.100. Transfer of Certificate of Ownership Upon Sale of
Vehicle
It shall be unlawful for any person to buy or sell in this City any motor
vehicle or trailer registered under the laws of this State unless at the
time of delivery thereof there shall pass between the parties a certificate
of ownership with an assignment thereof as provided in Section 301.210,
RSMo., as amended, and the sale of any motor vehicle or trailer registered
under the laws of this State, without the assignment of such certificate of
ownership, shall be fraudulent and void.
Section 370.110. Removal of Plates On Transfer of Vehicle — Use By
Purchaser
Upon the transfer of ownership of any motor vehicle or trailer, the
certificate of registration and the right to use the number plates shall expire
and the number plates shall be removed by the owner at the time of the
transfer of possession, and it shall be unlawful for any person other than
the person to whom such number plates were originally issued to have the
Section
370.060
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
370.110
AO:436
same in his/her possession whether in use or not; except that the buyer of a
motor vehicle or trailer who trades in a motor vehicle or trailer may attach
the license plates from the trade-in motor vehicle or trailer to the newly
purchased motor vehicle or trailer. The operation of a motor vehicle with
such transferred plates shall be lawful for no more than thirty (30) days.
As used in this Section, the term "trade-in motor vehicle or trailer" shall
include any single motor vehicle or trailer sold by the buyer of the newly
purchased vehicle or trailer, as long as the license plates for the trade-in
motor vehicle or trailer are still valid.
Section 370.120. Sale By Dealer
Upon the sale of a motor vehicle or trailer by a dealer, a buyer who has
made application for registration, by mail or otherwise, may operate the
same for a period of thirty (30) days after taking possession thereof if during
such period the motor vehicle or trailer shall have attached thereto, in
the manner required by Section 301.130, RSMo., number plates issued to
the dealer. Upon application and presentation of satisfactory evidence that
the buyer has applied for registration, a dealer may furnish such number
plates to the buyer for such temporary use. In such event, the dealer shall
require the buyer to deposit the sum of ten dollars fifty cents ($10.50), to
be returned to the buyer upon return of the number plates, as a guarantee
that said buyer will return to the dealer such number plates within thirty
(30) days.
Section 370.130. False Information By Dealer
No dealer shall advise any purchaser of a motor vehicle or trailer that such
purchaser may drive such a motor vehicle or trailer without compliance
with the foregoing license requirements.
Section
370.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.130
AO:437

ARTICLE III
Miscellaneous Provisions
Section 370.140. Financial Responsibility Required
A. No owner of a motor vehicle registered in this State or required to be
registered in this State shall operate the vehicle, or authorize any other
person to operate the vehicle registered, or maintain registration of a
motor vehicle, or permit another person to operate such vehicle upon
the streets or the alleys of this City unless the owner maintains the
financial responsibility as required in this Section which conforms to
the requirements of the laws of this State. Furthermore, no person shall
operate a motor vehicle owned by another with the knowledge that the
owner has not maintained financial responsibility unless such person
has financial responsibility which covers the person's operation of the
other's vehicle. However, no owner shall be in violation of this
Subsection if he/she fails to maintain financial responsibility on a motor
vehicle which is inoperable or being stored and not in operation.
B. For purposes of this Section, the term "financial responsibility" shall
mean the ability to respond in damages for liability on account of
accidents occurring after the effective date of proof of said financial
responsibility, arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of a
motor vehicle, in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) because of bodily injury to or death of one (1) person in
any one (1) accident and, subject to said limit for one (1) person, in the
amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) because of bodily injury
to or death of two (2) or more persons in any one (1) accident and in the
amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) because of injury to or
destruction of property of others in any one (1) accident.
C. Proof of financial responsibility may be shown by any of the following:
1. A current insurance identification card issued by a motor vehicle
insurer or by the Director of Revenue of the State of Missouri for
self-insurance. A motor vehicle liability insurance policy, a motor
vehicle liability insurance binder, or receipt which contains the
name and address of the insurer, the name and address of the
named insured, the policy number, the effective dates of the policy
and a description by year and make of the vehicle, or at least five
(5) digits of the vehicle identification number or the word "Fleet" if
the insurance policy covers five (5) or more motor vehicles shall be
satisfactory evidence of insurance in lieu of an insurance
identification card.
2. A certificate of the State Treasurer of a cash or security deposit
according to Section 303.240, RSMo.
3. A surety bond according to Section 303.230, RSMo.
Section
370.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
370.140
AO:439
Section 370.150. Display of False Evidence of Insurance — Penalty
— Confiscation of False Evidence
No person shall display evidence of insurance to a Law Enforcement Officer
knowing there is no valid liability insurance in effect on the motor vehicle
as required pursuant to this Article or knowing the evidence of insurance is
illegally altered, counterfeit or otherwise invalid as evidence of insurance.
If the Law Enforcement Officer issues a citation to a motor vehicle operator
for displaying invalid evidence of insurance, the officer shall confiscate the
evidence for presentation in court. Any person convicted of violating this
Section is guilty of an ordinance violation.
Section 370.160. Alteration, Production or Sale of Invalid
Insurance Card
No person shall alter an invalid insurance card to make it appear valid. No
person knowingly shall make, sell or otherwise make available an invalid or
counterfeit insurance card. Any person who violates this Section is guilty of
an ordinance violation.
D. Proof of financial responsibility shall be carried at all times in the
insured motor vehicle or by the operator of the motor vehicle if the
proof of financial responsibility is effective as to the operator rather
than to the vehicle. The operator of an insured motor vehicle shall
exhibit the insurance identification card on the demand of any Peace
Officer, commercial vehicle enforcement officer or commercial vehicle
inspector who lawfully stops such operator or investigates an accident
while that officer or inspector is engaged in the performance of the
officer's or inspector's duties.
E. However, no person shall be found guilty of violating this Section if the
operator demonstrates to the court that he/she met the financial
responsibility requirements of Section 303.025, RSMo., at the time the
Peace Officer wrote the citation.
F. Any person who violates any provisions of this Section shall be guilty of
an ordinance violation and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished
by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than three
hundred dollars ($300.00) for each and every violation.
Section
370.140
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
370.160
AO:440
Chapter 375
ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section 375.010. Abandoned Vehicles or Trailers Prohibited96
No person shall abandon any motor vehicle or trailer on the right-of-way of
any public road or State highway.
Section 375.020. Obstructing The Flow of Traffic Prohibited97
Except in the case of an accident resulting in the injury or death of any
person, the driver of a vehicle which for any reason obstructs the regular
flow of traffic on the roadway of any public road or State highway shall
make every reasonable effort to move the vehicle or have it moved so as not
to block the regular flow of traffic. Any person who fails to comply with the
requirements of this Section is guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00).
Section 375.030. Towing of Abandoned Property On Public Real
Property98
A. Any Law Enforcement Officer, or an official of the City where the City's
real property is concerned, may authorize a towing company to remove
to a place of safety:
1. Any abandoned property on the right-of-way of:
a. Any interstate highway or freeway in an urbanized area of the
City left unattended for ten (10) hours, or immediately if a Law
Enforcement Officer determines that the abandoned property
is a serious hazard to other motorists;
b. Any interstate highway or freeway outside of an urbanized
area of the City left unattended for forty-eight (48) hours, or
after four (4) hours if a Law Enforcement Officer determines
that the abandoned property is a serious hazard to other
motorists;
c. Any State highway other than an interstate highway or freeway
outside of an urbanized area, left unattended for more than
forty-eight (48) hours;
provided that commercial motor vehicles referred to in
Subsections (a—c) not hauling waste designated as hazardous
under 49 U.S.C. 5103(a) may only be removed under this
96.State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §577.080, RSMo.
97.State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §304.151, RSMo.
98.State Law References—For similar provisions, §§304.155.1(2005), 304.155.3, RSMo.
Section
370.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
375.030
AO:441
Section 375.040. General Provisions and Procedures99
Section to a place of safety until the owner or owner's
representative has had a reasonable opportunity to contact a
towing company of choice; or
d. Any State highway other than an interstate highway or freeway
in an urbanized area, left unattended for more than ten (10)
hours.
2. Any unattended abandoned property illegally left standing upon
any highway or bridge if the abandoned property is left in a position
or under such circumstances as to obstruct the normal movement
of traffic where there is no reasonable indication that the person in
control of the property is arranging for its immediate control or
removal.
3. Any abandoned property which has been abandoned under Section
375.010 herein or Section 577.080, RSMo.
4. Any abandoned property which has been reported as stolen or
taken without consent of the owner.
5. Any abandoned property for which the person operating such
property is arrested for an alleged offense for which the officer is
required to take the person into custody and where such person is
unable to arrange for the property's timely removal.
6. Any abandoned property which due to any other State law or City
ordinance is subject to towing because of the owner's outstanding
traffic or parking violations.
7. Any abandoned property left unattended in violation of a State law
or City ordinance where signs have been posted giving notice of the
law or where the violation causes a safety hazard.
B. When the City Police Department authorizes a tow pursuant to this
Section in which the abandoned property is moved from the immediate
vicinity, it shall complete a crime inquiry and inspection report.
C. Any City agency other than the City Police Department authorizing a
tow under this Section where property is towed away from the
immediate vicinity shall report the tow to the City Police Department
within two (2) hours of the tow, along with a crime inquiry and
inspection report.
A. Payment Of Charges. The owner of abandoned property removed as
provided in this Chapter shall be responsible for payment of all
reasonable charges for towing and storage of such abandoned property
as provided in Section 375.050.
99.State Law References—For similar provisions, §§304.155.5—6 (2004),
304.155.11—12(2004), 304.158.1, 304.158.5, 304.158.7, RSMo.
Section
375.030
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
375.040
AO:442
B. Crime Inquiry And Inspection Report. Upon the towing of any
abandoned property pursuant to Section 375.030 or under authority of
a Law Enforcement Officer or local governmental agency pursuant to
Section 223.040, the City Police Department, where it authorized such
towing or was properly notified by another governmental agency of
such towing, shall promptly make an inquiry with the National Crime
Information Center (NCIC) and any statewide Missouri law
enforcement computer system to determine if the abandoned property
has been reported as stolen and shall enter the information pertaining
to the towed property into the statewide law enforcement computer
system.
If the abandoned property is not claimed within ten (10) working days
of the towing, the tower who has online access to the Department of
Revenue's records shall make an inquiry to determine the abandoned
property owner and lienholder, if any, of record. In the event that the
records of the Department of Revenue fail to disclose the name of
the owner or any lienholder of record, the tower shall comply with
the requirements of Subsection (3) of Section 304.156, RSMo. If the
tower does not have online access, the City Police Department shall
submit a crime inquiry and inspection report to the Missouri Director
of Revenue. The City Police Department shall also provide one (1) copy
of the report to the storage facility and one (1) copy to the towing
company. A towing company that does not have online access to the
department's records and that is in possession of abandoned property
after ten (10) working days shall report such fact to the City Police
Department. The crime inquiry and inspection report shall be designed
by the Director of Revenue and shall include the following:
1. The year, model, make and property identification number of the
property and the owner and any lienholders, if known;
2. A description of any damage to the property noted by the Law
Enforcement Officer authorizing the tow;
3. The license plate or registration number and the State of issuance,
if available;
4. The storage location of the towed property;
5. The name, telephone number and address of the towing company;
6. The date, place and reason for the towing of the abandoned
property;
7. The date of the inquiry of the National Crime Information Center,
any statewide Missouri law enforcement computer system, and any
other similar system which has titling and registration information
to determine if the abandoned property had been stolen. This
information shall be entered only by the City Police Department;
Section
375.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
375.040
AO:443
8. The signature and printed name of the Law Enforcement Officer
authorizing the tow and the towing operator; and
9. Any additional information the Missouri Director of Revenue deems
appropriate.
C. Reclaiming Property. The owner of such abandoned property, or the
holder of a valid security interest of record, may reclaim it from the
towing company upon proof of ownership or valid security interest of
record and payment of all reasonable charges for the towing and
storage of the abandoned property.
D. Lienholder Repossession. If a lienholder repossesses any motor vehicle,
trailer, all-terrain vehicle, outboard motor or vessel without the
knowledge or cooperation of the owner, then the repossessor shall
notify the City Police Department within two (2) hours of the
repossession and shall further provide the Police Department with any
additional information the Police Department deems appropriate. The
City Police Department shall make an inquiry with the National Crime
Information Center and the Missouri statewide law enforcement
computer system and shall enter the repossessed vehicle into the
statewide law enforcement computer system.
E. Notice To Owner/Tow Lien Claim. Any towing company which comes
into possession of abandoned property pursuant to this Chapter and
who claims a lien for recovering, towing or storing abandoned property
shall give notice to the title owner and to all persons claiming a lien
thereon, as disclosed by the records of the Missouri Department of
Revenue or of a corresponding agency in any other State. The towing
company shall notify the owner and any lienholder within ten (10)
business days of the date of mailing indicated on the notice sent by the
Missouri Department of Revenue pursuant to Section 304.156, RSMo.,
by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall contain the
following:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the storage facility;
2. The date, reason and place from which the abandoned property
was removed;
3. A statement that the amount of the accrued towing, storage and
administrative costs are the responsibility of the owner, and that
storage and/or administrative costs will continue to accrue as a
legal liability of the owner until the abandoned property is
redeemed;
4. A statement that the storage firm claims a possessory lien for all
such charges;
5. A statement that the owner or holder of a valid security interest of
record may retake possession of the abandoned property at any
Section
375.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
375.040
AO:444
time during business hours by proving ownership or rights to a
secured interest and paying all towing and storage charges;
6. A statement that, should the owner consider that the towing or
removal was improper or not legally justified, the owner has a right
to request a hearing as provided in this Section to contest the
propriety of such towing or removal;
7. A statement that if the abandoned property remains unclaimed for
thirty (30) days from the date of mailing the notice, title to the
abandoned property will be transferred to the person or firm in
possession of the abandoned property, free of all prior liens; and
8. A statement that any charges in excess of the value of the
abandoned property at the time of such transfer shall remain a
liability of the owner.
F. Physical Search Of Property. In the event that the Missouri Department
of Revenue notifies the towing company that the records of the
Department of Revenue fail to disclose the name of the owner or any
lienholder of record, the towing company shall attempt to locate
documents or other evidence of ownership on or within the abandoned
property itself. The towing company must certify that a physical search
of the abandoned property disclosed no ownership documents were
found and a good faith effort has been made. For purposes of this
Section, "good faith effort" means that the following checks have been
performed by the company to establish the prior State of registration
and title:
1. Check of the abandoned property for any type of license plates,
license plate record, temporary permit, inspection sticker, decal or
other evidence which may indicate a State of possible registration
and title;
2. Check the law enforcement report for a license plate number or
registration number if the abandoned property was towed at the
request of a law enforcement agency;
3. Check the tow ticket/report of the tow truck operator to see if a
license plate was on the abandoned property at the beginning of
the tow, if a private tow; and
4. If there is no address of the owner on the impound report, check
the law enforcement report to see if an out-of-state address is
indicated on the driver license information.
G. Petition In Circuit Court. The owner of the abandoned property
removed pursuant to this Chapter or any person claiming a lien, other
than the towing company, within ten (10) days after the receipt of
notification from the towing company pursuant to Subsection (E) of this
Section may file a petition in the Associate Circuit Court in the County
where the abandoned property is stored to determine if the abandoned
Section
375.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
375.040
AO:445
property was wrongfully taken or withheld from the owner. The petition
shall name the towing company among the defendants. The petition
may also name the agency ordering the tow or the owner, lessee or
agent of the real property from which the abandoned property was
removed. The Missouri Director of Revenue shall not be a party to such
petition but a copy of the petition shall be served on the Director of
Revenue.
H. Notice To Owner. Notice as to the removal of any abandoned property
pursuant to this Chapter shall be made in writing within five (5)
working days to the registered owner and any lienholder of the fact of
the removal, the grounds for the removal, and the place to which the
property has been removed by either:
1. The public agency authorizing the removal; or
2. The towing company, where authorization was made by an owner
or lessee of real property.
If the abandoned property is stored in any storage facility, a
copy of the notice shall be given to the operator of the facility.
The notice provided for in this Section shall include the amount
of mileage if available shown on the abandoned property at the
time of removal.
I. Tow Truck Requirements. Any towing company which tows abandoned
property for hire shall have the towing company's name, City and State
clearly printed in letters at least three (3) inches in height on the sides
of the truck, wrecker or other vehicle used in the towing.
J. Storage Facilities. Persons operating or in charge of any storage facility
where the abandoned property is stored pursuant to this Chapter shall
accept cash for payment of towing and storage by a registered owner or
the owner's agent claiming the abandoned property.
K. Disposition Of Towed Property. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Section 301.227, RSMo., any towing company who has complied with
the notification provisions in Section 304.156, RSMo., including notice
that any property remaining unredeemed after thirty (30) days may be
sold as scrap property may then dispose of such property as provided in
this Subsection. Such sale shall only occur if at least thirty (30) days has
passed since the date of such notification, the abandoned property
remains unredeemed with no satisfactory arrangements made with the
towing company for continued storage, and the owner or holder of a
security agreement has not requested a hearing as provided in Section
304.156, RSMo. The towing company may dispose of such abandoned
property by selling the property on a bill of sale as prescribed by the
Director of Revenue to a scrap metal operator or licensed salvage
dealer for destruction purposes only. The towing company shall forward
a copy of the bill of sale provided by the scrap metal operator or
licensed salvage dealer to the Director of Revenue within two (2) weeks
Section
375.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
375.040
AO:446
Section 375.050. Maximum Charges100
Section 375.060. Sale of Abandoned Property By City101
When the City has physical possession of the abandoned property, it may
sell the abandoned property, in accordance with its established provisions
and regulations and may transfer ownership by means of a bill of sale signed
by the City Clerk and sealed with the official City Seal. Such bill of sale
shall contain the make and model of the abandoned property the complete
abandoned property identification number, and the odometer reading of the
of the date of such sale. The towing company shall keep a record of
each such vehicle sold for destruction for three (3) years that shall be
available for inspection by law enforcement and authorized Department
of Revenue officials. The record shall contain the year, make,
identification number of the property, date of sale, and name of the
purchasing scrap metal operator or licensed salvage dealer and copies
of all notifications issued by the towing company as required in this
Chapter. Scrap metal operators or licensed salvage dealers shall keep a
record of the purchase of such property as provided in Section 301.227,
RSMo. Scrap metal operators and licensed salvage dealers may obtain
a junk certificate as provided in Section 301.227, RSMo., on vehicles
purchased on a bill of sale pursuant to the Section.
A. A towing company may only assess reasonable storage charges for
abandoned property towed without the consent of the owner.
Reasonable storage charges shall not exceed the charges for vehicles
which have been towed with the consent of the owner on a negotiated
basis. Storage charges may be assessed only for the time in which the
towing company complies with the procedural requirements of this
Chapter.
B. The Board of Aldermen may from time to time establish maximum
reasonable towing, storage and other charges which can be imposed by
towing and storage companies operating within the City, and which are
consistent with this Chapter and with Sections 304.155 to 304.158,
RSMo. Any violation of said established maximum charges shall be
deemed a violation of this Section of the Code and shall be punishable
pursuant to Section 100.110.
C. A towing company may impose a charge of not more than one-half (½)
of the regular towing charge for the towing of abandoned property at
the request of the owner of private real property or that owner's agent
pursuant to this Chapter if the owner of the abandoned property or the
owner's agent returns to the abandoned property before it is removed
from the private real property. The regular towing charge may only be
imposed after the abandoned property has been removed from the
property and is in transit.
100. State Law References—For similar provisions, §§304.156.2, 304.158.6, 304.158.10, RSMo.
101. State Law Reference—For similar provisions, §304.156, RSMo.
Section
375.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
375.060
AO:447
abandoned property, if available and shall be lawful proof of ownership for
any dealer registered under the provisions of Section 301.218, RSMo., or
Section 301.560, RSMo., or for any other person.
Schedule I
SPEED LIMITS
In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 320, and when signs are
erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle at a speed in excess of the speeds listed below on the streets as
designated.
Table I-A. Congested Districts [CC 1970 §21-109; CC 1947 §11-76]
Street Speed Limit
Aberdeen Place 20 mph
Alexander Drive 20 mph
Arundel Place 20 mph
Asbury Drive 20 mph
Audubon Drive 20 mph
South Bemiston Avenue:
From Davis Drive south to south City limits 20 mph
Biltmore Drive 20 mph
North Biltmore Drive 20 mph
West Biltmore Drive 20 mph
East Drive in Brentmoor Park East Subdivision 20 mph
East Drive in Brentmoor Park West Subdivision 20 mph
North Drive in Brentmoor Park East Subdivision 20 mph
North Drive in Brentmoor Park West Subdivision 20 mph
South Drive in Brentmoor Park East Subdivision 20 mph
South Drive in Brentmoor Park West Subdivision 20 mph
West Drive in Brentmoor Park East Subdivision 20 mph
West Drive in Brentmoor Park West Subdivision 20 mph
Broadview Drive 20 mph
Buckingham Drive 20 mph
Byron Place 20 mph
East Drive in Carrswold Subdivision 20 mph
West Drive in Carrswold Subdivision 20 mph
Carswold Drive 20 mph
Claverach Drive 20 mph
Section
375.060
CLAYTON CITY CODE Table I-A
AO:448
Street Speed Limit
Clayshire Drive 20 mph
Colmar Drive 20 mph
Colonial Lane 20 mph
Crescent Drive 20 mph
Crestwood Drive 20 mph
Cromwell Drive 20 mph
Dartford Avenue 20 mph
Davis Drive 20 mph
Daytona Drive 20 mph
DeMun Avenue:
From an east-west alley between Fauquier Drive
and Aberdeen Place on the north to an east-west
alley between Arundel Place and Northwood
Avenue on the south
20 mph
Edgewood Drive 20 mph
Edinburg Drive 20 mph
Fauquier Drive 20 mph
Forest Ridge Drive 20 mph
Francis Place west of Brentwood Boulevard 20 mph
Glen Ridge Avenue 20 mph
Haddington Court 20 mph
Halifax Drive 20 mph
Harcourt Drive 20 mph
Hillvale Drive 20 mph
Langton Drive 20 mph
Mark Twain Circle 20 mph
South Meramec Avenue:
From the Rock Island right-of-way south to south
City limits
20 mph
Mohawk Place 20 mph
Oak Knoll Drive 20 mph
Oakley Drive 20 mph
Oleta Drive 20 mph
Orlando Drive 20 mph
Oxford Drive 20 mph
Parksdale Avenue 20 mph
East Polo Drive 20 mph
Table I-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table I-A
AO:449
Street Speed Limit
Middle Polo Drive 20 mph
West Polo Drive 20 mph
Ridgemoor Drive 20 mph
Rosaline Drive 20 mph
Roxburg Drive 20 mph
Seminole Drive 20 mph
Shaw Park Drive west of Brentwood 20 mph
Shirley Drive east of Hanley Road 20 mph
Somerset Avenue 20 mph
South Central Avenue:
From Shaw Park Drive right-of-way south to
south City limits
20 mph
Southmoor Drive 20 mph
Sudbury Drive 20 mph
Tuscany Park Private Drive 20 mph
University Lane:
From Arundel Place north to an east-west alley
alley between Wydown Boulevard and Aberdeen
Place
20 mph
Venetian Drive 20 mph
Walinca Drive west of South Central 20 mph
Walinca Terrace east of Hanley Road 20 mph
Watkins Drive 20 mph
Wellington Way 20 mph
Wenneker Drive 20 mph
Westwood Drive 20 mph
Whitburn Drive 20 mph
Wydown Terrace Private Drive 20 mph
York Drive 20 mph
Table I-B. Intermediate Districts [CC 1970 §21-111; CC 1947
§§11-90, 11-91; Ord. No. 3411 §1, 10-13-1970; Ord. No. 3466 §1,
6-8-1971; Ord. No. 3761 §1, 7-8-1975; Ord. No. 3789 §1, 12-9-1975;
Ord. No. 4895 §1, 7-14-1992; Ord. No. 5105 §2, 10-11-1994; Ord. No.
6058 §1, 2-24-2009
The following streets and parts of streets are hereby designated
intermediate districts and on such streets no person shall operate or drive
Table I-A CLAYTON CITY CODE Table I-B
AO:450
a vehicle (except emergency vehicles on emergency runs) at any time at a
rate of speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour.
Street Speed Limit
Brentwood Boulevard between Shaw Park Drive and
the north City limits
30 mph
Forsyth Boulevard:
Between Maryland Avenue and a point two
hundred seventy-nine (279) feet more or less
west of the west line of Jackson Avenue and
between Big Bend Boulevard and the east City
limits
30 mph
Hanley Road 30 mph
Maryland Avenue between Hanley Road and the west
City limits
30 mph
Wydown Boulevard 30 mph
Table I-C. Arterial Streets [CC 1970 §21-114; CC 1947 §11-89; Ord.
No. 3760 §1, 7-8-1975; Ord. No. 3789 §1, 12-9-1975; Ord. No. 5105
§1, 10-11-1994; Ord. No. 6058 §1, 2-24-2009]
The following streets and parts of streets are designated arterial streets
and on such streets no person shall operate or drive a vehicle (except
emergency vehicles on emergency runs) at any time at a rate of speed in
excess of thirty-five (35) miles per hour.
Street Speed Limit
Big Bend Boulevard 35 mph
Brentwood Boulevard between Clayton Road and
Shaw Park Drive
35 mph
Clayton Road 35 mph
Table I-D. Expressway District [CC 1970 §21-116; Ord. No. 3434 §1,
3-9-1971; Ord. No. 5967 §1, 3-27-2007]
The following streets and parts of streets are designated expressway
districts and on such streets no person shall operate or drive a vehicle
(except emergency vehicles on emergency runs) at any time at a rate of
speed in excess of forty (40) miles per hour.
Street Speed Limit
Forest Park Parkway 40 mph
Table I-B ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table I-E
AO:451
Table I-E. Highway District [CC 1970 §21-115; CC 1947 §11-91.1;
Ord. No. 5968 §1, 3-27-2007]
The following streets and parts of streets are designated highway districts
and on such streets no person shall operate or drive a vehicle (except
emergency vehicles on emergency runs) at any time at a rate of speed in
excess of sixty (60) miles per hour.
Street Speed Limit
I-170 Inner Belt Expressway 60 mph
Schedule II
STOP INTERSECTIONS AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS
Table II-A. Stop Intersections [CC 1970 §21-96; CC 1947 §11-93;
Ord. No. 3461 §1, 6-8-1971; Ord. No. 3462 §1, 6-8-1971; Ord. No.
3463 §1, 6-8-1971; Ord. No. 3573 §1, 12-26-1972; Ord. No. 3703 §1,
12-10-1974; Ord. No. 3707 §1, 1-14-1975; Ord. No. 3870 §1,
2-22-1977; Ord. No. 4053 §1, 8-28-1979; Ord. No. 4084 §1, 1-8-1980;
Ord. No. 4267 §1, 10-12-1982; Ord. No. 4368 §1, 4-24-1984; Ord. No.
4401 §1, 9-25-1984; Ord. No. 4438 §1, 5-14-1985; Ord. No. 4439 §1,
5-28-1985; Ord. No. 4443 §1, 6-25-1985; Ord. No. 4623 §1,
3-22-1988; Ord. No. 4770 §1, 6-26-1990; Ord. No. 4773 §1,
7-10-1990; Ord. No. 4912 §1, 8-25-1992; Ord. No. 5118 §1,
12-20-1994]
Entrances to the following streets or portions thereof indicated are
designated as stop entrances:
Location
Aberdeen Place at its intersections with University Lane and DeMun
Avenue, all approaches.
Arundel Place at its intersection with DeMun Avenue (north, east and west
approaches).
Asbury Avenue at its intersection with South Road in East Brentmoor Park
Subdivision.
Audubon Drive at its intersections with Byron Place (eastbound approach),
Parkdale Avenue (eastbound approach), Buckingham Drive (eastbound
approach), Oxford Drive (northbound, southbound and eastbound
approaches), York Drive (eastbound approach), Hillvale Drive (westbound
approach), Cromwell Drive (eastbound approach), Wellington Way
(northbound and southbound approach), and Somerset Avenue (eastbound
approach).
Bemiston Avenue at its intersections with Pershing Avenue (northbound
and southbound approaches), and Kingsbury Boulevard (all approaches).
Table I-E CLAYTON CITY CODE Table II-A
AO:452
Location
Bemiston Avenue (northbound approach) at its intersection with Davis
Drive.
Big Bend Boulevard at its intersections with Forest Ridge Drive north and
south (eastbound approaches), Southmoor Drive north and south access
(eastbound approaches), and Tuscany Park north and south access
(westbound approaches).
Brentwood Boulevard at its intersections with Francis Place (eastbound
and westbound approaches), Watkins Drive (westbound approach), Davis
Drive (westbound approach), Venetian Drive (westbound approach),
Rosiline Drive (westbound approach), Westmoreland Avenue (eastbound
and westbound approaches), University Drive (eastbound approach),
Pershing Avenue (eastbound and westbound approaches), Kingsbury
Avenue (all four (4) approaches).
Brighton Way at its intersections with Parkside Drive (southbound
approach), Maryland Avenue (northbound and southbound approaches).
Carondelet Avenue at its intersections with Central Avenue (all
approaches), Bemiston Avenue (all approaches), and Meramec Avenue (all
approaches).
Carondelet Plaza with its intersection with the north-south alley west of
Hanley Road (northbound, southbound approaches).
Carondelet Plaza Circle with its intersections with Carondelet Plaza.
Carswold Drive at its intersection with Shirley Drive (all approaches).
Central Avenue with its intersection with Shaw Park Drive (southbound
approach), Pershing Avenue (all approaches), and Kingsbury Boulevard (all
approaches).
Clayton Road at its intersections with Haddington Court (southbound
approach), Oleta Drive (southbound approach), Meramec Avenue
(southbound approach), Bemiston Avenue (southbound approach),
Westwood Drive (southbound approach), Cromwell Drive (southbound
approach), Somerset Avenue (southbound approach), Audubon Drive
(southbound approach), Ridgemoor Drive (southbound approach),
Concordia Avenue (southbound approach).
Crestwood Drive at its intersections with Hillvale (all approaches),
Claverach Drive (all approaches).
Country Club Drive at its intersection with Hanley Road (eastbound
approach).
Country Club Drive north and south rear alley access points at the
intersections with Hanley Road (eastbound approaches).
Davis Drive at its intersection with Meramec Avenue and Central Avenue
(all approaches).
Table II-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table II-A
AO:453
Location
DeMun Avenue at its intersections with Alamo Avenue (westbound
approach), San Bonita Avenue (eastbound approach), San Bonita Alley
(eastbound approach), Southwood Avenue (southbound and westbound
approach), South Rosebury Avenue (northbound approach), North
Rosebury (westbound approach), Northwood Avenue (northbound and
westbound approaches), Fauquier Drive (westbound approach). [Ord. No.
6468§ 1, 1-24-2017]
DeMun Park Alley:
The north/south alley east of DeMun Avenue between Southwood Avenue
and South Rosebury Avenue at its intersection with the east/west alley in
all three (3) directions.
East Brentmoor Park Service Drive at its intersection with East Road.
East Polo Drive at its intersection with Polo Drive.
East Road at its intersection with East Brentmoor Park Service Drive for
eastbound traffic.
Edgewood Drive at its intersections with Wydown Boulevard (southbound
approach) and Shirley Drive (all approaches).
Forsyth Boulevard at its intersection with Kingsbury Avenue (all
approaches), Stratford Drive (westbound approach), Brighton Way
(northbound approach), Pershing Drive (westbound approach), University
Drive (westbound approach), Westmoreland Drive (westbound approach),
Parkside Drive (northbound approach), Lyle (northbound and southbound
approaches).
Gay Avenue at its intersections with University Drive (westbound
approach), Colonial Lane (eastbound approach) and Kingsbury Boulevard
(westbound approach).
Glen Ridge Avenue at its intersections with Cromwell Drive (eastbound
and westbound approaches), York Drive (eastbound and westbound
approaches), Wellington Way (northbound, southbound and westbound
approaches), Oxford Drive (northbound, southbound and eastbound
approaches), Buckingham Drive (westbound approach), Parkdale Avenue
(all approaches) and Byron Place (westbound approach).
Hanley Road at its intersections with Shirley Drive (eastbound and
westbound approaches), Walinca Terrace (eastbound and westbound
approaches), West Polo Drive (eastbound approach).
Jackson Avenue at its intersection with Maryland Avenue (northbound,
southbound and westbound approaches).
Kingsbury Boulevard at its intersections with Bemiston Avenue, Crandon
Drive (northbound and southbound approaches), Central Avenue (all
approaches), Meramec Avenue (all approaches).
Maryland Avenue at its intersections with Linden Avenue (southbound
approach), Lancaster Drive (southbound approach) and Crandon Drive
(southbound approach).
Table II-A CLAYTON CITY CODE Table II-A
AO:454
Location
Meramec Avenue at its intersection with Westmoreland Avenue (eastbound
approach), Pershing Avenue (eastbound approach), Kingsbury Boulevard
(all approaches), Rosiline Drive (eastbound approach), Orlando Drive
(eastbound approach), Walinca Drive (eastbound and northbound
approaches), Venetian Drive (eastbound approach) and Daytona Drive
(eastbound approach).
Middle Polo Drive at its intersection with West Polo Drive (westbound
approach).
San Bonita Avenue at its intersection with Seminary Place Drive and at
its intersection with the exit from the Concordia Field House Driveway
(northbound, southbound and eastbound approaches).
Shaw Park Drive at its intersection with the south entrance to Shaw Park
from under Forest Park Parkway, east and west approaches. [Ord. No.
6350§ 1, 12-23-2014]
Shirley Drive at its intersection with Carswold Drive (all approaches).
South Road at its intersection with Asbury Avenue from northbound traffic.
Westwood Drive at its intersections with Byron Place (westbound
approach), Buckingham Drive (southbound and westbound approaches),
Oxford Drive (westbound approach), and Wellington Way (all approaches).
Wydown Boulevard at its intersection with Westwood Drive (northbound
approach), Edgewood Drive (southbound approach), Glen Ridge Avenue
(northbound approach), Audubon Drive (northbound approach), Crestwood
Drive (northbound approach), Hillvale Drive (northbound approach),
Ridgemoor Drive (northbound approach), Dartford Avenue (northbound
approach), University Lane (northbound and southbound approaches),
DeMun Avenue (northbound approach), Ellenwood Avenue (eastbound
approach from Ellenwood Avenue).
Table II-B. Yield Intersections102 [CC 1970 §21-97; CC 1947 §11-94;
Ord. No. 3704 §1, 12-10-1974; Ord. No. 4266 §1, 10-12-1982]
Entrances to the following streets or portions thereof indicated are hereby
designated as "yield-right-of-way" entrances:
Location
University Drive at its intersection with Crandon Drive (eastbound and
westbound approaches).
102. Editor's Note—Ord. No. 4266 §1, adopted October 12, 1982, provided for the repeal of the
yield intersection, Wydown Boulevard with Ellenwood Avenue; hence §21-97 currently
contains no listing of yield intersections.
Table II-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table II-B
AO:455
Schedule III
PARKING RESTRICTIONS
As authorized by and in accordance with Chapter 350, the designated
parking areas and parking zones set forth the following restrictions:
Table III-A. No Parking Areas. [Ord. No. 6543, 6-26-2018103]
The following districts or streets, alleys and places or parts thereof are
designated as places where the parking of vehicles is prohibited at the times
indicated or, if no time is indicated, at all times:
Location and Restriction
Alamo Avenue:
On the north side of the 6300 and 6400 block on the first Tuesday of the
months January through September between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and
11:30 A.M.
On the north side of the 6300 and 6400 block on the first and third
Tuesday of the months October through December between the hours of
9:00 A.M. and 11:30 A.M.
On the south side of the 6300 and 6400 block on the first Thursday of the
months January through September between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and
11:30 A.M.
On the south side of the 6300 and 6400 block on the first and third
Thursday of the months October through December between the hours of
9:00 A.M. and 11:30 A.M.
On the north side of the 6600 block on the first Tuesday of the months
January through September between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 11:30
A.M.
On the north side of the 6600 block on the first and third Tuesday of the
months October through December between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and
11:30 A.M.
On the south side of the 6600 block on the first Thursday of the months
January through September between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 11:30
A.M.
On the south side of the 6600 block on the first and third Thursday of the
months October through December between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and
11:30 A.M.
Alleys:
In the district bounded by Hanley Road, Maryland Avenue, Brentwood
Boulevard and Shaw Park Drive.
103. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 6543 repealed all of Schedule III and replaced same with an
entirely new Schedule III. The histories have been removed from all of the tables within
this Schedule and from all schedule material, see the Cross Reference for further
delineations.
Table II-B CLAYTON CITY CODE Table III-A
AO:456
Location and Restriction
East/west alley one hundred twenty-five (125) feet north of Clayton Road
between Biltmore Drive and Oleta Drive.
East/west alley between Clayton Road and Alamo Avenue from the
western boundary of Hi-Pointe Addition Subdivision to the eastern City
limits.
North/south alley between DeMun Avenue and the eastern City limits
from Southwood Avenue to Northwood Avenue.
East/west alley between Wydown Boulevard and Bemis Way from Forest
Court to Westwood Drive.
Alley bounded by Hanley Road, Wydown Boulevard and Walinca Terrace.
North/south alley one hundred fifty (150) feet east of Hanley Road from
Colorado Avenue to the east/west alley one hundred fifty (150) feet south
of Forsyth Boulevard.
East/west alley between Forsyth Boulevard and Carondelet Avenue from
Hanley Road to Jackson Avenue.
North/south alley between Hanley Road and Lyle Avenue from Forsyth
Boulevard to a point two hundred sixty (260) feet north thereof.
North/south alley between Lyle Avenue and Lee Avenue from Forsyth
Boulevard to a point two hundred sixty (260) feet north thereof.
East/west alley between Maryland Avenue and Westmoreland Avenue
from North Forsyth Boulevard to North Brentwood Boulevard.
East/west alley between Alamo Avenue and San Bonita Avenue from
University Lane to DeMun Avenue.
In the block bounded by Maryland Avenue, Brentwood Boulevard and
Forsyth Boulevard.
Bemiston Avenue:
East/west alley between Meramec Avenue and Brentwood Boulevard
north of Kingsbury Boulevard.
On the east side from a point one hundred twenty (120) feet south of the
south line of Carondelet Avenue to a point one hundred ninety (190) feet
south of the south line of Carondelet Avenue.
On the west side from Clayton Road approximately twenty-five (25) feet
north.
On the east side from Davis Drive approximately two hundred (200) feet
south.
On the east side from a point two hundred fifty (250) feet north of
Mohawk Drive to Mohawk Drive on Sundays from 8:00 A.M. to 1:00 P.M.
On the east side between Mohawk Drive and the north line of Clayton
Road.
On the west side approximately twenty-five (25) feet on either side of the
east-west alley south of West Biltmore Drive.
Table III-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table III-A
AO:457
Location and Restriction
Big Bend Boulevard:
Between Clayton Road and the north City limits.
Biltmore Drive:
On both sides from Clayton Road to a point approximately twenty-five (25)
feet north.
On the southwest side of the street approximately twenty-five (25) feet on
either side of the east-west alley north of Clayton Road.
Bland Drive:
On the west side from the east City limits to a point two hundred sixty
(260) feet southwest thereof.
Bonhomme Avenue:
On the north side from the west line of Hanley Road to a point two
hundred ten (210) feet west thereof.
Brentwood Boulevard:
On both sides between Shaw Park Drive and Clayton Road.
On the east side between Shaw Park Drive and Bonhomme Avenue
between 7:00 A.M. and 7:00 P.M. daily, except Saturday and Sunday.
On the west side from the north curb of Shaw Park Drive to a point two
hundred (200) feet north thereof.
On the west side from a point two hundred (200) feet north of the north
curb of Shaw Park Drive to a point eighty (80) feet south of the westward
prolongation of the south curb of Bonhomme Avenue.
On the west side from Forsyth Boulevard to a point one hundred thirty
(130) feet south thereof.
On the west side from Forsyth Boulevard to a point one hundred (100)
feet north thereof.
On the east side of Brentwood Boulevard from a point sixty (60) feet north
of Pershing Avenue for a distance of forty-five (45) feet.
Buckingham Drive:
On the north side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first Monday of the months January through September between the
hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the north side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first and third Monday of the months October through December between
the hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the south side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first Friday of the months January through September between the hours
of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
Table III-A CLAYTON CITY CODE Table III-A
AO:458
Location and Restriction
On the south side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first and third Friday of the months October through December between
the hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
Byron Place:
On the north side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first Monday of the months January through September between the
hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the north side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first and third Monday of the months October through December between
the hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the south side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first Friday of the months January through September between the hours
of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the south side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first and third Friday of the months October through December between
the hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
Carondelet Plaza:
On both sides between Hanley Road and the alley east of Hanley Road.
On the south side from Carondelet Plaza Circle to Forsyth Boulevard.
On the north side between Forsyth Boulevard and a point two hundred
(200) feet south thereof.
Along the parkway on both sides.
Carondelet Plaza Circle:
On inside and outside.
Carswold Drive:
On the east and south side from Walinca north and east to Edgewood
Drive.
Central Avenue:
On both sides from Clayton Road to a point approximately twenty-five (25)
feet north.
On the both sides of the street approximately twenty-five (25) feet on
either side of the east-west alley north of Clayton Road.
On the east side from Forsyth Boulevard southwardly for a distance of
seventy (70) feet from the intersection of the curb lines.
On both sides of the center parkway between Shaw Park Drive and
Bonhomme Avenue.
On the west side from Forsyth Boulevard to Carondelet Avenue.
Table III-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table III-A
AO:459
Location and Restriction
On the east side from a point one hundred ten (110) feet north of the
north curb line of Maryland Avenue northwardly for a distance of ninetyfive
(95) feet except for vehicles operated by or for handicapped persons
using the St. Louis County Library facility.
Central Business District:
On all streets bounded by Hanley Road, Shaw Park Drive, Brentwood
Boulevard and Maryland Avenue between 2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M.
Monday through Friday.
Clayshire Drive:
On both sides between Clayton Road and Whitburn Drive.
Clayton High School:
On both sides of front service drive south of Mark Twain Circle.
On the inside of the rear service drive.
On the north side from a point one hundred seventy-five (175) feet west of
Topton Way to a point two hundred five (205) feet west thereof.
On the south and east sides from a point one hundred sixty-five (165) feet
west of Topton Way to a point three hundred thirty-five (335) feet west
thereof.
Clayton Road (north side):
Between the eastern City limits and the east line of Big Bend Boulevard
from 4:00 to 6:00 P.M. daily except Sunday excepting that portion lying
between a point two hundred fifty (250) feet east of the east line of
DeMun Avenue and a point one hundred sixty (160) feet west of the west
line of DeMun Avenue.
Between Big Bend Boulevard and the west line of Hi-Pointe Addition, a
subdivision.
Between Glenridge Avenue and a point one hundred (100) feet west of the
west line of Glenridge Avenue.
Between Hanley Road and Cromwell Drive.
Between Hanley Road and a point two hundred thirty (230) feet west of
the centerline of Hanley Road.
Between Francis Place and the western City limits.
On the north side from the east line of Concordia Lane to a point two
hundred five (205) feet east thereof.
On the north side between the west line of Big Bend Boulevard and the
east property line of 7211 Clayton Road and the east line of Hanley Road.
On the north side between the west property line of 7228 Clayton Road
and the east line of Hanley Road.
Colorado Avenue:
Table III-A CLAYTON CITY CODE Table III-A
AO:460
Location and Restriction
On the north side from Hanley Road eastwardly to a point three hundred
(300) feet eastwardly from the east line of Hanley Road.
On the south side from Hanley Road eastwardly seven hundred (700) feet
more or less to the end of Colorado Avenue.
Concordia Lane:
On the east side between Clayton Road and San Bonita Avenue.
On the west side on the first Tuesday of the months January through
September between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 11:30 A.M.
On the west side on the first and third Tuesday of the months October
through December between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 11:30 A.M.
Corporate Park Drive:
On either side for entire length.
Crescent Drive:
On the south and west sides between Oleta Drive and the east/west alley
north of Clayton Road.
Cromwell Drive:
On the north side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first Monday of the months January through September between the
hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the north side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first and third Monday of the months October through December between
the hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the south side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first Friday of the months January through September between the hours
of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the south side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first and third Friday of the months October through December between
the hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
Dartford Avenue:
On the west side from Wydown Boulevard to a point one hundred (100)
feet south.
Davis Drive:
On all sides of the island in the intersection of Davis Drive and North
Biltmore Drive. On the south side between the northbound and
southbound lanes of South Central Avenue adjacent to the center median.
On the north side between South Central Avenue and a point fifty (50) feet
east thereof.
On the south side from Hanley Road west for two hundred (200) feet.
Table III-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table III-A
AO:461
Location and Restriction
On the north side, at the east ROW of South Bemiston Avenue, west to a
point fifty (50) feet east of the east ROW of South Central Avenue on
Sundays from 8:00 A.M. to 1:00 P.M.
On the north side from South Hanley Road to one hundred eighty-five
(185) feet west.
On all sides of the island in the intersection of Davis Drive and South
Bemiston Avenue.
Daytona Drive:
Between the north/south alley east of Brentwood Boulevard and Meramec
Avenue on the south side between January first (1st) and June thirtieth
(30th) and on the north side between July first (1st) and December thirtyfirst
(31st).
DeMun Avenue:
On the east side from the alley north of Clayton Road to Alamo Avenue.
On the east side from a point eighty (80) feet north of Alamo Avenue to
San Bonita Avenue.
On the east side from Alamo Avenue to a point eighty (80) feet north
thereof on the first Thursday of the months January through September
between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 11:30 A.M.
On the east side from Alamo Avenue to a point eighty (80) feet north
thereof on the first and third Thursday of the months October through
December between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 11:30 A.M.
On the east side from the south line of Fauquier Drive to a point one
hundred forty-five (145) feet south.
On the west side from the south line of Northwood Avenue to the
centerline of South Rosebury Avenue on the first Tuesday of the months
January through September between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 11:30
A.M.
One the west side from the south line of Northwood Avenue to the
centerline of South Rosebury Avenue on the first and third Tuesday of the
months October through December between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and
11:30 A.M.
On the west side from the centerline of South Rosebury Avenue to the
north line of Southwood Avenue on the first Thursday of the months
January through September between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 11:30
A.M.
On the west side from the centerline of South Rosebury Avenue to the
north line of Southwood Avenue on the first and third Thursday of the
months October through December between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and
11:30 A.M.
On both sides from Northwood Avenue to alley north of Northwood
Avenue.
Table III-A CLAYTON CITY CODE Table III-A
AO:462
Location and Restriction
On west side from north line of Southwood Avenue southwardly to alley
north of San Bonita Avenue.
Edgewood Drive:
On the east side from Wydown Boulevard north to Carswold Drive.
Ellenwood Avenue:
On north side from the west line of University Lane westwardly a distance
of one hundred forty-five (145) feet.
Forest Court:
On the west side of the 600 block on the first Friday of the months
January through September between the hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30
P.M.
On the west side of the 600 block on the first and third Friday of the
months October through December between the hours of 12:30 P.M. and
2:30 P.M.
On the east side of the 600 block on the first Monday of the months
January through September between the hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30
P.M.
On the east side of the 600 block on the first and third Monday of the
months October through December between the hours of 12:30 P.M. and
2:30 P.M.
Forsyth Boulevard:
On the south side between Big Bend Boulevard and the east City limits.
On the north side between Big Bend Boulevard and a point two hundred
twenty-five (225) feet east thereof.
On the north side between Jackson Avenue and the east City limits
immediately east of Jackson Avenue.
On the north side between a point three hundred forty-five (345) feet west
of Hanley Road and Lee Avenue.
On the south side between the north-south alley west of Hanley Road and
the east City limits immediately east of Jackson Avenue.
On the north side between Bemiston Avenue and a point two hundred
sixty-five (265) feet east thereof.
On the south side between Brentwood Boulevard and Parkside Drive.
On the west side between Maryland Avenue and a point one hundred
seventy (170) feet north thereof.
Francis Place:
On the west side between Clayton Road and Brentwood Boulevard.
On the west side between Whitburn Drive and Roxburgh Drive.
Glenridge Avenue:
Table III-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table III-A
AO:463
Location and Restriction
From the north curb line of Clayton Road northwardly a distance of one
hundred fifteen (115) feet.
On the east side from Wydown Boulevard to Clayton Road.
On the west side from Wydown Boulevard to one hundred fifteen (115)
feet north of the north curb line of Clayton Road on the first Monday of
the months January through September from 12:30 P.M. to 2:30 P.M.
On the west side from Wydown Boulevard to one hundred fifteen (115)
feet north of the north curb line of Clayton Road on the first and third
Monday of the months October through December between the hours of
12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
Gay Avenue on the west side between Maryland Avenue and the north City
limits except from a point three hundred fifteen (315) feet north of the
north line of Maryland Avenue to a point five hundred fifteen (515) feet
north of the north line of Maryland Avenue.
Hanley Road:
On the east side between the north City limit and the point of eighty (80)
feet south of the south line of Walinca Drive.
On the east side from a point forty (40) feet north of the north line of
Wydown Boulevard to a point two hundred twenty-five (225) feet south of
the south line of Wydown Boulevard.
On the east side from a point two hundred twenty-five (225) feet south of
the south line of Wydown Boulevard to a point three hundred five (305)
feet north of the north line of Clayton Road except Sunday.
On the west side from the north City limit to a point two hundred five
(205) feet north of the north line of Maryland Avenue.
On the west side from a point two hundred five (205) feet north of the
north line of Maryland Avenue to a point twenty-five (25) feet south of the
south line of Polo Drive.
On the west side from a point twenty-five (25) feet south of Polo Drive to a
point four hundred ten (410) feet north of the north line of Clayton Road
except Sunday.
On the west side from a point four hundred ten (410) feet north of the
north line of Clayton Road to the north line of Clayton Road.
On the east side from a point three hundred five (305) feet north of the
north line of Clayton Road to the north line of Clayton Road.
Jackson Avenue:
On the west side between Westmoreland and Carondelet Plaza.
On the east side from Maryland Avenue to Carondelet Plaza.
On the west side from Westmoreland Avenue to the northern City limits.
Kingsbury Boulevard:
On the north side between Central Avenue and Bemiston Avenue.
Table III-A CLAYTON CITY CODE Table III-A
AO:464
Location and Restriction
Lancaster Avenue:
On the east side from the north curb line of Maryland Avenue to a point
one hundred thirty-five (135) feet north.
On the west side from a point one hundred thirty-five (135) feet north of
the north curb line of Maryland Avenue to a point two hundred thirty-five
(235) feet north of the north curb line of Maryland Avenue.
Mark Twain Circle:
Between the two (2) driveways on either side of the main entrance to
Clayton High School.
On both sides from the southern intersection with Topton Way and
extending one hundred ninety-five (195) feet along the curb line.
Maryland Avenue:
On the south side between Jackson Avenue and a point one hundred
seventy-five (175) feet east of the east line of Jackson Avenue.
On the north side from Hanley Road to a point one hundred fifty (150) feet
east thereof.
On the south side from Hanley Road to a point ninety-two (92) feet east
thereof.
On the north side between Central Avenue and Meramec Avenue.
Meramec Avenue:
On the west side between Forsyth Boulevard and a point one hundred fifty
(150) feet south thereof.
On the east side between the north curb line of Walinca Drive to a point
one hundred sixty (160) feet south thereof between the hours of 8:00 A.M.
and 5:00 P.M.
On the west side of Meramec Avenue from the south curb line of Walinca
Drive to a point one hundred thirty-nine (139) feet south thereof.
Mohawk Place:
On the south side between South Bemiston Avenue and North Biltmore
Drive.
On all sides of the island in the intersection of Mohawk Place and South
Bemiston Avenue.
North Biltmore Drive:
On the west side from Davis Drive to West Biltmore.
Northwood Avenue:
On the north side of the 6300 block on the first Tuesday of the months
January through September between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 11:30
A.M.
Table III-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table III-A
AO:465
Location and Restriction
On the north side of the 6300 block on the first Tuesday of the months
October through December between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 11:30
A.M.
On the south side of the 6300 block on the first Thursday of the months
January through September between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 11:30
A.M.
On the south side of the 6300 block on the first and third Thursday of the
months October through December between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and
11:30 A.M.
On both sides from a point four hundred forty-four (444) feet east of the
east line of DeMun Avenue to a point five hundred four (504) feet east of
the east line of DeMun Avenue.
On the north side from a point five hundred four (504) feet east of the east
line of DeMun Avenue to the St. Louis City limits from 8:00 A.M. to 5:00
P.M. Monday through Friday.
On the north side from a point three hundred (300) feet east of the east
line of DeMun Avenue to a point four hundred fifty (450) feet east of the
east line of DeMun Avenue, Monday through Friday, between the hours of
8:00 A.M. and 9:00 A.M. and 3:00 P.M. and 4:00 P.M., except for school
buses.
Oakley Drive:
On the east and south side from Edgewood Drive north and east to Shirley
Drive.
Orlando Drive:
Between the north/south alley east of Brentwood Boulevard and Meramec
Avenue on the south side between January first (1st) and June thirtieth
(30th) and on the north side between July first (1st) and December thirtyfirst
(31st).
Oxford Drive:
On the north side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first Monday of the months January through September between the
hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the north side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first and third Monday of the months October through December between
the hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the south side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first Friday of the months January through September between the hours
of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the south side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first and third Friday of the months October through December between
the hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
Table III-A CLAYTON CITY CODE Table III-A
AO:466
Location and Restriction
On the south side between Glenridge Drive and a point five hundred (500)
feet east thereof between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M.
Parkside Drive:
On both sides from Forsyth Boulevard to a point fifty (50) feet south
thereof.
Parkdale Avenue:
On the north side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first Monday of the months January through September between the
hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the north side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first and third Monday of the months October through December between
the hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the south side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first Friday of the months January through September between the hours
of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the south side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first and third Friday of the months October through December between
the hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
Pershing Avenue:
On the north side between Meramec Avenue on the east and Brentwood
Boulevard on the west.
Polo Drive:
On the west side between the south line of the Forest Park Parkway and a
point one hundred eighty-five (185) feet south thereof between the hours
of 8:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M. daily except Saturday and Sunday.
East Polo Drive on the west and south sides.
Middle Polo Drive on the south side.
West Polo Drive on the east and north sides.
North Rosebury Avenue:
On the north side of the 6300 block on the first Tuesday of the months
January through September between the hours 9:00 A.M. and 11:30 A.M.
On the north side of the 6300 block on the first and third Tuesday of the
months October through December between the hours 9:00 A.M. and
11:30 A.M.
On the south side of the 6300 block on the first Thursday of the months
January through September between the hours 9:00 A.M. to 11:30 A.M.
On the south side of the 6300 block on the first and third Thursday of the
months October through December between the hours 9:00 A.M. to 11:30
A.M.
South Rosebury Avenue:
Table III-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table III-A
AO:467
Location and Restriction
On the north side of the 6300 block on the first Tuesday of the months
January through September between the hours 9:00 A.M. and 11:30 A.M.
On the north side of the 6300 block on the first and third Tuesday of the
months October through December between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and
11:30 A.M.
On the south side in the 6300 block on the first Thursday of the months
January through September between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 11:30
A.M.
On the south side in the 6300 block on the first and third Thursday of the
months October through December between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and
11:30 A.M.
Rosiline Drive:
Between the north/south alley east of Brentwood Boulevard and Meramec
Avenue on the north side between January first (1st) and June thirtieth
(30th) and on the south side between July first (1st) and December thirtyfirst
(31st).
San Bonita Avenue:
On the north side of the 6300 and 6400 block on the first Tuesday of the
months January through September between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and
11:30 A.M.
On the north side of the 6300 and 6400 block on the first and third
Tuesday of the month October through December between the hours of
9:00 A.M. and 11:30 A.M.
On the south side of the 6300 and 6400 block on the first Thursday of the
month January through September between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and
11:30 A.M.
On the south side of the 6300 and 6400 block on the first and third
Thursday of the months October through December between the hours of
9:00 A.M. and 11:30 A.M.
On the north side of the 6500 through the 6700 block on the first Tuesday
of the months January through September between the hours of 9:00 A.M.
and 11:30 A.M.
On the north side of the 6500 through the 6700 block on the first Tuesday
of the months October through December between the hours of 9:00 A.M.
and 11:30 A.M.
On the south side of the 6500 through the 6700 block on the first
Thursday of the months January through September between the hours of
9:00 A.M. and 11:30 A.M.
On the south side of the 6500 through the 6700 block on the first and
third Thursday of the months of October through December between the
hours of 9:00 A.M. and 11:30 A.M.
Seminary Place:
Table III-A CLAYTON CITY CODE Table III-A
AO:468
Location and Restriction
On the west side between Clayton Road and San Bonita Avenue on the
first Tuesday of the months January through September between the
hours 9:00 A.M. and 11:30 A.M.
On the west side between Clayton Road and San Bonita Avenue on the
first and third Tuesday of the months October through December between
the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 11:30 A.M.
On the east side between Clayton Road and San Bonita Avenue on the first
Thursday of the months January through September between the hours
9:00 A.M. and 11:30 A.M.
On the east side between Clayton Road and San Bonita Avenue on the first
and third Thursday of the months October through December between the
hours 9:00 A.M. and 11:30 A.M.
Seminole Place:
On the north side between Oleta Drive and Crescent Drive.
Shaw Park Drive:
On both sides between Brentwood Avenue and Hanley Road.
Shirley Drive:
On the south side from Edgewood Drive west to Hanley Road.
On the north side from Hanley Road to a point eighty (80) feet east
thereof.
On the north side between the west curb line of Carswold Drive and a
point one hundred twenty (120) feet west thereof between the hours of
8:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M. daily except Saturday and Sunday.
On the north and south sides between the west curb of Hanley Road and a
point eighty (80) feet west thereof between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and
5:00 P.M. daily except Saturday and Sunday.
Southmoor Drive:
On the inside circle of Southmoor Drive.
Southwood Avenue:
On the north side of the 6300 block on the first Tuesday of the months
January through September between the hours 9:00 A.M. and 11:30 A.M.
On the north side of the 6300 block on the first and third Tuesday of the
months October through December between the hours 9:00 A.M. and
11:30 A.M.
On the south side of the 6300 block on the first Thursday of the months
January through September between the hours 9:00 A.M. and 11:30 A.M.
On the south side of the 6300 block on the first and third Thursday of the
months October through December between the hours 9:00 A.M. and
11:30 A.M.
St. Rita Avenue:
Table III-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table III-A
AO:469
Location and Restriction
On the east side between Clayton Road and San Bonita Avenue on the first
Thursday of the months January through September between the hours
9:00 A.M. and 11:30 A.M.
On the east side between Clayton Road and San Bonita Avenue on the first
and third Thursday of the months October through December between the
hours 9:00 A.M. and 11:30 A.M.
Sudbury Drive:
On the north and east side beginning one hundred forty-five (145) feet
west of the intersection of the extension of the west line of Clayshire Drive
and the north curb line of Whitburn Drive and proceeding along a curve to
the right a distance of sixty-four and thirty-six hundredths (64.36) feet and
thence northwardly along the east curb line of Sudbury Drive an
additional thirty-five (35) feet.
Topton Way:
On the west side between the south line of Maryland Avenue and a point
four hundred sixty (460) feet south thereof.
On the west side between the north line of Maryland Avenue and a point
two hundred twenty-seven (227) feet north thereof.
On the east side from the south line of Maryland Avenue to a point two
hundred forty (240) feet south thereof.
On the east side from the north line of Maryland Avenue to a point one
hundred forty-six (146) feet north thereof.
Venetian Drive: [Ord. No. 6549, 8-14-2018]
Between the north/south alley east of Brentwood Boulevard and Meramec
Avenue on the south side between January first (1st) and June thirtieth
(30th) and on the north side between July first (1st) and December thirtyfirst
(31st).
Walinca Drive:
On the north side between Brentwood Boulevard and Meramec Avenue.
Walinca Terrace:
On the north side between Edgewood Drive and Hanley Road and on the
south side from Hanley Road to a point one hundred fifty (150) feet east of
Hanley Road.
On the west end of Walinca Drive around the outside of the cul-de-sac.
Wellington Way:
On the north side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first Monday of the months January through September between the
hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the north side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first and third Monday of the months October through December between
the hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
Table III-A CLAYTON CITY CODE Table III-A
AO:470
Location and Restriction
On the south side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first Friday of the months January through September between the hours
of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the south side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first and third Friday of the months October through December between
the hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
West Biltmore Drive:
On the north side between South Bemiston Avenue and North Biltmore
Drive.
On the northeast side from South Hanley Road approximately eighty (80)
feet northwest.
On the southwest side from Clayton Road approximately one hundred
(100) feet northwest.
On the south side approximately twenty-five (25) feet on either side of the
east-west alley.
Westwood Drive:
On the east side between Clayton Road and one hundred twenty-five (125)
feet north of the north curb line of Byron Avenue, except as otherwise
prohibited, on Fridays, of the first full weeks of the months of January
through September and first and third full weeks of the months of October
through December, between the hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the east side between Clayton Road and one hundred twenty-five (125)
feet north of the north curb line of Byron Avenue, except as otherwise
prohibited, on the first Friday of the months January through September
between the hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the east side between Clayton Road and one hundred twenty-five (125)
feet north of the north curb line of Byron Avenue, except as otherwise
prohibited, on the first and third Friday of the months October through
December between the hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the east side between Wydown Boulevard and one hundred twenty-five
(125) feet north of the north curb line of Byron Avenue.
On the west side.
Westmoreland Avenue:
On the north and south sides between Brentwood Boulevard and Meramec
Avenue.
Whitburn Drive:
Between Brentwood Boulevard and a point one hundred (100) feet west
thereof, including the traffic island.
Wydown Boulevard:
Table III-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table III-A
AO:471
Location and Restriction
Along both sides of the center median except on Sunday when parking is
permitted on both sides of the center median from the east City limits on
the east and the centerline of the Demun Avenue right-of-way on the west.
On the south side from the east line of Westwood Drive to a point one
hundred fifty (150) feet east thereof.
On the north side from the west line of Edgewood Drive to a point one
hundred forty (140) feet west thereof.
On the south side between a point one hundred fifty (150) feet east of the
east line of Westwood Drive and a point eight hundred seventy-five (875)
feet east of the east line of Westwood Drive on the first Monday of the
month January through September between the hours of 12:30 P.M. and
2:30 P.M.
On the south side between a point one hundred fifty (150) feet east of the
east line of Westwood Drive and a point eight hundred seventy-five (875)
feet east of the east line of Westwood Drive on the first and third Monday
of the month October through December between the hours of 12:30 P.M.
and 2:30 P.M.
On the south side from Ridgemoor Drive to Big Bend Boulevard.
On the south side from the east line of Big Bend Boulevard to a point six
hundred forty (640) feet east thereof.
On the south side between a point one hundred fifty (150) feet west of the
west line of Dartford Avenue and a point ninety (90) feet west of the west
line of Dartford Avenue between the hours of 2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M.
daily.
On the south side from the west line of Dartford Avenue to a point ninety
(90) feet west thereof.
On the south side between a point six hundred sixty-four (664) feet west
of the west line of University Lane to a point six hundred forty-nine (649)
feet west of the west line of University Lane.
On the south side between a point six hundred forty-nine (649) feet west
of the west line of University Lane to a point four hundred four (404) feet
west of the west line of University Lane between the hours of 2:00 A.M. to
4:00 A.M. and 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. daily.
On the south side between a point four hundred four (404) feet west of the
west line of University Lane to a point two hundred eighty-seven (287)
feet west of the west line of University Lane.
On the south side between a point two hundred eighty-seven (287) feet
west of the west line of University Lane to a point fifty-five (55) feet west
of the west line of University Lane between the hours of 2:00 A.M. to 4:00
A.M. daily; and 7:30 A.M. to 8:30 A.M. and 2:30 P.M. to 3:00 P.M. Monday
through Friday.
On the south side from the east line of University Lane to a point forty-five
(45) feet east thereof.
Table III-A CLAYTON CITY CODE Table III-A
AO:472
Location and Restriction
On the south side between a point forty-five (45) feet east of the east line
of University Lane to a point one hundred eighty-nine (189) feet east of
the east line of University Lane between the hours of 2:00 A.M. to 6:00
A.M. daily.
On the south side between a point one hundred eighty-nine (189) feet east
of the east line of University Lane to a point two hundred eighty-seven
(287) feet east of the east line of University Lane.
On the south side between a point two hundred eighty-seven (287) feet
east of the east line of University Lane to a point seven hundred forty
(740) feet east of the east line of University Lane between the hours of
2:00 A.M. to 6:00 A.M. daily.
On the south side between a point three hundred fourteen (314) feet west
of the west line of Demun Avenue to a point two hundred seventy-six (276)
feet west of the west line of Demun Avenue.
On the south side between a point two hundred seventy-six (276) feet
west of the west line of Demun Avenue to a point sixty-three (63) feet west
of the west line of Demun Avenue between the hours of 2:00 A.M. to 6:00
A.M. daily.
On the south side from the west line of Demun Avenue to a point sixtythree
(63) feet west thereof.
On the south side from the east line of Demun Avenue to a point eightytwo
(82) feet east thereof.
On the south side between a point four hundred eighteen (418) feet east
of the east line of Demun Avenue to a point four hundred thirty-eight
(438) feet east of the east line of Demun Avenue.
On the north side from Edgewood Drive to Big Bend Boulevard.
On the north side from the east line of Big Bend Boulevard to a point two
hundred thirty-seven (237) feet east thereof.
On the north side between a point two hundred thirty-seven (237) feet
east of the east line of Big Bend Boulevard to a point seven hundred fiftyseven
(757) feet east of the east line of Big Bend Boulevard between the
hours of 2:00 A.M. to 6:00 A.M. daily.
On the north side between a point seven hundred fifty-seven (757) feet
east of the east line of Big Bend Boulevard to a point eight hundred sixtythree
(863) feet east of the east line of Big Bend Boulevard.
On the north side between a point eight hundred sixty-three (863) feet
east of the east line of Big Bend Boulevard to a point one thousand one
hundred twenty-six (1,126) feet east of the east line of Big Bend Boulevard
between the hours of 2:00 A.M. to 6:00 A.M. daily.
On the north side between a point one thousand one hundred twenty-six
(1,126) feet east of the east line of Big Bend Boulevard to a point one
thousand two hundred sixteen (1,216) feet east of the east line of Big
Bend Boulevard.
Table III-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table III-A
AO:473
Location and Restriction
On the north side between a point two hundred sixty (260) feet west of the
west line of University Lane to a point thirty-five (35) feet west of the west
line of University Lane between the hours of 2:00 A.M. to 6:00 A.M. daily.
On the north side from the west line of University Lane to a point thirtyfive
(35) feet west thereof.
On the north side from the east line of University Lane to a point fifty (50)
feet east thereof. On the north side between a point one thousand four
hundred eighty-three (1,483) feet east of the east line of University Lane
to a point one thousand six hundred ten (1,610) feet east of the east line
of University Lane between the hours of 12:00 A.M. to 7:00 A.M. daily.
On the north side between a point one thousand six hundred ten (1,610)
feet east of the east line of University Lane to a point one thousand six
hundred thirty-one (1,631) feet east of the east line of University Lane.
On the north side from the west line of Ellenwood Avenue to a point
fifteen (15) feet west thereof.
On the north side around the Ellenwood Avenue splitter island.
On the south side between a point two hundred eighty-seven (287) feet
east of the east line of University Lane to a point seven hundred forty
(740) feet east of the east line of University Lane between the hours of
2:00 A.M. to 7:45 A.M. daily.
York Drive:
On the north side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first Monday of the months January through September between the
hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the north side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first and third Monday of the months October through December between
the hours of 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the south side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first Friday of the months January through September between the hours
12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
On the south side between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue on the
first and third Friday of the months October through December between
the hours 12:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.
Table III-B. Fifteen-Minute Parking Areas. [Ord. No. 6543,
6-26-2018]
The following streets or parts of streets are designated as districts where
the parking of vehicles is restricted as to time to fifteen (15) minutes:
Location and Restriction
Davis Drive:
On the south side from a point two hundred (200) feet west of Hanley
Road for a distance of fifty (50) feet.
Table III-A CLAYTON CITY CODE Table III-B
AO:474
Location and Restriction
North Brentwood:
100 Block — residents only.
Table III-C. Thirty-Minute Parking Areas. [Ord. No. 6543,
6-26-2018]
The following streets or parts of streets are designated as districts where
the parking of vehicles is restricted as to time to thirty (30) minutes:
Location and Restriction
Mark Twain Circle:
Inner circle from a point forty (40) feet south of the south line of Topton
Way to one hundred forty (140) feet south of the south line of Topton Way.
Table III-D. One-Hour Parking Areas. [Ord. No. 6543, 6-26-2018]
The following streets or parts of streets are designated as districts where
parking is restricted, except on Sundays and holidays, to one (1) hour at
all times between 8:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M. each day or during other times
indicated and except by valid resident and visitor permit:
Location and Restriction
Mark Twain Circle:
On the inner circle from a point one hundred seventy (170) feet south of
the south line of Topton Way to two hundred thirty (230) feet south of the
south line of Topton Way.
Maryland Avenue:
On the north side from a point one hundred fifty (150) feet east of the east
line of Hanley Road to Lee Avenue except Saturday and Sunday.
On the south side from a point ninety-two (92) feet east of the east line of
Hanley Road to Lee Avenue except Saturday and Sunday.
On the north side between Jackson Avenue and the east City limits except
Sunday.
On the south side between a point one hundred seventy-five (175) feet
east of the east line of Jackson Avenue and the east City limits except
Saturday and Sunday.
Table III-E. One-Hour Residential Parking Zones, 8:00 A.M. To 5:00
P.M. Weekdays. [Ord. No. 6543, 6-26-2018]
A. The following streets or parts of streets are designated as residential
parking zones where parking is restricted to one (1) hour between 8:00
A.M. and 5:00 P.M. except on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays and
further except by valid resident and visitor permit:
Table III-B ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table III-E
AO:475
Location
Alamo Avenue:
Between DeMun Avenue and the east City limits.
Bemiston Avenue:
Between City limits and a point one hundred (100) feet north of the
north line of Maryland Avenue.
Brighton Way:
On both sides of the 100 block from a point one hundred forty-five
(145) feet north of Maryland Avenue.
From 185 south of Maryland Avenue to Parkside Drive, east and west
sides.
Carswold Drive:
On the west and north sides.
Central Avenue:
On both sides of the 100 north block.
DeMun Avenue:
On the east side of the 300 block.
On the west side of the 300 block.
On the west side between Alamo Avenue and the alley north of Alamo
Avenue.
Edgewood Drive:
On the west side.
Linden Avenue:
On the east side between Maryland Avenue and the north City limits.
On the west side between Maryland Avenue and Kingsbury Boulevard.
Meramec Avenue:
On both sides of the 300 north block.
Oakley Drive:
On the west side.
Orlando Drive:
On the north side of the 8000 block between January first (1st) and
June thirtieth (30th).
On the south side of the 8000 block between July first (1st) and
December thirty-first (31st).
Parkside Drive:
On the west side between Topton and a point one hundred thirty (130)
feet north of Brighton Way.
Polo Drive:
Table III-E CLAYTON CITY CODE Table III-E
AO:476
Location
On the north and east sides between Shirley Drive and the entrance
to Country Club Place Subdivision.
On the west side between North Polo Drive and a point one hundred
sixty (160) feet south of Shirley Drive.
Rosiline Drive:
On the south side between South Meramec Avenue and a point one
hundred forty-five (145) feet east of Brentwood Boulevard between
January first (1st) and June thirtieth (30th).
On the north side between South Meramec Avenue and a point one
hundred forty-five (145) feet east of Brentwood Boulevard between
July first (1st) and December thirty-first (31st).
San Bonita Avenue:
Between DeMun Avenue and Seminary Place.
Between DeMun Avenue and the east City limits.
Shirley Drive:
On the north side between Carswold Drive and Edgewood Drive.
On the north side from a point eighty (80) feet east of Hanley Road to
a point one hundred twenty (120) feet west of the west curb line of
Carswold Drive.
On the south side between a point eighty (80) feet west of Hanley
Road and Polo Drive.
Sudbury Drive:
On both sides between a point one hundred fifty-five (155) feet south
of Halifax Drive and Whitburn Drive.
Topton Way:
On both sides of the 100 block from a point one hundred forty-six
(146) feet north of Maryland Avenue.
On the east side between Parkside Drive and a point two hundred
forty (240) feet south of the south line of Maryland Avenue.
University Lane:
On both sides from Wydown Boulevard to Arundel Place.
Venetian Drive:
Between the north/south alley east of Brentwood Boulevard and
Meramec Avenue on the south side between January first (1st) and
June thirtieth (30th) and on the north side between July first (1st) and
December thirty-first (31st).
Walinca Drive:
From Meramec Avenue to Brentwood Boulevard.
Walinca Terrace:
Table III-E ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table III-E
AO:477
Table III-F. One-Hour Residential Parking Zones, 8:00 A.M. To 9:00
P.M. Weekdays. [Ord. No. 6543, 6-26-2018; Ord. No. 6614,
8-27-2019]
The following streets or parts of streets are designated as residential
parking zones where parking is restricted to one (1) hour between 8:00 A.M.
and 9:00 P.M. except on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays and further except
by valid resident and visitor permit:
Location and Restriction
Aberdeen Place:
On both sides from Dartford eastwardly to University.
Arundel Place:
On the north side, between Dartford Avenue and a point two hundred fifty
(250) feet west of University Lane.
Location
On the south side between Edgewood Drive and a point one hundred
fifty (150) feet east of Hanley Road.
On the north side from Hanley Road westward to the dead end.
Westmoreland Avenue:
On both sides between North Forsyth Boulevard and Brentwood
Boulevard.
Whitburn Drive:
On both sides between Francis Place and Sudbury Drive.
Wydown Boulevard:
On the north side between University Lane and a point two hundred
eighty-five (285) feet west of Ellenwood Avenue.
On the north side from the eastern city limits to Ellenwood.
On the south side between a point two hundred seventy-six (276) feet
west of the west line of Demun Avenue to a point sixty-three (63) feet
west of the west line of Demun Avenue.
On the south side from the east line of Demun Avenue to the east city
limits.
B. When the Director of Public Works determines, on the basis of
engineering and traffic investigation, that it is in the best interest and
safety of the general public and residents of the street to increase the
hours per day and/or days per week that the restrictions are in effect,
the Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to make such changes
for periods not to exceed sixty (60) days and limited to no more than
four (4) times per year and when official signs are erected, no person
shall park in the designated areas for more than one (1) hour except by
valid resident and visitor permit.
Table III-E CLAYTON CITY CODE Table III-F
AO:478
Location and Restriction
On the south side, between Dartford Avenue and a point three hundred
fifty-five (355) feet west of University Lane.
Cecil Avenue.
Crandon Drive:
Between University Drive and a point one hundred forty-one (141) feet
north of the north line of Maryland Avenue.
Dartford:
On both sides from Wydown Boulevard to the east-west alley south of
Aberdeen.
On both sides from Wydown Boulevard to the southern end, one hundred
ninety (190) feet south of Arundel Place.
Davis Drive:
On the south side, between South Bemiston Avenue and South Central
Avenue.
Ellenwood Avenue:
On the north side between University Lane and Wydown Boulevard.
On the south side between University Lane and a point seventy-four (74)
feet east of Cecil Avenue.
Lancaster Drive:
On the east side between a point one hundred thirty-five (135) feet north
of Maryland Avenue and University Drive.
On the west side between a point two hundred thirty-five (235) feet north
of Maryland Avenue and University Drive.
University Lane:
On the east side between Wydown Boulevard and Ellenwood Avenue.
On the west side between a point two hundred (200) feet north of Wydown
Boulevard and Ellenwood Avenue.
Table III-G. Police And Law Enforcement Parking. [Ord. No. 6615,
8-27-2019]
The following streets or parts of streets are designated as districts where
the parking of vehicles is restricted to vehicles registered to a public agency
involved in law enforcement activities and used for parking vehicles used
by police or law enforcement personnel. Signs designating the restriction
may read “Police Parking Only” or such other language as may reasonably
inform the public of the restricted use.
Table III-F ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table III-G
AO:479
Location
Central Avenue
On the east side of Central Avenue between Carondelet Avenue and the
north side of the east-west alley between Bemiston Avenue and Central
Avenue.
Table III-H. Two-Hour Residential Parking Zones, 8:00 A.M. To 5:00
P.M. Weekdays. [Ord. No. 6543, 6-26-2018]
A. The following streets or parts of streets are designated as residential
parking zones where parking is restricted to two (2) hours between
8:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M. except on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays and
further except by valid resident and visitor permit:
Location and Restriction
Crandon Drive:
On both sides between University Drive and Kingsbury Boulevard.
Forest Court:
On both sides of the 600 block.
Lancaster Drive:
On both sides between University Drive and Kingsbury Boulevard.
Lee Avenue:
On the east side of Lee Avenue from a point two hundred seventy-five
(275) feet north of the intersection of Forsyth Boulevard to a point
three hundred seventy-five (375) feet north of the intersection of
Forsyth Boulevard and on the west side of Lee Avenue from a point
one hundred thirty-six (136) feet north of the intersection of Forsyth
Boulevard to a point three hundred ninety (390) feet north of the
intersection of Forsyth Boulevard. [Ord. No. 6591, 5-14-2019]
Wydown Boulevard:
On the south side between a point one hundred fifty (150) feet east of
the east line of Westwood Drive and a point eight hundred seventyfive
(875) feet east of the east line of Westwood Drive.
B. When the Director of Public Works determines, on the basis of
engineering and traffic investigation, that it is in the best interest and
safety of the general public and residents of the street to increase the
hours per day and/or days per week that the restrictions are in effect,
the Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to make such changes
for periods not to exceed sixty (60) days and limited to no more than
four (4) times per year, and when official signs are erected, no person
shall park in the designated areas for more than two (2) hours except by
valid resident and visitor permit.
Table III-G CLAYTON CITY CODE Table III-I
AO:480
Table III-I. Two-Hour Parking Areas. [Ord. No. 6543, 6-26-2018]
The following streets or parts of streets are designated as districts where
parking is restricted, except on Sundays and holidays, to two (2) hours at
the times indicated or if no time is indicated, at all times between 8:00 A.M.
and 5:00 P.M. each day and except by valid resident and visitor permit:
Location and Restriction
Brentwood Boulevard:
Between Westmoreland Avenue and northern City limits.
Central Avenue:
On both sides between Pershing Avenue and the northern City limits.
On the west side of the street between a point approximately twenty-five
(25) feet south of the east-west alley north of Clayton Road and a point
approximately twenty-five (25) feet north of Clayton Road.
Clayton Road:
On the north side from a point one hundred five (105) feet west of the
west line of St. Rita Avenue to a point one hundred fifty (150) feet west
thereof between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M. Monday through
Friday.
On the north side from a point two hundred fifty (250) feet east of DeMun
Avenue to St. Mark's Way between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M.
Monday through Friday.
Country Club Court:
On both sides between the hours of 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. daily except
Sundays and holidays.
Gay Avenue:
On the east side from a point three hundred ninety-five (395) feet north of
Maryland Avenue to the northern city limits between the hours of 8:00
A.M. and 5:00 P.M. Monday through Friday.
Jackson Avenue:
On the east side from a point sixty-five (65) feet north of the north line of
Maryland Avenue to the northern City limits.
Kingsbury Boulevard:
Between Meramec Avenue and Forsyth Boulevard.
On the south side between a point one hundred sixty-eight (168) feet east
of Meramec Avenue to Bemiston Avenue between the hours of 8:00 A.M.
and 5:00 P.M. Monday through Friday.
On the north side between Meramec Avenue and Central Avenue between
the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M. Monday through Friday.
Lancaster Drive:
On both sides from University Drive to and Kingsbury Boulevard.
Pershing Avenue:
Table III-I ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table III-I
AO:481
Location and Restriction
Between Forsyth Boulevard and the eastern City limits.
Polo Drive:
East Polo Drive on the east and north sides from a point one hundred
thirty (130) feet south of North Polo Drive except Saturday and Sunday.
Middle Polo Drive on the north side except Saturday and Sunday.
West Polo Drive on the west side from North Polo Drive to a point five
hundred twenty-five (525) feet south thereof except Saturday and Sunday.
Shaw Park Drive:
On both sides from a point six hundred sixty (660) feet west of the west
line of Brentwood Boulevard to a point nine hundred fifty (950) feet west
of the west line of Brentwood Boulevard between the hours of 8:00 A.M.
and 5:00 P.M. Monday through Friday.
On the north side beginning at a point one hundred seventy (170) feet
west of the east side of the municipal garage underpass beneath the
Forest Park Parkway to a point three hundred seventy (370) feet west of
the east line of the underpass between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 5:00
P.M. Monday through Friday.
Roxburgh:
On both sides from 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. Monday through Friday.
University Drive:
Between Forsyth Boulevard and Brentwood Boulevard from 8:00 A.M. to
5:00 P.M. Monday through Friday.
Westmoreland Avenue:
Both sides between Hanley Road and Jackson Avenue from 8:00 A.M. to
5:00 P.M. Monday through Friday.
Wydown Boulevard:
On the south side between a point one hundred fifty (150) feet west of the
west line of Dartford Avenue and a point ninety (90) feet west of the west
line of Dartford Avenue between the hours of 6:00 A.M. and 2:00 A.M.
daily.
On the south side between a point forty-five (45) feet east of the east line
of University Lane to Wydown Terrace between the hours of 6:00 A.M. to
2:00 A.M. daily.
On the south side between a point two hundred seventy-six (276) feet
west of the west line of Demun Avenue to a point sixty-three (63) feet west
of the west line of Demun Avenue between the hours of 5:00 P.M. to 2:00
A.M. daily.
On the north side between a point two hundred thirty-seven (237) feet
east of the east line of Big Bend Boulevard to a point seven hundred fiftyseven
(757) feet east of the east line of Big Bend Boulevard between the
hours of 6:00 A.M. to 2:00 A.M. daily.
Table III-I CLAYTON CITY CODE Table III-I
AO:482
Location and Restriction
On the north side between a point eight hundred sixty-three (863) feet
east of the east line of Big Bend Boulevard to a point one thousand one
hundred twenty-six (1,126) feet east of the east line of Big Bend Boulevard
between the hours of 6:00 A.M. to 2:00 A.M. daily.
On the north side between a point two hundred sixty (260) feet west of the
west line of University Lane to a point thirty-five (35) feet west of the west
line of University Lane between the hours of 6:00 A.M. to 2:00 A.M. daily.
Table III-J. Five-Hour Parking Areas. [Ord. No. 6543, 6-26-2018]
The following streets or parts of streets are designated as districts where
parking is restricted to five (5) hours at the times indicated and if no time is
indicated at all times:
Location and Restriction
Ellenwood Avenue:
On the south side between a point seventy-four (74) feet east of Cecil
Avenue and Wydown Boulevard between 8:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M. Monday
through Friday.
On the south side between a point one thousand one hundred thirty-four
(1,134) feet east of the east line of Cecil to a point one thousand four
hundred fifty-six (1,456) feet east of the west line of Wydown between the
hours of 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. daily.
Table III-K. Ten-Hour Parking Areas. [Ord. No. 6543, 6-26-2018]
The following streets or parts of streets are designated as districts where
parking is restricted to ten (10) hours at the times indicated and if no time
is indicated at all times:
None
Table III-L. Two-Hour Residential Parking Zones 8:00 A.M. To 9:00
P.M. Monday Through Saturday. [Ord. No. 6543, 6-26-2018]
The following streets or parts of streets are designated as residential
parking zones where parking is restricted to two (2) hours between 8:00
A.M. and 9:00 P.M. except on Sundays and holidays and further except by
valid resident and visitor permit:
None
Table III-I ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table III-M
AO:483
Table III-M. Residential Parking Zones, Except Sunday 8:00 A.M. To
1:00 P.M. [Ord. No. 6543, 6-26-2018; Ord. No. 6550, 8-14-2018104]
The following streets or parts of streets are designated as residential
parking zones where parking is restricted to parking with a valid resident
and visitor permit except for Sunday 8:00 A.M. to 1:00 P.M.:
Location and Restriction
Davis Drive:
On the north side, starting approximately one hundred eighty-five (185)
feet west of the South Hanley Road west ROW, west to a point
approximately two hundred twenty (220) feet west.
On the south side between South Bemiston Avenue and North Biltmore
Drive.
Mohawk Place:
On the north side between South Bemiston Avenue and North Biltmore
Drive.
North Biltmore Drive:
On the west side from approximately twenty-five (25) feet northwest of
the east-west alley to West Biltmore Drive.
On the east side starting at the east/west alley north to a point
approximately fifteen (15) feet south of the southern right-of-way for
Mohawk Place.
West Biltmore Drive:
On the south side between South Bemiston Avenue and North Biltmore
Drive.
Table III-N. Residential Parking Zones, Except No Parking Sunday
8:00 A.M. To 1:00 P.M. [Ord. No. 6543, 6-26-2018]
The following streets or parts of streets are designated as residential
parking zones where parking is restricted to parking with a valid resident
and visitor permit except for Sunday 8:00 A.M. to 1:00 P.M. when no parking
is permitted:
Location and Restriction
Davis Drive:
On the north side, starting approximately four hundred five (405) feet
west of the west Hanley Road ROW, west to the east ROW of South
Bemiston Avenue.
104. Editor's Note: Ord. No 6550 amended the title of this Section only from "Two-Hour
Residential Parking Zones 8:00 A.M. To 1:00 P.M. Monday Through Saturday" to
"Residential Parking Zones, Except Sunday 8:00 A.M. To 1:00 P.M."
Table III-M CLAYTON CITY CODE Table III-O
AO:484
Table III-O. One-Hour Residential Parking Zones 8:00 A.M. to 9:00
P.M. Monday through Saturday. [Ord. No. 6543, 6-26-2018; Ord. No.
6614, 8-27-2019]
The following streets or parts of streets are designated as residential
parking zones where parking is restricted to one (1) hour between 8:00 A.M.
and 9:00 P.M. except on Sundays and holidays and further except by valid
resident and visitor permit.
Location and Restriction
Bemiston Avenue:
On the west side, between Mohawk Place south ROW and the east-west
alley south of West Biltmore Drive.
Topton Way:
On the west side from a point six hundred fifty (650) feet south of the
south line of Maryland Avenue to a point seven hundred ninety-five (795)
feet south of the south line of Maryland Avenue.
Table III-P. Parking Meter Zones. [Ord. No. 6543, 6-26-2018; Ord.
No. 6615, 8-27-2019]
Parking on the following streets or parts of streets is regulated by parking
meter between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M., except weekends and
holidays; provided, however, within the meaning of this Table, the term
"holidays" shall include the following days only: the first day of January, the
last Monday in May, the fourth day of July, the first Monday in September,
the fourth Thursday in November and the twenty-fifth day of December, as
follows:
Fifteen Minute Meter Zone
South Bemiston Avenue:
On the west side from a point approximately twenty-five (25) feet north of
Clayton Road to a point approximately one hundred fifteen (115) feet
north.
Wydown Boulevard:
On the south side from a point twenty-five (25) feet east of the east curb
of Forest Court to a point forty-five (45) feet east of the east curb of Forest
Court.
Thirty Minute Meter Zone
Clayton Road:
On the north side the first two (2) metered spaces west of Hanley Road.
Two Hour Meter Zones
Bemiston Avenue:
On both sides between Maryland Avenue and Shaw Park Drive
Table III-O ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table III-P
AO:485
Two Hour Meter Zones
Bonhomme Avenue:
Between Hanley Road and Brentwood Boulevard.
Brentwood Boulevard:
Between Maryland Avenue and Westmoreland on both sides.
On the east side between Carondelet Avenue and Maryland Avenue.
On the west side between Maryland and Forsyth.
Carondelet Avenue:
Between Hanley Road and Central Avenue.
Between Meramec Avenue and Brentwood Boulevard.
Carondelet Plaza:
On the south side between a point one hundred fifty (150) feet east of
Hanley Road to the Carondelet Plaza Circle.
On the north side between a point one hundred fifty (150) feet east of
Hanley Road to a point three hundred (300) feet east of Hanley Road.
On the north side from the Carondelet Circle to Forsyth Boulevard.
Central Avenue:
Between Shaw Park Drive and a point two hundred (200) feet north of the
north line of Maryland Avenue; except, however, that the area on the east
side of Central Avenue between the north side of the eastwest alley
between Bemiston and Central avenue and the south side of Carondelet
Avenue shall not be included in the metered zone.
Clayton Road:
On the north side between Hanley Road and Oleta Drive.
On the north side between a point one hundred sixty (160) feet west of the
west curb line of DeMun Avenue, and DeMun Avenue.
Crandon Drive:
On both sides between Maryland Avenue and the first alley north of
Maryland Avenue.
DeMun Avenue:
On the east and west sides, from Clayton Road to the east and west alley
situated between Clayton Road and Alamo Avenue.
Forest Court:
On both sides from Wydown Boulevard to sixty-seven (67) feet south of
Wydown Boulevard.
Forsyth Boulevard:
Between Maryland Avenue and Hanley Road, on the east side from the
alley north of Maryland to Maryland, on the north side between Hanley
Road and Lyle Avenue, on the north side between Jackson Avenue and Lee
Avenue, and on the south side west of Lyle Avenue.
Table III-P CLAYTON CITY CODE Table III-P
AO:486
Two Hour Meter Zones
Francis Place:
On the east side from Clayton Road to Brentwood Boulevard.
Gay Avenue:
On the east side between the north curb line of Maryland Avenue to three
hundred ninety-five (395) feet north.
Hanley Road:
On the east side from Wydown Boulevard to two hundred (200) feet north
of Wydown Boulevard.
Kingsbury Boulevard:
On the south side east of Meramec Avenue to a point one hundred fifty
(150) feet east of Meramec Avenue.
Lee Avenue
Lyle Avenue
Maryland Avenue:
On the north side between Gay Avenue and Forsyth Boulevard, north and
south side between Forsyth and Meramec, south side between Meramec
Avenue and North Central Avenue, and north and south side between
North Central Avenue and north/south alley east of Bemiston.
Meramec Avenue:
Both sides between Shaw Park Drive and Kingsbury Boulevard.
On the east side from Clayton Road to the alley north of Clayton Road.
Wydown Boulevard:
On the north side between Hanley Road and Westwood Drive and its
prolongation northwardly.
On the south side between Hanley Road and Westwood Drive.
10 N Brentwood Parking Lot:
Twenty nine (29) parking spots
Central and Maryland Parking Lot:
24 parking spots
40 S Central Parking Lot:
151 parking spots
11 N Meramec Parking Lot:
51 parking spots
Four Hour Meter Zones
Brentwood:
On the west side from Carondelet to Bonhomme.
Parkside Drive:
Table III-P ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table III-P
AO:487
Four Hour Meter Zones
On the east and west side between Forsyth Boulevard and Topton Way.
Topton Way:
On the southwest side between Parkside Drive and the north entrance of
Mark Twain Circle.
Ten Hour Meter Zones
Brighton Way:
On both sides from Maryland Avenue to a point one hundred forty-five
(145) feet north of Maryland Avenue.
Hunter Avenue.
Lancaster Drive:
On the west side from Maryland Avenue to one hundred forty-five (145)
feet north of Maryland Avenue.
Maryland Avenue:
On both sides of the 7700 block to the alley east of the Post Office.
Central and Maryland Parking Lot:
19 Parking Spaces
Schedule IV
PROHIBITED TURNS
Table IV-A. Prohibited Left Turn Intersections [CC 1970 §21-90; CC
1947 §11-133; Ord. No. 3715 §1, 2-11-1975; Ord. No. 3719 §1,
2-25-1975; Ord. No. 3781 §1, 11-11-1975; Ord. No. 4341 §1,
11-22-1983; Ord. No. 4873 §1, 4-14-1992; Ord. No. 4921 §1,
9-22-1992; Ord. No. 5250 §1, 5-14-1996; Ord. No. 5273 §§1—2,
8-27-1996; Ord. No. 5376 §1, 9-23-1997]
The following intersections in the City are designated as intersections
where the making of a left turn by the operator of any vehicle is prohibited
and such operation is prohibited at all times:
Location
Big Bend Boulevard and the private driveway on the east side of Big Bend
Boulevard and one thousand forty (1,040) feet south of Wydown Boulevard
entering into Fontbonne College property.
Brentwood Boulevard and the alley immediately south of Forsyth
Boulevard south from alley into Brentwood Boulevard.
Brentwood Boulevard and Juvenile Center service drive north from
Juvenile Center service drive into Brentwood Boulevard.
Table III-P CLAYTON CITY CODE Table IV-A
AO:488
Location
Brentwood Boulevard and Walinca Drive east from Brentwood Boulevard
into Walinca Drive from 7:00 A.M. to 9:00 A.M. and from 3:00 P.M. to 6:00
P.M. Monday through Friday.
Clayton Road and private driveway on the north side of Clayton Road one
hundred forty (140) feet west of Westwood Drive, east from private
driveway into Clayton Road between the hours of 3:00 P.M. and 6:00 P.M.
Monday through Friday.
Forsyth Boulevard and public alley on the north side of Forsyth Boulevard
and two hundred ten (210) feet east of Bemiston Avenue from southbound
in alley into Forsyth Boulevard eastbound between the hours of 7:00 A.M.
and 6:00 P.M.
Hanley Road and the east-west alley immediately south of Forsyth
Boulevard and west of Hanley Road north from alley into Hanley Road.
Hanley Road and the private driveway on the east side of Hanley Road
forty (40) feet north of Bonhomme Avenue which provides access to the
200 South Hanley property, west from private driveway into Hanley Road.
Hanley Road and Shirley Drive east from Hanley Road into Shirley Drive
between the hours of 4:00 P.M. and 6:00 P.M., Monday through Friday.
Hanley Road and Walinca Terrace east from Hanley Road into Walinca
Terrace between the hours of 4:00 P.M. and 6:00 P.M., Monday through
Friday.
Maryland Avenue and Topton Way, north from Maryland Avenue into
Topton Way, at all times except when flashing.
Meramec Avenue and Kingsbury Boulevard, east from Meramec Avenue
into Kingsbury Boulevard between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 9:00 A.M.
and between the hours of 4:00 P.M. and 6:00 P.M., Monday through
Friday.
Meramec Avenue and Kingsbury Boulevard west from Meramec Avenue
into Kingsbury Boulevard between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 9:00 A.M.
and between the hours of 4:00 P.M. and 6:00 P.M., Monday through
Friday.
Meramec Avenue and private driveway on the west side of Meramec
Avenue one hundred thirty-seven (137) feet south of Maryland Avenue
from eastbound in driveway into Meramec Avenue.
North Forsyth Boulevard and Kingsbury Boulevard, east from North
Forsyth Boulevard into Kingsbury Boulevard, between the hours of 7:00
A.M. and 9:00 A.M., Monday through Friday.
North Forsyth Boulevard and East Drive east from North Forsyth
Boulevard into East Drive, between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 9:00 A.M.
and between the hours of 4:00 P.M. and 6:30 P.M., Monday through
Friday.
Walinca Drive and Meramec Elementary School parking lot south onto
Walinca Drive.
Table IV-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table IV-B
AO:489
Table IV-B. Prohibited Right Turn Intersections Designated [CC
1970 §21-90.1; Ord. No. 5273 §3, 8-27-1996]
The following intersections in the City are designated as intersections
where the making of a right turn by the operator of any vehicle is prohibited
and such operation is prohibited at all times unless otherwise designated:
Location
Brentwood Boulevard and Walinca Drive east from Brentwood Boulevard
onto Walinca between the hours of 7:00 A.M. to 9:00 A.M. and 3:00 P.M. to
4:00 P.M. Monday through Friday.
Meramec Avenue and Kingsbury Boulevard west from Meramec Avenue
into Kingsbury Boulevard between 7:00 A.M. and 9:30 A.M., Monday
through Friday.
Walinca Drive and the north-south alley east of Brentwood Boulevard from
the north-south alley onto Walinca between the hours of 7:00 A.M. to 9:00
A.M. and 3:00 P.M. to 4:00 P.M. Monday through Friday.
Schedule V
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
Table V-A. One-Way Streets and Alleys [CC 1970 §21-67; CC 1947
§11-130; Ord. No. 3367, 1-27-1970; Ord. No. 3374 §1, 2-24-1970;
Ord. No. 3383 §1, 5-12-1970; Ord. No. 3408 §1, 9-22-1970; Ord. No.
3525 §1, 5-9-1972; Ord. No. 3566 §1, 10-10-1972; Ord. No. 3607 §1,
7-10-1973; Ord. No. 3702 §1, 12-10-1974; Ord. No. 3716 §1,
2-11-1975; Ord. No. 3854 §1, 11-9-1976; Ord. No. 3869 §1,
2-22-1977; Ord. No. 4028 §1, 6-12-1979; Ord. No. 4175 §1,
2-24-1981; Ord. No. 4712 §1, 7-25-1989; Ord. No. 4769 §1,
6-26-1990; Ord. No. 4815 §1, 6-25-1991; Ord. No. 5059 §1,
4-12-1994]
In accordance with the provisions of Section 330.010, the following streets
and alleys are designated one-way streets and alleys as indicated.
Location
Alley extending north from Forsyth Boulevard between Central Avenue
and Bemiston Avenue, southbound. [Ord. No. 6415 §1, 2-9-2016]
Alley extending north from Forsyth Boulevard between Lee Avenue and
Lyle Avenue and turning east to Lee Avenue, northwardly and eastwardly.
Alley, east-west alley north of Bonhomme Avenue and south of Carondelet
Avenue from the eastern line of Central Avenue eastwardly to the western
line of Bemiston Avenue.
Alley, east-west alley north of Forsyth Boulevard and south of Maryland
Avenue from the eastern line of Bemiston Avenue eastwardly to the northsouth
alley.
Table IV-B CLAYTON CITY CODE Table V-A
AO:490
Location
Alley, north one-half (1/2) of the north-south alley located two hundred
seven (207) feet east of Bemiston Avenue between Forsyth Boulevard and
Maryland Avenue, northwardly.
Alamo Avenue between the east City limits and University Lane,
westwardly.
Buckingham Drive between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue,
westwardly.
Byron Place between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue, westwardly.
Carondelet Plaza Circle in a counter clockwise direction.
Country Club Drive in a counter clockwise direction.
Driveway at northwest corner of Clayton Road and Clayshire Drive,
eastwardly.
Driveway on the north side of Clayton Road located two hundred fifty
(250) feet west of the west line of Clayshire Drive, northwardly.
Driveway on the north side of Clayton Road located three hundred (300)
feet west of the west line of Clayshire Drive, southwardly.
Forest Court, southwardly.
Francis Place between Clayton Road and Brentwood Boulevard,
northwardly.
Juvenile Center Service Drive, eastwardly.
Lee Avenue between Maryland Avenue and the alley north of Forsyth
Boulevard, southwardly.
Mark Twain Circle, southwestwardly, southwardly, southeastwardly,
eastwardly and northeastwardly, the direction thereof to be in a curve to
the left, that is in a counterclockwise direction.
Maryland Avenue westwardly between Jackson Avenue and Lee Avenue.
Northwood Avenue between the east City limits and DeMun Avenue,
westwardly.
Oxford Drive between Audubon Drive and Glenridge Avenue, eastwardly.
Parkdale Avenue between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue,
eastwardly.
Polo Drive, northwardly and westwardly.
North Rosebury Avenue, westwardly.
San Bonita Avenue between the east City limits and Seminary Place,
eastwardly.
Shaw Park Drive, westwardly from Hanley Road to the underpass beneath
the Forest Park Parkway.
South Rosebury Avenue, eastwardly.
Southwood Avenue, westwardly.
Table V-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table V-A
AO:491
Location
Wellington Way, westwardly from Audubon Drive to Westwood Drive.
West Polo Drive, southwardly and eastwardly.
York Drive between Westwood Drive and Glenridge Avenue, eastwardly.
Schedule VI
RESTRICTED COMMERCIAL VEHICLES OR TRUCK USE -
STREETS DESIGNATED
Table VI-A. Restricted Commercial Vehicles or Truck Use — Streets
Designated [CC 1970 §§21-91—21-92; CC 1947 §11-79; Ord. No.
3534 §1, 6-13-1972; Ord. No. 4258 §1, 8-24-1982; Ord. No. 4918 §1,
9-8-1992]
A. All of the streets of the City of Clayton are hereby designated restricted
local traffic streets, where no person or persons shall operate a truck or
commercial vehicle in through travel, except for those trucks and
commercial vehicles making deliveries to or working at a property on
restricted streets. Such restriction shall not apply to permitted trucks
and commercial vehicles on the following streets or parts of streets nor
to trucks and commercial vehicles which have been given previous
written permission to do so by the City Traffic Engineer:
Big Bend Boulevard.
Brentwood Boulevard from Clayton Road to Maryland Avenue.
Clayton Road.
Hanley Road.
Maryland Avenue from west City limits to Hanley Road.
I-170 (Inner belt).
Shaw Park Drive from Hanley Road to Shaw Park Access.
B. Permitted trucks and commercial vehicles do not include the following,
which require a permit:
1. All vehicles which have a dump type bed.
2. All motorized construction equipment.
3. All vehicles that exceed either thirteen feet six inches (13€ 6") in
height or fifty-five (55) feet in length.
4. All vehicles licensed for sixty thousand (60,000) pounds gross
vehicle weight or more.
Table V-A CLAYTON CITY CODE Table VI-A
AO:492
Schedule VII
PARKING RESTRICTIONS
Table VII-A. Fire Lanes. [Ord. No. 6543, 6-26-2018]
As authorized by and in accordance with Chapter 350, the following areas
shall be designated as fire lanes where parking, standing or stopping is
prohibited at all times, except as noted herein:
Locations
Any street or portion of street designated by the Fire Chief in accordance
with Section 305.030 of the Municipal Code.
Audubon:
From Wydown Boulevard to Clayton Road.
On the east side from January 1st to June 30th and on the west side from
July 1st to December 31st.
Buckingham Drive:
From Audubon Drive to Glen Ridge Avenue.
On the north side from January 1st to June 30th and on the south side
from July 1st to December 31st.
Byron Place:
From Audubon Drive to Glen Ridge Avenue.
On the north side from January 1st to June 30th and on the south side
from July 1st to December 31st.
Carswold Drive:
On the east and south side from Walinca north and east to Edgewood
Drive.
Concordia Lane:
On the east side from Clayton Road to San Bonita Avenue.
Colmar Drive:
On the north side from Langton Drive to Francis Place.
Crescent Drive:
On the south and west side from Oleta Drive to Clayton Road.
Cromwell Drive:
From Audubon Drive to Glen Ridge Avenue.
On the north side from January 1st to June 30th and on the south side
from July 1st to December 31st.
Edgewood Drive:
On the east side from Wydown Boulevard north to Carswold Drive.
Halifax Drive:
Table VI-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table VII-A
AO:493
Locations
On the north side from Langton Drive to Francis Place.
Langton Drive:
On the east side from Halifax Drive to Edinburgh Drive.
Meramec Avenue:
On the west side from the north line of Clayton Road the east/west alley
north thereof.
Oakley Drive:
On the east and south side from Edgewood Drive north and east to Shirley
Drive.
Oxford Drive:
From Audubon Drive to Glen Ridge Avenue.
On the north side from January 1st to June 30th and on the south side
from July 1st to December 31st.
Parkdale Drive:
From Audubon Drive to Glen Ridge Avenue.
On the north side from January 1st to June 30th and on the south side
from July 1st to December 31st.
Polo Drive:
Middle polo drive on the north side from East Polo Drive to West Polo
Drive.
North Polo Drive on the north side from Shirley Drive to the dead end.
Shirley Drive:
On the north side from Hanley Road to Rear Drive. to Hanley Road.
On the south side from Edgewood Drive west
Seminole Place:
On the north side from Oleta Drive to Crescent Drive.
Somerset Avenue:
From Audubon Drive to Clayton Road.
On the north side from January 1st to June 30th and on the south side
from July 1st to December 31st.
St Rita Avenue:
On the west side from Clayton Road to San Bonita Avenue.
Tuscany Park:
On both sides. Along the common ground area except in front of #8
Tuscany Park in which it is both sides.
Walinca Terrace:
On the north side between Edgewood Drive and Hanley Road.
Table VII-A CLAYTON CITY CODE Table VII-A
AO:494
Locations
From Hanley Road to the dead end on the south side.
Watkins Drive:
From Brentwood Boulevard to Meramec Avenue.
On the north side from January 1st to June 30th and on the south side
from July 1st to December 31st.
Wellington Way:
From Audubon Drive to Glen Ridge Avenue.
On the north side from January 1st to June 30th and on the south side
from July 1st to December 31st.
York Drive:
From Audubon Drive to Glen Ridge Avenue.
On the north side from January 1st to June 30th and on the south side
from July 1st to December 31st.
Chapter 400
PLANNING, CITY PLAN COMMISSION AND ARCHITECTURAL
REVIEW BOARD
Table VII-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table VII-A
AO:495

ARTICLE I
Department of Planning
Section 400.010. Created [CC 1970 §2-125; Ord. No. 3848 §1,
10-12-1976]
There is hereby created the Department of Planning of the City.
Section 400.020. Appointment, Qualifications of Department Head
[CC 1970 §2-126; Ord. No. 3848 §1, 10-12-1976]
The head of the Department of Planning shall be the Planning Director
who shall be appointed by and be responsible to the City Manager. He/she
shall, in addition to all other requirements imposed by law, have supervisory
professional experience in City planning and in master plan development,
together with a bachelor's degree in public administration, urban planning
or related field or an equivalent combination of training and experience
and he/she shall have a knowledge of the principles and practices of civil
engineering, economics, municipal finances, sociology, architecture and
landscape architecture as applied to City planning.
Section 400.030. Duties of Planning Director Generally [CC 1970
§2-127; Ord. No. 3848 §1, 10-12-1976]
The Planning Director shall exercise general supervision over the
Department of Planning and shall serve as staff liaison with the City Plan
Commission and advisor thereto and attend meetings thereof. He/she shall
work with and advise those interested in building or developing in Clayton
concerning zoning and planning. He/she shall coordinate the development
of the capital improvements program of the City and work closely with
other departments and directors thereof in the administration, enforcement
and supervision of building construction and maintenance and zoning
ordinances and perform work related to planning and zoning as required.
Section
400.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.030
AO:497

ARTICLE II
City Plan Commission
Section 400.040. Establishment of City Plan Commission — Rules —
Recommend Legislation105 [CC 1970 §§2-6—2-8; CC 1947 §§9-1, 9-3,
9-5]
Section 400.050. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §1(6.1),
4-27-2004]
The Plan Commission is established to advise the Board of Aldermen on
how best to preserve and protect the existing residential and business
community, to provide for, plan, guide and direct the development,
redevelopment and growth of the City and to encourage high standards
of architectural, site and landscape design and to encourage public
participation.
Section 400.060. Constitution of Commission [Ord. No. 5814
§1(6.2), 4-27-2004]
There shall be a City Plan Commission consisting of seven (7) members
appointed by the Board of Aldermen, one (1) of whom shall be the City
Manager or an administrative officer of the City designated by him/her and
another of whom shall be a member of the Board of Aldermen. The other
five (5) members shall be residents of the City qualified by knowledge or
experience to act on questions pertaining to the development of a City
plan, who shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years, except that of
the members first (1st) appointed, two (2) shall be appointed to serve for
one (1) year, two (2) for two (2) years and one (1) for three (3) years. The
Board of Aldermen shall fill vacancies for any unexpired term. The City Plan
Commission shall elect its own Chairman and other officers annually.
Section 400.070. Powers and Duties [Ord. No. 5814 §1(6.3),
4-27-2004]
A. Established. In order to make adequate provision for and to stimulate,
guide, direct, arrange and beautify the City and the future development
and growth thereof, there is established a City Plan Commission.
B. Promulgating Rules And Regulations. The City Plan Commission may
provide such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the ordinances
of the City for its own organization and procedure as it may deem
proper.
C. Recommending Legislation. It shall be the duty of the City Plan
Commission to prepare and recommend such national, State and
municipal legislation as may, in its opinion, be deemed necessary in
carrying out the recommendations or suggestions of the Commission.
105. Charter References—Required, art. IV §1; membership, etc., art. IX. State Law
Reference—Authority to appoint, etc., §§89.310 et seq., RSMo.
Section
400.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.070
AO:499
Section 400.080. Public Notice [Ord. No. 5814 §1(6.4), 4-27-2004]
For at least seven (7) days immediately prior to the date of the public
hearing on any proposed amendment, modification or revision, the
Commission shall cause public notices to be maintained in at least five (5)
public places, two (2) of which shall be upon the property which would
be affected by the proposed change in the Zoning Ordinance. At least ten
(10) days prior to such hearing, the Commission shall mail a written notice
to the last known place of abode of the owners of all property, according
to current City tax records, adjacent to or lying within two hundred (200)
feet of all boundaries of the property under consideration. In addition, the
Commission shall cause notice of the hearing to be published at least two
(2) times in a newspaper printed or published in the City or, if there be no
newspaper printed or published in the City, then in any daily newspaper
of general circulation in the City. The first (1st) publication shall be at
A. The City Plan Commission shall have the authority and the duty to
submit to the Board of Aldermen for its approval a master plan for the
physical development of the City and shall have the power to employ or
consult professional advisers. The plan shall include, among other
things, the general location, character and extent of streets, bridges,
parks, waterways and other public ways, grounds, places and spaces,
together with the general location of public buildings and other public
property, public utilities and terminals. The Commission shall
recommend such modifications of the master plan, from time to time, as
it deems in the City's interest; and not less frequently than once a year,
it shall submit to the Board of Aldermen a report which shall include a
summary of its activities and statements of its recommendations for
improvements in the master plan. Reports of the Plan Commission shall
be filed in the office of the City Clerk and be open to public inspection.
B. The City Plan Commission shall also act as the Zoning Commission with
all of the powers granted to a Zoning Commission by law and shall have
the authority and the duty to submit and recommend to the Board of
Aldermen for enactment into an ordinance a comprehensive plan for
the zoning of the City. The zoning plan shall include regulations as to
the location, height, width and bulk of buildings and other structures
and the size of the yards, courts and other open spaces, including offstreet
parking areas surrounding the same, as the Commission shall
determine to be necessary or desirable for the promotion of the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City. The
zoning plan shall also specify the use of such buildings, structures and
land as the Commission shall determine to be necessary or desirable for
the promotion of the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the City.
C. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for
amendments, modifications or revisions of the Zoning Ordinance and
shall forward such application to the Board of Aldermen with its
recommendations thereon.
Section
400.070
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
400.080
AO:500
least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing. All such notices
shall describe briefly the proposed amendment, modification or revision and
indicate the time and place of the hearing. In the event of a general revision
of the Zoning Ordinance, such notices shall not be required.
Section 400.090. Recommendation To The Board of Aldermen [Ord.
No. 5814 §1(6.5), 4-27-2004]
Section 400.100. Meetings and Records [Ord. No. 5814 §1(6.6),
4-27-2004]
Meetings to consider applications may be held on the regularly scheduled
meeting dates or at any other time deemed necessary by the Chairperson.
All meetings shall be open to the public, unless closed pursuant to State law.
The Plan Commission shall keep a written record in the form of minutes of
each meeting, depicting the discussion of the Commission and the vote of
each member present upon each agenda item. Absences and failure to vote
shall also be noted for the record. Copies of minutes and materials used by
the Plan Commission shall be kept on file in the office of the Department
of Planning and Development Services. All notification requirements, public
meetings and/or hearings and availability for examination of records related
to actions by the Plan Commission shall conform with existing Federal,
State and local laws.
A. The Commission shall have authority to recommend regulations as to
size, value and type of construction of buildings proposed to be erected
within the City. Such regulations shall be made giving consideration to
the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular
uses and with a view of conserving the values of buildings and
encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City.
B. The recommendations of the Commission shall not be binding on the
Board of Aldermen, which may approve or disapprove the Commission's
findings. However, the affirmative vote of five (5) members shall be
required to adopt any amendment, modification or revision contrary to
the recommendations of the Commission and the Board of Aldermen
may prescribe by ordinance a period of time which must elapse before
any proposal for amendment, modification or revision which has been
rejected can be resubmitted. No zoning ordinance or any modification,
amendment or revision thereof shall become effective unless a public
hearing has been held by the Board of Aldermen in relation thereto.
Notice of such hearing shall be given in the manner prescribed by law.
Section
400.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.100
AO:501

ARTICLE III
Architectural Review Board
Section 400.110. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §1(7.1),
4-27-2004]
Section 400.120. Composition of Board [Ord. No. 5814 §1(7.2),
4-27-2004]
The Architectural Review Board shall be comprised of seven (7) members
as follows: The City Manager, a member of the Board of Aldermen selected
by the Board and five (5) residents of Clayton. At least one (1) member shall
be a registered architect. The term of office for members shall be three (3)
years.
Section 400.130. Meetings and Records [Ord. No. 5814 §1(7.3),
4-27-2004]
Meetings to consider applications may be held in conjunction with the
regularly scheduled meetings of the City Plan Commission or at any other
time deemed necessary by the Chairperson. All meetings shall be open to
the public, unless closed pursuant to State law. The Architectural Review
Board shall keep a written record in the form of minutes of each meeting,
A. In order to assure that construction/renovation activities are of high
quality design and materials and in general conformity with the style
and design of surrounding structures, an Architectural Review Board
has been established. The Architectural Review Board will conduct
design and material reviews of additions, alterations and improvements
to existing structures, buildings and properties and will also review the
design, material and compatibility of new construction within the City
of Clayton. The goals of the Architectural Review Board are as follows:
1. To assure the continued and long-term quality of Clayton's housing
stock by adoption of architectural review guidelines for residential
construction;
2. To encourage high quality development, both residential and
commercial, and to discourage poor exterior design, appearance
and inferior quality that is likely to have a depreciating effect on
the local environment and surrounding area;
3. To enhance the beauty, livability and prosperity of the community;
4. To encourage originality, creativity and diversity in design and to
avoid monotony;
5. To preserve greenspace by requiring the preservation/replacement
of existing trees and enhanced landscaping; and
6. To ensure residential design that is compatible with the character
inherent within the surrounding neighborhood.
Section
400.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.130
AO:503
depicting the discussion of the Board and the vote of each member present
upon each agenda item. Absences and failure to vote shall also be noted
for the record. Copies of minutes and materials used by the Architectural
Review Board shall be kept on file in the office of the Department of
Planning and Development Services. All notification requirements, public
meetings and/or hearings and availability for examination of records related
to actions by the Architectural Review Board shall conform with existing
Federal, State and local laws.
Section 400.140. Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(7.4), 4-27-2004]
All proposed new construction, alterations, additions, renovations or
signage affecting the exterior appearance of a building or property shall be
submitted to and approved by the Architectural Review Board prior to the
commencement of construction/installation.
Section 400.150. Exceptions [Ord. No. 5814 §1(7.5), 4-27-2004]
A. The City Manager shall have the authority to exclude from
Architectural Review Board consideration minor alterations,
installations, repairs and/or additions not substantially affecting the
exterior appearance of the property. Minor exterior alterations
considered for administrative review include, but are not limited to, the
following:
1. Signage meeting the provisions of the sign ordinance;
2. Awning replacement;
3. Window replacement;
4. Facade changes not effecting the building's character;
5. Mechanical equipment screening;
6. Fences and retaining walls meeting the provisions of the Building
Code;
7. Small additions less than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet;
8. Landscaping;
9. Surface parking lot expansion (twenty percent (20%) or less of the
existing lot size) or reconfiguration;
10. Detached garages/porte-cocheres and carports designed for no
more than two (2) automobiles.
B. The City Manager shall have the discretion to approve the construction/
installation administratively or to refer the proposed project to the
Architectural Review Board for their consideration.
Section
400.130
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
400.160
AO:504
Section 400.160. Application and Plan Requirements [Ord. No.
5814 §1(7.6), 4-27-2004]
Section 400.170. Submission By Applicant [Ord. No. 5814 §1(7.7),
4-27-2004]
The applicant must submit one (1) original and thirteen (13) copies of the
application and all required documentation to the Director of Planning and
Development Services. At the time an application is filed, the applicant
shall pay a fee as required by the fee schedule approved by the Board
of Aldermen. The fee shall be paid to the City of Clayton to the credit
of the General Revenue Fund of the City. Applications and all required
documentation should be submitted twelve (12) days in advance of the
Architectural Review Board meeting date in order to be considered for that
Architectural Review Board agenda.
Section 400.180. Staff Review [Ord. No. 5814 §1(7.8), 4-27-2004]
Upon receipt of the architectural review application, plans and supporting
documents, the Director of Planning and Development Services shall review
the documents to determine completeness. If the Director determines the
submittal is complete, then the submittal can be forwarded to the
Architectural Review Board.
Section 400.190. Architectural Review Board Procedure [Ord. No.
5814 §1(7.9), 4-27-2004]
A. An application form for architectural review shall be completed and
filed with the Department of Planning and Development Services.
Application forms and a list of the required submittal materials are
available at the office of Planning and Development Services during
regular business hours.
B. The application document will provide a description of the project and
plans and other pertinent information required for submittal by the
applicant as part of the architectural review process.
A. The Architectural Review Board shall hear all applications for
architectural review.
B. The Architectural Review Board may approve as submitted, approve
with modifications or deny an application.
1. If the application is approved as submitted, the Director of
Planning and Development Services or his/her designee may
process an application for a building permit.
2. If the Architectural Review Board approves the application with
modifications, the Director of Planning and Development Services
or his/her designee shall issue a permit only after the applicant
submits the appropriate revisions required by the Architectural
Review Board.
Section
400.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.190
AO:505
Section 400.200. Time Limit On Approval [Ord. No. 5814 §1(7.10),
4-27-2004]
Approval shall be void unless a building permit has been issued within
one (1) year from the date of approval. When Architectural Review Board
approval coincides with a development approved by the Board of Aldermen
as a planned unit development or pursuant to a conditional use permit,
Architectural Review Board approval shall expire and become void upon
expiration of the rights granted by the planned unit development or
conditional use permit ordinance. A written request for an extension must
be received by the Director of Planning and Development Services not less
than forty-five (45) days prior to expiration of the original one (1) year
period. The applicant shall bear the burden of providing just cause for delay,
proof that the project remains the same and proof that no circumstances
bearing on the suitability of the project have changed. Approval of a request
for an extension is at the sole direction of the Architectural Review Board.
Section 400.210. Reapplication [Ord. No. 5814 §1(7.11), 4-27-2004]
In the event that the Architectural Review Board denies an application, no
request for a hearing upon the same application or substantially similar
application will be accepted for a period of at least one (1) year from date
of denial by the Architectural Review Board.
Section 400.220. Building Permit Issuance [Ord. No. 5814 §1(7.12),
4-27-2004]
Building permits shall be issued in accordance with the approved
architectural review plans. A copy of the approved plans shall be retained
in the records of the office of the Department of Planning and Development
Services and all building and occupancy permits issued by the Director of
Planning or his/her designee shall conform to the provisions of the plans.
Section 400.230. Appeals [Ord. No. 5814 §1(7.13), 4-27-2004]
An aggrieved party may, within fifteen (15) days of the decision for which
redress is sought, file with the Board of Aldermen a written request for
reconsideration and appeal of any decision of the Architectural Review
Board under this Article. The written request must set forth in a concise
manner the decision being appealed and all grounds known to the appellant
C. All applications shall be promptly considered by the Architectural
Review Board who shall render a decision no later than sixty (60) days
from the date of the meeting at which the item first appears before the
Architectural Review Board. Failure of the Architectural Review Board
to make a decision within that time period will result in the application
being deemed approved and shall make a decision of said Architectural
Review Board unnecessary, unless said time period is extended by
mutual agreement, in writing, of the Architectural Review Board and
the applicant to allow further consideration.
Section
400.190
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
400.230
AO:506
as to wherein and why the decision is allegedly in error. The request for
reconsideration and appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within the time
specified above. A copy of the request and any supporting documents or
materials filed by aggrieved party must be served by the aggrieved party on
the applicant (if different than the aggrieved party) by certified U.S. mail,
return receipt requested, within three (3) days of filing with the City Clerk.
Proof of service on the applicant must be filed with the City Clerk within six
(6) days of filing of the request. The Board of Aldermen may consider the
appeal on the record of the prior decision by the Architectural Review Board
or may, at its sole discretion, receive additional evidence in such manner as
it deems appropriate in light of the circumstances.
Section 400.240. Action By The Board of Aldermen [Ord. No. 5814
§1(7.14), 4-27-2004]
The Board of Aldermen shall hear such interested parties as may desire
to be heard and after said hearing shall approve, modify or disapprove
the application. If the Board of Aldermen approves the application, the
Director of Planning and Development Services or his/her designee shall
promptly issue the requested permit. If the application is approved with
modifications, the Director of Planning and Development Services or his/
her designee will issue a permit after the applicant submits the appropriate
revisions to the plans and/or specifications required by the Board of
Aldermen.
Section
400.230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.240
AO:507
Chapter 405
ZONING REGULATIONS
Section
400.240
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
400.240
AO:508
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 405.010. Title [Ord. No. 5814 §1(1.1), 4-27-2004]
These regulations shall be known, cited and referred to as the Zoning
Ordinance, Chapter 405 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Clayton. All
references to these regulations shall be considered as references to Chapter
405 of the City of Clayton Code of Ordinances.
Section 405.020. Applicability [Ord. No. 5814 §1(1.2), 4-27-2004]
These zoning regulations shall apply only to the areas within the City limits
of the City of Clayton.
Section 405.030. Partial Validity [Ord. No. 5814 §1(1.3), 4-27-2004]
If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause or phrase contained in this
Chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Chapter.
Section 405.040. Purpose [Ord. No. 5814 §1(1.4), 4-27-2004]
A. The purpose of the City of Clayton Zoning Ordinance is to promote and
protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the present and
future residents of and visitors to Clayton in accordance with the
comprehensive general plan by:
1. Dividing the City into districts and regulating the use and intensity
of use of the land, buildings and surrounding open space;
2. Controlling and regulating growth and development to ensure
adequate transportation, parking, utility services and other public
requirements;
3. Providing standards for lot size, building height, density and
setbacks to assure compatibility of properties within a district and
the regulated growth of uses throughout the City;
4. Providing adequate open space for privacy, light, air and
greenspace;
5. Providing protection against fire, flood and other dangers;
6. Protecting the quality of the environment from nuisances
associated with certain uses or constructions;
7. Providing overlay zones to encourage desirable commercial
development;
8. Providing for increased regulation of uses and flexibility of certain
requirements through the conditional use permit and planned unit
development provisions;
Section
405.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.040
AO:509
Section 405.050. Zoning Districts [Ord. No. 5814 §1(1.5),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. B), 7-8-2008]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the City is hereby divided into the
following districts:
"R-1" Large Lot Single-Family Dwelling District
"R-2" Single-Family Dwelling District
"R-3" One- and Two-Family Dwelling District
"R-4" Low Density Multiple-Family Dwelling District
"R-5" Medium-Low Density Multiple-Family Dwelling District
"R-6" Medium Density Multiple-Family Dwelling District
"R-7" High Density Multiple-Family Dwelling District
"C-1" Neighborhood Commercial District
"C-2" General Commercial District
"HDC" High Density Commercial District
"S-1" Service District
"PUD" Planned Unit Development District
"SDD" Special Development District
Section 405.060. Zoning Map [Ord. No. 5814 §1(1.6), 4-27-2004;
Ord. No. 5906 §2, 10-25-2005]
Zoning districts established by this Chapter are bounded and defined as
shown in the official Zoning Map of the City of Clayton, and all amendments
thereto, which, together with all explanatory materials contained thereon,
is hereby made a part of this Chapter.
Section 405.070. Zoning Boundaries [Ord. No. 5814 §1(1.7),
4-27-2004]
District boundaries on the aforementioned map are streets, alleys or lot
lines unless otherwise shown. In the cases where the district designations
are bounded approximately by a street, alley or lot line(s), the same shall
be construed to be the boundary of the district. In case of unsubdivided
property, the district boundary lines shall be determined by use of the scale
appearing on the district map.
Section 405.080. Areas Not Included Within A District [Ord. No.
5814 §1(1.8), 4-27-2004]
9. Conserving and enhancing the value of property; and
10. Protecting residential, commercial and industrial areas from
harmful encroachment by incompatible uses.
Section
405.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.080
AO:510
Section 405.090. Violations and Penalties [Ord. No. 5814 §1(1.9),
4-27-2004]
A. Where property is not specifically within a district shown on the district
map, such property shall be considered as being contained within the
"R-1" Large Lot Single-Family Dwelling District until or unless
otherwise classified by ordinance. All territory, which may hereafter be
annexed to the City, shall be classified in the "R-1" Large Lot Single-
Family Dwelling District until otherwise classified by ordinance.
B. Whenever any public right-of-way is vacated by the Board of Aldermen,
the zoning districts adjoining each side of such public right-of-way shall
automatically be extended to the center of such vacation and all area
included in the vacation shall be subject to the regulations of the
extended districts.
A. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is
used in violation of Sections 89.010 to 89.140, RSMo., or of any
ordinance or other regulation made under authority conferred hereby,
the proper local authorities of the municipality, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to
prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct, or
abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of such building,
structure, or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or
use in or about such premises. Such regulations shall be enforced by an
officer empowered to cause any building, structure, place or premises
to be inspected and examined and to order in writing the remedying of
any condition found to exist therein or thereat in violation of any
provision of the regulations made under authority of Sections 89.010 to
89.140, RSMo.
B. The owner or general agent of a building or premises where a violation
of any provision of said regulations has been committed or shall exist,
or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where
such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the owner, general
agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the building or premises in which
such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the general agent,
architect, builder, contractor or any other person who commits, takes
part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or
premises in which any such violation shall exist shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars
($10.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each and
every day that such violation continues or by both such fine and
imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Notwithstanding the
provisions of Section 82.300, RSMo., however, for the second (2nd) and
subsequent offenses involving the same violation at the same building
or premises, the punishment shall be a fine of not less than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
Section
405.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.090
AO:511
Section 405.100. through Section 405.120. (Reserved)
for each and every day that such violation shall continue or by
imprisonment for ten (10) days for each and every day such violation
shall continue or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion
of the court.
C. Any such person who having been served with an order to remove any
such violation shall fail to comply with such order within ten (10) days
after such service or shall continue to violate any provision of the
regulations made under authority of Sections 89.010 to 89.140, RSMo.,
in the respect named in such order shall also be subject to a civil
penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
Section
405.090
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.100
AO:512
ARTICLE II
General Regulations
Section 405.130. Land Use [Ord. No. 5814 §1(2.1), 4-27-2004; Ord.
No. 5935 §1(2.1), 7-11-2006]
No land, premise or structure shall be used for any purpose other than those
permitted by right or conditional use permit in the subject district.
Section 405.140. Structures in Compliance With Permitted Land
Uses [Ord. No. 5814 §1(2.2), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(2.2),
7-11-2006]
No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered for a use not permitted in the
subject district.
Section 405.150. Structures in Compliance With District Land Area
Regulations [Ord. No. 5814 §1(2.3), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935
§1(2.3), 7-11-2006]
No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged or
structurally altered except in compliance with all regulations established for
the district in which such building is located.
Section 405.160. Temporary Buildings [Ord. No. 5814 §1(2.4),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(2.4), 7-11-2006]
Temporary buildings for construction purposes are permitted in all districts.
Temporary buildings are required to meet specific criteria established by
the City's Building Code.
Section 405.170. Structures in Compliance With Off-Street Parking
and Loading Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(2.5), 4-27-2004; Ord.
No. 5935 §1(2.5), 7-11-2006]
No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed or structurally altered except in conformity with the off-street
parking and loading requirements found in Article XXV of this Chapter.
Off-street parking spaces on the property of the existing building(s) and/
or structure(s) shall be maintained so long as the building(s), structure(s)
and/or use remains unless an equivalent number of spaces are provided at
another off-street location in conformance with this Chapter. In the event of
change in use, the parking requirement for that use will govern.
Section 405.180. Lot Area Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(2.6),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(2.6), 7-11-2006]
The minimum yard and/or open space required for a building/structure by
this Chapter shall not be encroached upon or considered as part of the
required yard or open space for any other building/structure. Additionally,
Section
405.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.180
AO:513
lot area shall not be reduced below the requirements of this Chapter except
as specifically provided for by this Chapter.
Section 405.190. One Structure For One Lot [Ord. No. 5814 §1(2.7),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(2.7), 7-11-2006]
Every primary building, dwelling unit or structure erected, converted,
enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered shall be located on a lot as
defined by this Chapter, and in no case shall there be more than one (1)
main building or one (1) dwelling unit on one (1) lot except as specifically
provided by this Chapter.
Section 405.200. One Family For One Dwelling [Ord. No. 5814
§1(2.8), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(2.8), 7-11-2006]
Every family/household shall live in an individual dwelling unit, and in no
case shall there be more than one (1) family residing in a single dwelling
unit.
Section 405.210. Conditional Uses [Ord. No. 5814 §1(2.9),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(2.9), 7-11-2006]
Any use designated as a conditional use will require a conditional use
permit as defined in Article VII of this Chapter, except as provided for in
Section 405.770 "Requirements".
Section 405.220. Planned Unit Development or Special
Development Districts [Ord. No. 5814 §1(2.10), 4-27-2004; Ord. No.
5935 §1(2.10), 7-11-2006; Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. B), 7-8-2008]
Any use or proposed development within a planned unit development
district or special development district will require a rezoning as defined in
Article XI "Text Amendments And Rezoning" of this Chapter.
Section 405.230. Right of Entry [Ord. No. 5814 §1(2.11), 4-27-2004;
Ord. No. 5935 §1(2.11), 7-11-2006]
The Director of Planning and Development Services or his/her designee
shall have the authority to enter any structure or premises at any
reasonable time when the Director of Planning and Development Services
or his/her designee has reasonable cause to believe that a violation of
this Chapter exists. Prior to entering into a space not otherwise open to
the general public, the Director of Planning and Development Services
or his/her designee shall make reasonable effort to locate the owner or
other person having charge or control of the structure or premises, present
proper identification and request entry. If requested entry is refused or not
obtained, the Director of Planning and Development Services or his/her
designee shall pursue recourse as provided by law.
Section
405.180
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.240
AO:514
Section 405.240. Front Yard Prohibitions [Ord. No. 5814 §1(2.12),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(2.12), 7-11-2006; Ord. No. 6393 §1,
10-13-2015]
Except as provided in Section 505.125, Mobile Food Vending, the sale,
display or storage of food products, magazines, newspapers, commodities,
goods, wares or merchandise is prohibited in the front yard of all zoning
districts. No parking space or facility may be located within any required
front yard except as provided by a conditional use permit.
Section 405.250. Group Homes [Ord. No. 5814 §1(2.13), 4-27-2004;
Ord. No. 5935 §1(2.13), 7-11-2006]
Total occupancy of group homes shall be limited by Missouri Statutes
and the International Property Maintenance Code as related to maximum
occupancy. The exterior appearance of the group home and property shall
be in reasonable conformance with the general neighborhood standards.
No group home shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet from any
existing group home.
Section 405.260. Child Day Care Homes [Ord. No. 5814 §1(2.14),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(2.14), 7-11-2006]
A. Home child care facilities may be permitted as a conditional accessory
use in the "R-1", "R-2" and "R-3" residential zoning districts upon
issuance of a home day care permit as follows:
1. Child care providers caring for five (5) or more children (including
children related to the care provider) may provide home day care
services in a residence if the property owners and, if different, the
adult occupant(s) of the property apply for and are issued a home
day care permit pursuant to this Section.
2. No home day care permit for a child day care home may be granted
to any person who does not personally provide the day care service
to the children in attendance and no facility may be permitted or
allowed to continue to operate if any person not residing in the
home is involved in providing care to the children in attendance.
Any home day care permit issued under the provisions of this
Section shall be so limited such that the number of children on the
premises under the age of thirteen (13) years, including the
operator's children, shall not exceed ten (10) at any one time.
Home day cares with four (4) or fewer children (including the
operator's children) are exempt from a home day care permit. The
granting of a home day care permit for a home day care will be
contingent on the grantee securing a State license for the same.
3. For the purposes of approval of a child day care home, a site plan
need not provide a surveyor's seal or statement of verification. The
application for a home day care permit shall include:
Section
405.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.260
AO:515
a. A diagram of the main building on the property designating the
areas to be utilized in providing the service and the number of
square feet on the premises available for outside recreation for
the children.
b. Any and all physical changes to be made to the interior and
exterior of the property in association with such services.
c. Copy of a State child day care license application and/or any
license issued by the State of Missouri for the same.
d. Detailed information as to the days and hours which service is
to be available.
e. The maximum number of children to be cared for, including
children residing in the home, under the age of thirteen (13)
years.
f. Information as to how parking for clients is to be provided.
4. Upon receipt of the home day care permit application, plans and
supporting documents, the Director of Planning and Development
Services or his/her designee shall review the documents to
determine completeness. If the Director determines the submittal
is complete, then the submittal can be forwarded to the Plan
Commission.
5. The Plan Commission may approve as submitted, recommend
additional conditions to mitigate possible negative impacts or deny
the home day care permit. It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to clearly establish that the following criteria are met:
a. The service can be provided without disturbing the appearance
and tranquility of the neighborhood.
b. The premises can accommodate the reasonably required offstreet
parking and any physical changes reasonably necessary
to provide the service.
c. There are at least seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of
contiguous fenced outside play area in the rear yard of the
premises regardless of the number of children to be cared for
and that such play area does not include any common ground,
public property or any other property where possession is in
fact shared with other residents or where other residents have
the right to use such property.
6. The application may be approved subject to meeting the
aforementioned criteria and such reasonable conditions as may be
necessary to avoid adverse impact on nearby properties. Any
permittee shall also be required to obtain and maintain in force a
business license as required by the Finance Department of the City
of Clayton.
Section
405.260
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.260
AO:516
Section 405.270. Drug Rehabilitation Facility [Ord. No. 5814
§1(2.15), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(2.15), 7-11-2006]
Section 405.280. Townhouse Dwellings. [Ord. No. 5814 §1(2.16),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(2.16), 7-11-2006; Ord. No. 6509,
11-28-2017106]
7. Child day care home approval shall not be issued, and may be
revoked if previously issued, if the operator thereof or any person
regularly on the premises has committed an act demonstrating a
lack of fitness to care for children including, but not limited to, the
following:
a. Child molestation; or
b. Abuse; or
c. Theft; or
d. Fraud; or
e. Any other act of moral turpitude.
8. Child day care home approval shall not be issued, and may be
revoked if previously issued, if the operator of the facility operates
it in such a manner that the residential character of the
neighborhood is disturbed. For this purpose, the operator shall not
permit the following:
a. Excessive noise in connection with the operation of the facility
which would annoy a person of ordinary sensibility; or
b. Children to trespass on property where there is no permission
for the children to enter; or
c. Operation of the facility in such a manner as to cause damage
to the property of others; or
d. Operation of the facility in such a manner as to cause or
contribute to causing the permitted premises to become
deteriorated.
A. Inpatient or outpatient facilities for the treatment of alcohol and other
drug abuse to be operated and located as stand-alone building(s) only.
Drug rehabilitation facilities are conditionally permitted uses within the
Service District ("S-1") Zoning District. Drug rehabilitation facilities are
subject to the approval of the conditional use permit by the Board of
Aldermen as per the provisions of Article VII of this Chapter.
B. The exterior appearance of the facility must be approved by the
Architectural Review Board to ascertain that it is consistent and
compatible with its surroundings.
Section
405.260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.280
AO:517
Section 405.290. Detached Multi-Unit Housing/Multiple Structures
On A Single Lot [Ord. No. 5814 §1(2.17), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935
§1(2.17), 7-11-2006]
Section 405.300. Home Occupations [Ord. No. 5814 §1(2.18),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(2.18), 7-11-2006]
A. Approval of townhouse dwellings occupying more than one (1) platted
lot shall require an approved subdivision plat.
B. Townhouse dwellings may be constructed on adjacent separate lots (fee
simple) with a party wall connecting the units and, in such cases, each
individual lot shall meet the minimum lot width and lot area
requirements provided in this Article, but the side yard setback
requirement at the common wall between units shall not apply.
C. No row of townhouse dwellings shall contain more than five (5)
connected dwelling units.
D. In addition, each dwelling unit shall be provided with outdoor living
area in the form of individual patios, balconies, yards or terraces equal
to at least twenty percent (20%) of the floor area of each dwelling unit.
Enclosed garages shall not be included in the floor area calculations.
A. A conditional use permit is required in order to allow the development
of detached multi-unit housing/multiple structures on a single lot.
B. Detached multi-family dwellings may be constructed on multiple lots
(fee simple), in such cases, each individual lot shall meet the minimum
lot area, lot width, setback, height and parking requirements.
C. Detached multi-family dwellings constructed on a single lot (i.e.,
condominium; not fee simple) must meet the minimum lot area,
setback, height and parking requirements.
D. In addition, each dwelling unit shall be provided with outdoor living
area in the form of individual patios, balconies, yards or terraces equal
to at least twenty percent (20%) of the floor area of each dwelling unit.
Enclosed garages shall not be included in the floor area calculations.
A. A home occupation is any profession being conducted in a residential
dwelling unit. The regulations governing home occupations are as
follow:
1. The home occupation must not employ on the premise persons not
residing in the home as part of the immediate family.
2. Signage consists of only one (1) non-illuminated nameplate no
more than one (1) square foot in area and attached to the building.
106. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 6509 also changed the title of this Section from "Attached Single-
Family Dwelling Structures (Town House)" to "Townhouse Dwellings."
Section
405.280
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.300
AO:518
Section 405.310. Kiosks [Ord. No. 5814 §1(2.19), 4-27-2004; Ord.
No. 5935 §1(2.19), 7-11-2006]
3. No mechanical equipment may be installed except that which has a
normal domestic function.
4. No commodity may be stored on or delivered to others from or at
the premises.
5. No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area of any
story may be used for the home occupation.
6. Home occupations offering services to the general public on the
premises and causing any one (1) of the following nuisances shall
be prohibited:
a. Unreasonable noise.
b. Offensive odor.
c. Smoke on the premises.
d. Having an adverse impact upon the residential character of a
neighborhood, including the need for more parking or creates
additional traffic other than that which is normally created by a
residential use of a property.
7. Any home occupation that involves the congregation of two (2) or
more non-resident employees, clients, subcontractors or other
persons engaging in business activity at a dwelling unit are
prohibited.
8. No commercial vehicle(s) in connection with a home occupation
shall be stored or parked on the public street or on the premises,
except within a private garage.
A. An exterior self-standing accessory structure in a public place used for
providing and disseminating information. Privately owned and operated
kiosks may be approved as part of a larger development involving site
plan review and/or a planned unit development rezoning, if the
development provides adequate open space or public area. No privately
owned kiosks may be placed in the public right-of-way.
B. City-owned and operated kiosks which disseminate public information
may be placed on City-owned property. Additionally, City-owned and
operated kiosks may be located in the public right-of-way, subject to
coordination with and approval by the Department of Public Works.
C. All kiosks, privately and publicly owned and operated, must comply
with the following regulations:
1. Must be maintained in a clean and orderly manner.
2. Must be maintained free from paper and other debris.
Section
405.300
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.320
AO:519
Section 405.320. Special Development Districts, Planned Unit
Developments and Existing Uses [Ord. No. 5814 §1(2.20),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(2.20), 7-11-2006; Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att.
B), 7-8-2008]
Section 405.330. Second Units (Carriage Houses/Granny Units)
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(2.21), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(2.21),
7-11-2006]
A. Special development districts approved prior to the enactment of this
Chapter shall be deemed to be the same as the existing special
development district. Any enlargement, alteration or extension of an
existing special development district shall be considered in accordance
to Section 405.1320 of this Chapter.
B. Conditional uses with a planned unit development approved prior to the
provisions for planned unit development districts shall be deemed to
have received a rezoning to a planned unit development district.
However, any enlargement, alteration or extension to a conditional use
with a planned unit development deemed approved requires a rezoning
to a planned unit development district approved by the Board of
Aldermen.
A. A second (2nd) unit is a type of accessory structure, either attached or
detached, which provides complete, independent living facilities for one
(1) or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking and sanitation and is located on the same site as the
principal residence. Second (2nd) units are permitted subject to
approval of a conditional use permit as per Article VII of this Chapter
and the following criteria:
1. Second (2nd) units are only permitted in the "R-1" and "R-2" Large
Lot and Single-Family Residential Dwelling Districts, respectively.
2. If a second (2nd) unit is to be occupied permanently, then the
occupants must be related to the residents of the principal
residence. The second (2nd) unit occupants must be related by
blood, marriage or adoption or be employed by the principal
residence and do work on the grounds.
3. A second (2nd) unit may not be rented, sold, transferred or
assigned separately from the principal residence. The owner shall
record a deed restriction to this effect as part of the conditional use
permit process required for such second (2nd) unit.
4. Maximum living area for a second (2nd) unit in the "R-1" Large Lot
Single-Family Dwelling District is two thousand (2,000) square feet.
5. Maximum living area for a second (2nd) unit in the "R-2" Single-
Family Dwelling District is one thousand (1,000) square feet.
Section
405.320
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.330
AO:520
Section 405.340. Alcohol Service as Accessory Use. [Ord. No. 6398
§2, 10-27-2015]
6. An accessory structure containing a second (2nd) unit may not
exceed twenty (20) feet in height or occupy more than thirty-five
percent (35%) of the area of a required rear yard, but no accessory
structure shall be closer than ten (10) feet to the principal building
nor closer than five (5) feet from any side or rear property line.
7. An accessory building that is not part of the principal structure
shall be located not less than sixty (60) feet from the front property
line.
8. Required parking facilities (i.e., garage) may not be demolished or
converted in order to construct a second (2nd) unit, unless the
required parking space(s) are replaced concomitantly on the site.
9. Each second (2nd) unit shall be provided with one (1) additional
parking space in addition to the parking required for the principal
residence.
10. The second (2nd) unit shall conform to the color, material,
architectural style and detailing of the principal residence and shall
meet all other applicable Building Code requirements, zoning
regulations, developments standards and guidelines.
11. A landscape plan which provides for adequate screening of the
second (2nd) unit from neighboring properties as determined by
the landscape architect on contract with the City of Clayton.
12. Any waiver from the above-stated criteria will require approval of a
variance from the Board of Adjustment.
A. The service of alcoholic beverages by the drink where it is intended as
merely adjunct to the operation of a grocery store or package liquor
store shall be permitted as follows:
1. All requirements pursuant to Chapter 600 of the Clayton Municipal
Code, including proper licensure and locational restrictions, etc.,
shall apply.
2. The facility shall not be advertised or otherwise held out to be a
drinking establishment, restaurant, bar or tavern.
3. Establishments with alcohol service as an accessory use shall
affirm by affidavit, prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit,
that the sale of alcohol to patrons for consumption on the premises
will at all times be carried out in accord with the requirements of
this Section and shall be subordinate and accessory to the
operation of the grocery or package liquor sales business operated
on the premises.
Section
405.330
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.340
AO:521
Section 405.350. Performance Standards And Regulations Relating
To Medical Marihuana Facilities. [Ord. No. 6597, 6-11-2019]
4. An establishment with alcohol service as an accessory use shall not
convert to a restaurant or other similar alcoholic beverage
establishment without first complying with the City's Land Use
Code pursuant to Chapters 400 — 430, of the Clayton Code.
5. The business shall be primarily engaged in the retail sale of
distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages in the original package
(package liquor store) or shall be classified as a grocery store,
pursuant to Article III, Definitions.
6. Package liquor stores and grocery stores shall derive at least
seventy-five percent (75%) of their gross annual sales of alcohol
from original packages, for consumption off the premises.
7. Hours for the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
premises shall be in accordance with all the requirements of a
conditional use permit (where required) but in no case shall the
sale of alcoholic beverages take place outside of the normal
business hours of the retail store.
8. If otherwise properly licensed to do so, the grocery store or
package liquor store may offer educational classes related to
alcoholic beverages, with or without a fee, and with or without
complimentary tastings.
A. The purpose of this Section is to regulate the placement and licensing
of facilities for the dispensing, selling, storing, and testing of marijuana
and marijuana-infused products, to the extent permitted by the
Missouri Constitution, applicable statutes enacted by the General
Assembly, and regulations promulgated by the Missouri Department of
Health and Senior Services, and to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the residents, businesses, and property owners in the City.
1. No marijuana-related use, activity or facility shall emit an odor or in
any way cause a public nuisance per Chapter 220 of this Code.
Appropriate ventilation systems to prevent any odor of marijuana
or fumes from leaving the premises or other changes to the
facilities can be required if a public nuisance violation occurs.
2. No more than a total of three (3) medical marijuana dispensary
facilities will be allowed within the City limits.
3. Each medical marijuana testing or medical marijuana dispensary
facility shall be located on properties that meet the following
distance requirements:
a. No marijuana-related uses shall be operated or maintained
within five hundred (500) feet of any school, child day-care
center or place of worship.
Section
405.340
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.350
AO:522
b. No marijuana-related uses shall be operated or maintained
within five hundred (500) feet of another marijuana-related use
except when marijuana sales represent less than five percent
(5%) of the dollar volume of business in a state or federally
licensed pharmacy. Marijuana-related uses under the same
ownership and on the same property are exempt from this
requirement.
c. The distances described in this Section shall be computed by
direct measurement from the nearest property boundary of
land upon which a building or buildings are used for the above
purposes to the nearest portion of the property boundary
housing the medical marijuana testing facility, or medical
marijuana dispensary facility, using a straight line.
4. Each medical marijuana cultivation facility or medical marijuanainfused
products manufacturing facility shall be located on
properties that meet the following distance requirements and are
subject to the following land area requirements:
a. No marijuana-related cultivation or manufacturing uses shall
be operated or maintained within seven hundred and fifty (750)
feet of any school, child day-care center or place of worship.
b. No marijuana-related cultivation or manufacturing facility
shall be operated or maintained within one thousand five
hundred (1,500) feet of another marijuana-related use.
Marijuana-related uses under the same ownership and on the
same property are exempt from this requirement.
c. The distances described in this Section shall be computed by
direct measurement from the nearest property boundary of
land upon which a building or buildings are used for the above
purposes to the nearest portion of the property boundary
housing the medical marijuana manufacturing or testing
facility, or medical marijuana dispensary facility, using a
straight line.
d. No marijuana-related cultivation or manufacturing facility
shall be located, operated or maintained on property that is
less than seven (7) acres in size.
5. The waiting area and the area of a medical marijuana dispensary
facility where marijuana or marijuana-infused products are
physically delivered to a qualifying patient or primary caregiver
shall be separated by a solid wall and solid door so that persons in
the waiting area are obstructed from observing the delivery of the
marijuana or marijuana-infused products to the qualifying patient
or primary caregiver. No loitering will be permitted at any facility.
Section
405.350
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.350
AO:523
6. No marijuana or marijuana-infused product shall be displayed to be
visible through glass, windows, or doors by a person of normal
visual acuity standing at the outside perimeter of a facility.
7. Paraphernalia as referenced in Section 215.540, excluding (1)f.
RSMo., as may be amended, may be lawfully sold at a medical
marijuana dispensary facility. Such items may not be publicly
displayed and may be sold, displayed and provided only to patients
or primary caregivers of patients.
8. The sale or consumption of alcohol within a facility is prohibited.
9. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed in any
portion of a medical marijuana testing facility, cultivation facility or
products manufacturing facility. The entrance to a facility shall be
clearly and legibly posted with notice indicating that persons under
the age of eighteen (18) are precluded from entering the premises.
10. A medical marijuana dispensary facility shall not dispense more
than four (4) ounces of a usable form of medical marijuana per
patient in a thirty-day period, except as otherwise allowed by law
[Art. 2, Sec. 3(13)]. All marijuana sold or otherwise distributed
shall be in a sealed container. Such packaging shall have a label
that indicates the quantity and advises the purchaser that the
marijuana is intended for use solely by the patient, and that any
resale or redistribution to any third person is a criminal violation.
11. The consumption, inhalation or other personal use of marijuana or
medical marijuana-infused products on or within the premises of a
medical marijuana testing facility, medical marijuana dispensary
facility, medical marijuana cultivation facility or medical marijuanainfused
products manufacturing facility is prohibited, except that a
medical marijuana testing facility may consume marijuana during
the testing process and only as the consumption relates to the
testing process.
12. Maximum Hours Of Operation.
a. Dispensary facilities are limited to the following hours of
operation: 8:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M. Monday through Friday,
10:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. Saturday and Sunday and shall be
closed on federally recognized holidays.
b. Testing facilities are limited to the following hours of
operation: 8:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M. Monday through Friday and
shall be closed on federally recognized holidays.
13. Security Plans. Marijuana testing facilities, medical marijuana
cultivation facilities, medical marijuana-infused products
manufacturing facility and medical marijuana dispensary facilities
shall provide adequate security on the premises, including, but not
limited to, the following:
Section
405.350
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.350
AO:524
a. Surveillance. Security surveillance cameras installed to
monitor each entrance to the facility along with the interior
and exterior of the premises to discourage and to facilitate the
reporting and investigation of criminal acts and nuisance
activities occurring at the premises. Security video shall be
preserved for at least ninety (90) days and be made available to
Law Enforcement Officers upon demand.
b. Inventory. All salable inventory of marijuana must be kept and
stored in a secured, locked manner.
c. Safe. A locking safe or secure vault permanently affixed or
built into the premises to store any currency on site.
d. Alarm System. Professionally monitored robbery alarm and
burglary alarm systems shall be installed and maintained in
good working condition within the facility at all times.
e. Emergency Contact. Each facility shall provide the Chief of
Police with the name, cellular telephone number, electronic
mail address, and facsimile number of an on-site facility
employee to whom the City may provide notice of any
operating problems associated with the facility. It shall be the
responsibility of the licensee to keep up-to-date the contact
information of the facility employee.
14. Operating Plans. As a condition of processing of a business license
application, a facility operator shall provide at the time of filing the
business license application a detailed operations plan and, upon
issuance of a license, shall operate the facility in accordance with
the plan. Such plan shall include:
a. Floor Plan. A plan showing the layout of the facility and the
principal uses of the floor area depicted. A medical marijuana
dispensary facility shall have a lobby waiting area at the
entrance to the center to receive clients, and a separate and
secure designated area for dispensing medical marijuana to
qualified patients or designated primary caregivers. The
primary entrance of any stand-alone facility shall be located
and maintained clear of barriers, landscaping and similar
obstructions so that it is clearly visible from public streets,
sidewalks or site driveways. All storage areas shall be shown
and labeled.
b. Odor Controls. A facility shall provide a plan for the mitigation
and control of odors and other environmental impacts which
may emanate from a facility. Such plan shall describe the
ventilation system for the premises. Appropriate ventilation
systems to prevent any odor of marijuana or fumes from
leaving the premises of a facility or other changes to a facility
may be required to abate a public nuisance.
Section
405.350
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.350
AO:525
Section 405.360. through Section 405.380. (Reserved)
15. Each facility shall at all times possess a current City business
license. By obtaining a City business license, the facility licensee
irrevocably consents to the immediate closure and cessation of
operation of the facility in addition to all other penalties or
remedies available by law for the failure to possess a current City
business license.
16. It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, transmit, give,
dispense or otherwise provide medical marijuana as a home
occupation.
17. No medical marijuana dispensary facility, medical marijuana
testing facility, medical marijuana cultivation facility or medical
marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility shall be
operated within the City without a valid license issued by the
Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services. No marijuana
or marijuana-infused products shall be acquired, certified,
delivered, processed, sold, stored, tested, or transported within the
City, except by persons or entities licensed for such purposes by the
Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services.
18. Application Review Process.
a. Site Review Permit. This preliminary permit reviews the
proposed marijuana-related use for compliance with the City's
zoning and location standards prior to issuance of a State
license. A draft of proposed security and floor plans should also
be provided. Site review approval shall expire, and be of no
effect, one (1) year after the date of issuance thereof.
b. Business License. Once State licensing has been received, the
business license shall include all relevant State approvals and
approved operating plans and security plans.
c. Occupancy Permit. Once a business license and site review
permit is obtained, the applicant shall apply for an occupancy
permit.
Section
405.350
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.360
AO:526
ARTICLE III
Definitions
Section 405.390. Definitions [Ord. No. 5814 §1(Art. 3), 4-27-2004;
Ord. No. 6010 §1, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. B), 7-8-2008;
Ord. No. 6159 §1, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 6191 §2, 2-28-2012]
A. In General.
1. Unless a contrary intention clearly applies, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings given in the following definitions
for the purposes of this Chapter. Words and phrases which are not
defined shall be given their usual meaning except where the
context clearly indicates a different or specific meaning.
2. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the
singular number shall include the plural and the plural of the
singular; the word "premises" shall include the word "structure"
and "building"; the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory; the
words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended",
"designed" or "arranged to be occupied"; the word "lot" includes
the words "plot" or "parcel"; and the word "person" includes a firm,
association, organization, partnership, trust, company or
corporation as well as an individual. Any word not herein defined
shall be as defined in any recognized standard English dictionary.
B. Definitions. As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise
indicates, the following terms mean:
ACADEMY — Academy to teach painting, dancing, theater, music and
similar disciplines.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE — A subordinate building or use
customarily incidental to and located on the same lot occupied by the
main building or use, subordinate in area, extent or purposes to the
main building, limited to and contributing to the comfort, convenience
or necessity of the occupants of the main building. An accessory
building that is not part of the principal structure shall be located not
less than sixty (60) feet from the front property line.
Section
405.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.390
AO:527
ACRE — Unit of land measure; forty-three thousand five hundred sixty
(43,560) square feet. As a square, each segment measures two hundred
eight and seventy-one hundredths (208.71) feet.
ADULT USES — Specifies the types of establishments that offer for sale
or for viewing, for any form of consideration, any books, magazines,
periodicals or other printed matter, instruments, devices or
paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with sexual
activities or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides
or other visual representations that are characterized by an emphasis
upon the depiction or description of sexual activities or anatomical
areas; including massage parlors where, for any form of consideration,
massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, electric or magnetic treatment or
similar treatment or manipulation of the human body is administered,
unless such treatment or manipulation is administered by a medical
practitioner, chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist or similar
professional person licensed by the State. This definition does not
include an athletic club, health club, school, gymnasium, reducing
salon, spa or similar establishment where massage or similar
manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or accessory
service. Adult uses may not be located within two hundred (200) feet
of any school, place of religious worship or any parcel in which another
existing adult use is located.
AGGRIEVED PARTY — For the purpose of standing to file permitted
appeals from decisions made in the course of administration of the
City's land use regulations, an "aggrieved party" is either:
1. The applicant, or
One who:
Suffers a demonstrable and material adverse effect from the
decision at issue, and
a.
Is the owner or occupant of property within two hundred (200)
feet of the subject property as measured from all boundaries of
the subject property.
b.
2.
Section
405.390
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.390
AO:528
ALLEY — A public or private thoroughfare which affords only a
secondary means of access to abutting property.
ALTERATION — A physical change in a structure or an addition to
a structure. The term "alteration" includes renovation, modification,
rehabilitation and restoration.
AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNA (AS USED IN REGULATING HOME
ANTENNAS, SATELLITE DISHES, COMMERCIAL ANTENNAS AND
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURES) — Any antenna that is owned and
operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the FCC.
ANTENNA (AS USED IN REGULATING HOME ANTENNAS,
SATELLITE DISHES, COMMERCIAL ANTENNAS AND ANTENNA
SUPPORT STRUCTURES) — Any device, array or antenna of any kind
including, but not limited to, whip antennas, panel antennas and
satellite antennas that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic
signals for voice, data or video communication purposes including, but
not limited to, television, AM/FM radio, microwave, cellular telephone
and similar forms of communications, but excluding satellite dishes and
home antennas.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE (AS USED IN REGULATING HOME
ANTENNAS, SATELLITE DISHES, COMMERCIAL ANTENNAS AND
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURES) — Any structure designed and
constructed or otherwise used for the support or mounting of antennas.
For purposes of this Article, the term "antenna support structure" shall
also include any related and necessary cabinet or shelter when the
context so indicates.
APARTMENT HOUSE — See "DWELLING, MULTIPLE".
APPLICANT — An individual or a corporation, firm, partnership, joint
venture, association, organization or entity of any kind, including any
shareholder, owner, officer, partner, joint venturer or member of such
entity or any other person holding an ownership interest in such entity.
ART GALLERY — A place or establishment for art exhibitions and
sales. For the purposes of parking regulations, an "art gallery" shall be
considered a general retail use.
ATRIUM — A multiple story open area that is enclosed or partially
enclosed by glass walls or a glass roof or both. 107
AUTOMOBILE AGENCY — A facility used for the sale and display of
automobiles both new and used.
AVERAGE SETBACK — Where fifty percent (50%) or more of the
frontage along any block face is improved with buildings that have
observed a front yard line with a variation in depth of not more than
ten (10) feet, the average of such front yard lines shall be the minimum
setback observed in such block face in lieu of the required front yard
107. Editor's Note: The former definition of Attached Single-Family Developments, which
immediately followed, was repealed 11-28-2017 by Ord. No. 6509.
Section
405.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.390
AO:529
setback. For example, when calculating the average setback for a block
face with ten (10) homes, where nine (9) homes have setbacks ranging
from twenty-five (25) feet to thirty-five (35) feet and the remaining
home has a forty (40) foot setback, the home with the forty (40) foot
setback is not included in the calculation for the average. No front yard
shall be required to exceed the maximum of sixty (60) feet.
BALCONY — An exterior floor projecting from the wall of an upper
story, enclosed by a railing or balustrade, with an entrance from the
building and supported by the structure without additional independent
supports. This definition has also been amended within Chapter 410.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building which is partly below and
partly above grade and having at least one-half (½) of its height above
grade.
BUFFER AREA — An area separating two (2) or more land uses from
one another.
BUILDABLE AREA — That part of the lot remaining to be built upon
after provision of all required front, side and rear yards setbacks are
considered.
BUILDABLE WIDTH — The width of the lot left to be built upon after
the side yard setbacks are provided.
Section
405.390
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.390
AO:530
BUILDING — Any structure, including a roof supported by walls or
columns, for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals,
chattels or property of any kind, and when separated by dividing walls
without openings, each portion of such building so separated, shall be
deemed a separate building.
BUILDING (AS USED IN REGULATING PARKING) — Any structure
occupied or intended for supporting or sheltering any occupancy.
BUILDING BULK — The height, depth, width, density and volume of a
building.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance from grade to the
highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard
roof or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of a gable, hip
or gambrel roof. In the case of new construction and building additions,
building height shall be measured from existing grade prior to the
commencement of any construction.
BUILDING-INTEGRATED RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEM — A
renewable energy system that is an integral part of a principal or
accessory building, rather than a separate mechanical device, replacing
or substituting for an architectural or structural component of the
building which contributes to the design of the building including, but
not limited to, photovoltaic or hot water solar systems contained within
roofing materials, windows, skylights and awnings.
BUILDING-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy
system affixed to either a principal or accessory structure on a lot.
CABINET (AS USED IN REGULATING HOME ANTENNAS, SATELLITE
DISHES, COMMERCIAL ANTENNAS AND ANTENNA SUPPORT
STRUCTURES) — A casing or console, not to include a shelter, used for
the protection and security of communications equipment associated
with one (1) or more antennas, the horizontal dimensions of which do
not exceed four (4) feet by six (6) feet.
Section
405.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.390
AO:531
CAFETERIA — A restaurant in which food is displayed on counters
and customers serve themselves. For the purposes of this Chapter,
cafeterias which are open to and serve the general public shall be
considered a restaurant use and must comply with all regulations
applicable to restaurant uses.
Additionally, cafeterias that are closed to and do not serve the general
public shall not be considered a restaurant use. Cafeteria uses which
are exclusively open to and serve on-site employees and/or residents
shall be deemed to be an accessory use of the principal use.
CARRIAGE HOUSE — See "SECOND UNIT".
CELLAR — Same as a basement, except that a cellar has more than onehalf
(½) of its height from floor below grade.
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (AS USED IN REGULATING
PARKING) — The Central Business District shall be that area bounded
by the following perimeter: Beginning at the intersection between the
east most City limits and Forest Park Parkway, then west along Forest
Park Parkway, then north along Brentwood Boulevard, then west along
Forsyth Boulevard, then west behind the south property lines of the
parcels on the south side of Maryland Avenue to the west most City
limits, then north along the west most City limits, then east to include
all commercially zoned properties along the north side of Maryland
Avenue (from the west most City limits to the east side of Central
Avenue), also including all properties fronting onto Meramec Avenue
(from Maryland Avenue to Kingsbury Avenue), then east along
Maryland Avenue to Hanley Road, then south along Hanley to the alley
just north of Forsyth Boulevard, then along the alley to the east most
City limits, then south along the east most City limits to Forest Park
Parkway, as depicted by the map below; except those areas or projects
designated as planned unit developments or special development
districts.
Section
405.390
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.390
AO:532
CHILD DAY CARE HOME — A home occupied as a residence by the day
care provider in which the provision of care and supervision to children
under the age of thirteen (13) years is provided in the home by the
occupant(s) of the home to non-occupants of the home on a recurring
basis, whether or not the dwelling occupant receives compensation for
such services. A home day care shall not include the occasional hosting
of a play group.
A child day care home may be operated only in accordance with the
conditions and restrictions of Article II, Section 405.260 of this Chapter.
CHURCH — See "PLACE OF RELIGIOUS WORSHIP".
CLINIC — An establishment where patients who are not lodged
overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of
physicians practicing medicine together.
CLUB — A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated
by a corporation, association, person or persons for a social,
educational or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to
render a service which is customarily carried on as a business.
CO-USE (AS USED IN REGULATING HOME ANTENNAS, SATELLITE
DISHES, COMMERCIAL ANTENNAS AND ANTENNA SUPPORT
STRUCTURES) — The location and use of two (2) or more antennas on
a single antenna supporting structure.
COMMERCIAL ANTENNA (AS USED IN REGULATING HOME
ANTENNAS, SATELLITE DISHES, COMMERCIAL ANTENNAS AND
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURES) — An antenna used for
commercial purposes.
Section
405.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.390
AO:533
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES (AS USED IN REGULATING PARKING) —
Those vehicles other than employees' own vehicles parked and used for
personal transportation during normal working hours and employed by
a business for the delivery of goods and services, whether or not they
are parked on the premises overnight. In addition, where employees'
personal vehicles are regularly used for delivery of goods to customers
and loading/unloading of supplies or goods, they shall be considered as
commercial vehicles.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use allowed in a zoning district only after a
permit is granted according to provisions of Article VII of this Chapter.
CONDOMINIUMS — All the land, property and space comprising the
parcel or parcels, all improvements and structures erected, constructed
or contained therein or thereon, including the building and all
easements, rights and opportunities belonging thereto and other
fixtures and equipment intended for the mutual use, benefit or
enjoyment of the unit owners, subject to the provision of Chapter 448,
RSMo., and this Chapter.
COURTYARD — An open space with or without direct street access
around which is arranged a single building or a group of related
buildings.
DAY (CALENDAR DAY) — For the purposes of this Chapter, a calendar
day as defined herein. A calendar day shall be construed to mean any
twenty-four (24) hour period beginning and ending at Midnight. For the
purposes of computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this
Chapter, the day of the act or event on which the designated period of
time begins to run is not to be included. The last day of the period so
computed is to be included.
DECK — An exterior floor supported on at least two (2) opposing
sides by an adjacent structure and/or posts, piers or other independent
support.
DEVELOPMENTAL STANDARDS — Regulations and standards,
including developmental standards and use limitations as defined by
the size, bulk or siting conditions of buildings or land uses located
within a designated use district.
DIRECTOR (AS USED IN REGULATING HOME ANTENNAS,
SATELLITE DISHES, COMMERCIAL ANTENNAS, ANTENNA
SUPPORT STRUCTURES AND FACILITIES) — The City's Director of
Planning and Development or his/her designee.
DISGUISED SUPPORT STRUCTURE (AS USED IN REGULATING
HOME ANTENNAS, SATELLITE DISHES, COMMERCIAL ANTENNAS
AND ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURES) — Any free-standing,
manmade structure designed for the support of antennas, the presence
of which is camouflaged or concealed as an architectural or natural
feature. Such structures may include, but are not limited to, clock
towers, campaniles, observation towers, pylon sign structures, water
towers, artificial trees, flagpoles and light standards.
Section
405.390
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.390
AO:534
DISPLAY WINDOW — A window of at least eight (8) horizontal feet
in length installed in the wall of a first (1st) or second (2nd) floor of
a retail establishment fronting a street for the purpose of displaying
merchandise or products offered for sale on the premises.
DORMITORY — A building or portion thereof which contains living
quarters for students, staff or members of an accredited college,
university, boarding school, theological school, hospital, religious order
or comparable organization; provided that said building is owned and
managed by said organization.
DRUG REHABILITATION FACILITY — Inpatient or outpatient facilities
for the treatment of alcohol and other drug abuse to be operated and
located as stand-alone building(s) only.
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof which is designed and
used exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE — A building or portion thereof designed and
used for occupancy by three (3) or more families each in a separate
dwelling unit.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A building designed and used for
occupancy by one (1) family.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A type of multiple unit dwelling,
comprised of three (3) or more attached single dwelling units erected in
a row and separated from an adjoining unit(s) by a vertical party wall or
other approved fire-rated wall without openings, except that basement
areas used as a common garage area for the units need not have such
separation. A townhouse may occupy a single platted lot (condominium)
or multiple platted lots (fee simple), subject to the provisions of Section
405.280.[Ord. No. 6509, 11-28-2017]
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing two (2) separate
dwelling units designed and used for occupancy by two (2) families.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent
living facilities occupied by or intended to be occupied as separate
living unit by a single family as defined herein, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
Section
405.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.390
AO:535
EMPLOYEES (AS USED IN REGULATING PARKING) — The regular
working staff (paid, volunteer or otherwise) at maximum strength
necessary to operate, maintain or service any given facility or use under
normal levels of service. Includes the teachers and administrators in an
accredited school or degree program, including hospital-based medical
education programs.
ENCROACHMENT — An extension of a structure or use into the
required setback or public right-of-way.
ENTRYWAY (CBD DESIGN CONCEPT) — As defined in the Clayton
Business Districts Master Plan, the Forsyth corridor should serve as the
spine of Clayton's Central Business District, with the west entrance at
Shaw Park and the east entrance at the Clayton Plaza. These entrances
are envisioned as greenspace areas.
ERECT — To build, construct, install, attach, hang, place, inscribe,
suspend, affix, paint or repaint.
FAA (AS USED IN REGULATING HOME ANTENNAS, SATELLITE
DISHES, COMMERCIAL ANTENNAS AND ANTENNA SUPPORT
STRUCTURES) — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FACILITIES (AS USED IN REGULATING FACILITIES) — A network or
system, or any part thereof, used for providing or delivering a service
and consisting of one (1) or more lines, pipes, irrigation systems, wires,
cables, fibers, conduit facilities, cabinets, poles, vaults, pedestals,
boxes, appliances, antennas, transmitters, radios, towers, gates,
meters, appurtenances, or other equipment; provided however, that
facilities shall not include individual service drops of one hundred (100)
feet or less, temporary construction facilities, or private sewer laterals.
FACILITIES PERMIT (AS USED IN REGULATING FACILITIES) — A
permit granted by the City for the placement of facilities on private
property.
FAMILY — An individual or married couple and the children thereof
(by blood, marriage or adoption) and no more than one (1) other
person related directly to the individual or married couple by blood or
marriage; a group of three (3) or fewer individuals residing together in
a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit except in living units with
four (4) or more bedrooms (bedrooms as defined by the applicable City
code), four (4) or fewer unrelated individuals shall constitute a family.
City Code provisions regulating overcrowding shall supersede the right
to reside as a "family" as defined by this Section. The definition of
"family" shall not be construed to include hotels, clubs, rooming houses,
fraternity or sorority homes or religious congregate living
arrangements.
FCC (AS USED IN REGULATING HOME ANTENNAS, SATELLITE
DISHES, COMMERCIAL ANTENNAS AND ANTENNA SUPPORT
STRUCTURES) — The Federal Communications Commission.
Section
405.390
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.390
AO:536
FENCE — A constructed barrier between portions of a lot or between
two (2) or more lots or between a lot and a public right-of-way.
FINISHED GRADE — A reference plane representing the final ground
level adjoining the building at all exterior walls. See also "GRADE".
FLAG LOT — See "LOT, FLAG".
FLOOR AREA — The gross horizontal area of each floor, including
basements, cellars and penthouses, measured from the exterior faces
of a building. Areas within a building used for parking and mechanical
penthouses, atriums and landscaped decorative pedestrian areas shall
be excluded from the measurement of floor area.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The total floor area of all structure
improvements on a lot, divided by the area of the lot.
FRONT YARD — See "YARD, FRONT".
FRONTAGE — That side of a lot abutting on a street or way and
ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot. For the purposes of
determining yard requirements on corner lots, all sides of a lot adjacent
to streets shall be considered frontage.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or portion of the main
building designed and used for the storage of four (4) or fewer motordriven
vehicles owned by the occupants of the property on which it is
accessory.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building or portion thereof, other than a private
garage, designed or used for the short- or long-term parking of five (5)
or more motor-driven vehicles.
GAS STATION — See "SERVICE STATION".
Section
405.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.390
AO:537
GRADE — A reference plane representing the average of ground level
adjoining the building at all exterior walls. When the finished ground
level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be
established as the lowest points within the area between the building
and the lot line or, when the lot line is more than six (6) feet from the
building, between the building and a point six (6) feet from the building.
GRANNY UNIT — See "SECOND UNIT."
GROCERY STORE — A store selling food and other household goods,
which may include the sale of prepared cooked food.[Ord. No. 6333
§1, 8-26-2014]
GROSS FLOOR AREA (AS USED IN REGULATING PARKING) — The
gross floor area (GFA) of the occupied space, including the exterior
building or structure. GFA shall include all occupiable areas minus the
following deductions:
GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy
system that is not attached to another structure and is affixed to the
ground.
GROUND-MOUNTED WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy
system that is not attached to another structure and is affixed to the
ground with a monopole tower.
GROUP HOME — Any home in which eight (8) or fewer unrelated
mentally or physically handicapped persons reside, and may include
two (2) additional persons acting as houseparents or guardians who
need not be related to each other or to any of the mentally or physically
handicapped persons residing in the home.
GUEST — A person who occupies or has the right to occupy a residence
as a visitor for a period of thirty (30) days or less.
HEALTH CLUB — An athletic facility equipped for sports and/or
physical training, including all facilities offering personal
training.[Ord. No. 6333 §1, 8-26-2014]
HOME ANTENNA (AS USED IN REGULATING HOME ANTENNAS,
SATELLITE DISHES, COMMERCIAL ANTENNAS AND ANTENNA
SUPPORT STRUCTURES) — Any receive-only television antenna or
amateur radio antenna not used for commercial purposes.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any profession being conducted in a
residential dwelling unit. A home occupation may be operated only in
accordance with the conditions and restriction of Article II, Section
405.300 of this Chapter.
1. Vehicular parking and loading areas within the structure.
Floor area occupied by HVAC (heating, ventilating and airconditioning),
mechanical, electrical, communications and security
equipment or apparatus.
2.
Section
405.390
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.390
AO:538
HOSPITAL — An establishment providing physical or mental health
services, inpatient or overnight accommodations and medical or
surgical care of the sick or injured; including sanitariums.
HOTEL — A building in which lodging is provided and offered to
transient guests for compensation. Primary ingress and egress to and
from rooms is made through an inside lobby and an office is on the
premises.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — That area within a lot that is covered by
impervious materials.
IMPERVIOUS MATERIAL — A surface that has been compacted or
covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to
infiltration by water. It includes, but is not limited to, surfaces such
as compacted sand, limerock or clay, asphalt concrete, driveways,
retaining walls, stair wells, stairways, walkways, decks and patios at
grade level and other similar structures. For the purposes of calculating
impervious coverage, pools and other water features shall only count at
fifty percent (50%) of the actual water area.
INSTITUTION — A building or area occupied by a non-profit
corporation or a non-profit establishment for public uses.
KINDERGARTEN, PRE-KINDERGARTEN, NURSERY — Any land,
building, structure or premises used for educational instruction and/or
supplemental parental care for four (4) or more children, either on an
hourly or daily basis, with or without compensation.
KIOSK — An exterior self-standing accessory structure in a public place
used for providing and disseminating information. Privately owned and
operated kiosks may be approved as part of the site plan for a larger
development, if the development provides adequate open space or
public area. No privately owned kiosks may be placed in the public
right-of-way. All privately owned or operated kiosks must comply with
the provisions of Article II, Section 405.310.
LANDSCAPED SPACE — Open space on a lot devoted to plants rooted
directly in the ground or in permanent planters.
LAUNDRY SHOP — A building or portion thereof equipped with no
more than thirty (30) automatic type laundry and drying machines.
LOADING SPACE — A space within the main building or on the same
lot therewith, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks
Section
405.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.390
AO:539
and having a minimum dimension of twelve (12) by thirty-five (35) feet
and a vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet.
LOT — A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by one
(1) main building together with its accessory buildings, including the
open spaces and parking spaces required by this Chapter and having
its primary frontage upon a street or upon an officially approved place.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their
intersection.
LOT COVERAGE — The area of a site covered by buildings or roofed
areas, excluding allowed projecting eaves, balconies and similar
features.
LOT, DEPTH OF — The distance between the front lot line and the rear
lot line. In the case of an irregular shaped lot, the depth of the lot shall
be the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT, FLAG — A lot located behind another lot, with no direct access to
the street other than a driveway or other narrow corridor.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES — The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
Section
405.390
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.390
AO:540
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of
which has been recorded at the St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds, or
a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been
recorded at the St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds.
MARIJUANA or MARIHUANA — Cannabis indica, Cannabis sativa, and
Cannabis ruderalis, hybrids of such species, and any other strains
commonly understood within the scientific community to constitute
marijuana, as well as resin extracted from the plant and marijuanainfused
products. Marijuana or Marihuana does not include industrial
hemp containing a crop-wide average tetrahydrocannabinol
concentration that does not exceed three-tenths of one percent (3/8 of
1%) on a dry-weight basis, or commodities or products manufactured
from industrial hemp.[Ord. No. 6597, 6-11-2019]
MARIJUANA-INFUSED PRODUCTS — Products that are infused with
marijuana or an extract thereof and are intended for use or
consumption other than by smoking, including, but not limited to,
edible products, ointments, tinctures and concentrates.[Ord. No.
6597, 6-11-2019]
MASSAGE PARLOR — See "ADULT USES".
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY — A facility licensed
by the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services to acquire,
cultivate, process, store, transport, and sell marijuana to a medical
marijuana dispensary facility, medical marijuana testing facility, or to
a medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility.[Ord. No.
6597, 6-11-2019]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY FACILITY — A facility licensed
by the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services to acquire,
store, sell, transport, and deliver marijuana, marijuana-infused
products, and drug paraphernalia used to administer marijuana to
a qualifying patient, a primary caregiver, another medical marijuana
dispensary facility, a medical marijuana testing facility, or a medical
marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility.[Ord. No. 6597,
6-11-2019]
Section
405.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.390
AO:541
MEDICAL MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY — A facility certified by the
Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services to acquire, test,
certify, and transport marijuana.[Ord. No. 6597, 6-11-2019]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA-INFUSED PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING
FACILITY — A facility licensed by the Missouri Department of Health
and Senior Services to acquire, store, manufacture, transport, and sell
marijuana-infused products to a medical marijuana dispensary facility,
a medical marijuana testing facility, or to another medical marijuanainfused
products manufacturing facility.[Ord. No. 6597, 6-11-2019]
MIXED USE BUILDING — A building including a combination of at least
two (2) of the following components: residential uses, commercial uses
or office uses.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which is propelled by a motor and which
is used for the purpose of carrying persons or commodities.
MULTIPLE-LEVEL PARKING FACILITY — Public or private garage as
defined herein, with multiple levels accessed by a circulation system.
NON-CONFORMING USE — Any building, use or property which was
not erected or established in conformance to the provisions of the
ordinance at the time of its inception.
NON-CONFORMING USE, LEGAL — Any building, use or property
that conformed to the provisions of the ordinance at the time of its
inception, but due to zoning revisions and amendments effecting the
subject zoning district no longer complies with the permitted use and/
or some other provisions of this most recently approved Chapter.
NOTICE (PUBLIC NOTICE) — A statement concerning a pending
matter before an official body of the City of Clayton and, where
applicable, proposed action(s) to be taken in regard to the matter. The
terms "notice" and "public notice" are used interchangeably.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME — A home for the aged,
chronically or terminally ill in which three (3) or more persons are
provided with food, shelter and medical care, for compensation; but
does not include hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted
primarily to the diagnosis, treatment or care of the sick or injured.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A permit issued by the City certifying that a
structure conforms to all applicable City ordinances and requirements
at the time of issuance and therefore may be used or occupied per the
provisions of this Chapter.
OCCUPIED SPACE (AS USED IN REGULATING PARKING) — An area,
enclosed or covered, providing a ceiling height of seven (7) feet zero (0)
inches or more, intended for normal use by people on an occasional or
more frequent basis. "Occupied space" may include basements, cellars,
penthouses, attic space and interior balconies or mezzanines if the
space is intended for use or habitation.
OFF-SITE — Not being on the same lot as defined herein.
Section
405.390
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.390
AO:542
OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITY (AS USED IN REGULATING
PARKING) — Parking spaces located in an area other than a street
or public right-of-way and limited in use to vehicles not exceeding a
gross vehicle weight of three (3) tons and not parked continuously for
periods of more than forty-eight (48) hours. Parking facilities include
the following subclasses:
ON-SITE — Being on the same lot as defined herein.
OPEN AREA — The portion of a lot or property which is primarily
vacant or is improved with grass, plantings, parking or patios of which
no structure rises to an elevation of thirty (30) inches or more above
the highest curb elevation of the street(s) which bound the lot.
OVERLAY ZONE — A district in which additional requirements act to
supersede or supplement, as applicable, the regulations of the base
zoning district.
PACKAGE LIQUOR STORE — A place of business primarily or
exclusively for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages in the original
package for consumption off the business property.[Ord. No. 6333 §1,
8-26-2014; Ord. No. 6398 §1, 10-27-2015]
PARK — An open area available to the general public for recreational,
educational or scenic purposes.
PARKING LOT — Any place, lot, parcel or other street level property
used in whole or in part for parking of five (5) or more vehicles.
PARKING SPACE — A surfaced area either adjacent to the street or
enclosed within a building, which provides automobile parking.
Minimum dimension per space is nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet.
PARTY WALL — A common wall separating dwelling units.
PERMITTED OCCUPANCY (AS USED IN REGULATING PARKING) —
The capacity of the building expressed in number of persons as
determined by the Fire Marshal and/or the adopted Building Code of
the City.
PERMITTED USE — A use allowed by the regulations of this Chapter
for the district in which the use is located.
SURFACE PARKING LOT — A parking facility constructed on
prepared grade and without a covering roof or structure.
1.
OPEN PARKING STRUCTURE — A parking area or facility
comprising one (1) or more floors as a part or whole of a building
that meets the requirements for natural ventilation as specified by
the adopted Building Code of the City.
2.
ENCLOSED PARKING STRUCTURE — A parking area or facility
comprising one (1) or more floors as a part or whole of a building
that does not meet the adopted Building Code requirements for
openness.
3.
Section
405.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.390
AO:543
PERSON — A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization
and any other group acting as a unit, as well as individuals. It shall
also include an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other
representative appointed according to law. Whenever the word
"person" is used in any Section of this Chapter prescribing a penalty
or fine, the word shall include the partners or members thereof and, as
to corporation, it shall include the officers, agents or members thereof
who are responsible for any violation of such Section.
PERSONAL CARE SERVICE — An establishment that primarily
provides service generally involving the care of a person or a person's
apparel, including but not limited to barbershop, beauty salon, tanning
salon, nail salon, clothing rental, tailor, shoe repair, dry cleaning, and
drop-off or self-serve laundries [no more than thirty (30) machines];
except tattoo parlors.[Ord. No. 6333 §1, 8-26-2014]
PLACE — An open unoccupied space other than a street or alley
permanently reserved as the primary means of access to abutting
property.
PLACE OF RELIGIOUS WORSHIP — An institution that people
regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, meetings or
other similar activities. The term shall not carry a secular connotation
and shall include buildings in which the religious services of any
denomination are held.
PORTE-COCHERE — A large porch outside the entrance of a building
under which vehicles may be driven.
PREMISES — A lot inclusive of all buildings and structures thereon.
PRIVATE ROAD — A portion of private property configured, used and
permanently reserved as the primary means of access to abutting
property.
PRIVATE SCHOOL — An institution offering general education similar
to that provided in public elementary and high schools. This does
not include nursery schools, play schools, secretarial schools or other
limited-purpose institutions.
PROPERTY — A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structure(s)
thereon.
PROPERTY OWNER — The owner of record of a building or lot.
PUBLIC INTEREST SIGNS — Signs containing information of interest
to the general public, such as weather and time information.
PUBLIC PARKING (AS USED IN TRIGGERING PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS OR SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT
DISTRICTS) — Parking provided in excess of what is required.
Additionally, in order to qualify as public parking, this excess parking
must be readily accessible to the general public. The amount of excess
parking spaces provided in order to be deemed public parking must be
Section
405.390
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.390
AO:544
ten percent (10%) or more than the parking spaces required for the
use(s) as required by the Plan Commission.
RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS — Equipment and appurtenances
used in the production of energy through the conversion of sun and
wind energy which includes solar energy and wind energy systems.
REPAIR SHOP, AUTO — Any premises where heavy automobile
maintenance activities such as engine overhauls, automobile painting
and body fender work are conducted.
REPLACEMENT VALUE — The estimated current cost in money for
the labor and materials necessary to restore a damaged structure to
substantially the same configuration, using substantially similar types
of materials, as existed before the damage occurred.
RESTAURANT — A business establishment providing food or drink
for consumption by customers on or off the premises, but excluding
facilities for non-commercial and incidental food services to employees
or members of an office or institution (churches, schools and hospitals)
that specifically never provides food services to the general public.
Facilities for non-commercial and incidental food that are closed to and
do not serve the general public are not required to meet the regulations
of this Chapter applicable to restaurant uses. Such facilities which are
exclusively open to and serve on-site employees and/or residents shall
be deemed to be an accessory use of the principal use.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Including generally the sale of items
such as antiques; appliance repair; art; art supplies; bakeries and
confectioneries (non-manufacturing); bicycles; books; camera and
photographic supplies; china and glassware; clothing; coin and stamp;
crafts/needlework; direct selling; discount/mass merchandising;
drapery/curtain/window coverings; fabrics and sewing accessories;
film/video rentals; floor coverings; furniture; furriers and fur apparel;
garden supply, greenhouses, nurseries, truck gardens and orchards;
gifts/novelty/souvenirs jewelry; hardware; household appliances; key
and lock; laundry/dry cleaning (pickup station only); leather/luggage/
suitcases; lighting and electrical supplies; linens/sheets/towels; lumber,
building supplies and sales display and show rooms for any building
product (including millwork, cabinets, plumbing, glass and mirror,
fencing, swimming pools/spas/hot tubs, etc.); mail order; merchandise
vending; musical instruments; optical shops; newspapers and
magazines; retail florist; paint and wall coverings; pet shops; pharmacy/
drug; printing/copy; photographic studios; pool and patio furniture;
records/audio/stereo/TV; school and office supplies; secondhand and
resale; shoes; shoe repair; small electrical appliance; specialty;
stationery; tailoring and dressmaking; tobacco; tool and appliance
rentals; toys; upholstery and/or drapery services; wholesale florists.
ROOF-MOUNTED WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy system
affixed to the roof of a principal or accessory structure on a lot.
Section
405.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.390
AO:545
SATELLITE DISH (AS USED IN REGULATING HOME ANTENNAS,
SATELLITE DISHES, COMMERCIAL ANTENNAS AND ANTENNA
SUPPORT STRUCTURES) — Any exterior-mounted parabolic antenna
designed to receive or transmit voice, video, data or other
communications signals to or from a satellite including, but not limited
to, direct-to-home satellite service, video programming services via
multipoint distribution services, including multi-channel multipoint
distribution services, instruction television fixed services and local
multipoint services, whether used for personal or commercial purposes.
SCREEN — Any individual or groups of shrubbery, hedges, tree(s) or
other plant growth substantial enough in height, width and dimension
to provide sight or noise barriers from the street or adjacent properties.
Additionally, any wall, fence or other solid material that surrounds
mechanical equipment, trash containers, wood compost piles or other
similar uses in yards, on roof tops, where such screening provides a
barrier to the negative impacts associated with sight, smell or noise.
SECOND UNIT — A type of accessory structure, either attached or
detached, which provides complete, independent living facilities for
one (1) or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, and is located on the same
site as the principal residence. Second units are permitted subject
to the criteria established in Section 405.330 of Article II of this
Chapter.[Ord. No. 6333 §1, 8-26-2014]
SERVICE (AS USED IN REGULATING FACILITIES) — Providing or
delivering an economic good or an article of commerce, including but
not limited to gas, telephone, cable television, Internet, open video
systems, video services, alarm systems, steam, electricity, water,
telegraph, data transmission, petroleum pipelines, sanitary or
stormwater sewerage or any similar or related service, to one (1) or
more persons located within or outside of the City using facilities
located within the City.
SERVICE STATION — Any premises where gasoline and other
petroleum products are sold and/or maintenance activities such as
engine tune-ups, lubrication, minor repairs and carburetor cleaning are
conducted. Service stations shall not include premises where heavy
automobile maintenance activities such as engine overhauls,
automobile painting, body and fender work are conducted.
SETBACK — The required minimum horizontal distance between the
building line and the related front, side and rear property lines.
SHELTER (AS USED IN REGULATING HOME ANTENNAS, SATELLITE
DISHES, COMMERCIAL ANTENNAS AND ANTENNA SUPPORT
STRUCTURES) — A building for the protection and security of
communications equipment associated with one (1) or more antennas.
SIGN — Any identification, description, illustration or device
illuminated or non-illuminated which is visible from any public place
or is located on private property and exposed to the public and which
Section
405.390
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.390
AO:546
directs attention to a product, service, place, activity, person,
institution, business or solicitation, including any emblem, painting,
placard or temporary sign designed to advertise, identify or convey
information, with the exception of window displays and national flags.
For the purpose of removal, "signs" shall also include all sign
structures.
SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTOR — The component of a solar energy
system containing the flat plate or tube or other devices that absorb
energy from the sun when exposed to sunlight.
SOLAR ENERGY EQUIPMENT — The solar energy collectors,
electronics, disconnects, valves, and other appurtenances associated
with a solar energy system.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A building or ground-mounted
photovoltaic, hot air, or hot water collector device or other type of
energy system which relies upon solar radiation as the source for the
generation of electricity or transfer of stored heat.
SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT — Special development districts
approved prior to the enactment of this Chapter shall be deemed to be
the same as the existing special development district. Any enlargement,
alteration or extension of an existing special development district shall
be considered in accordance with Article IX, Section 405.1320 of this
Chapter.
Section
405.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.390
AO:547
STEPBACK — A horizontal recess of a building above a lower level.
STORAGE — The existence of any stock, vehicle, equipment or material
enclosed or unenclosed for a period of more than forty-eight (48) hours.
STORY — That portion of a building between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there are no floor(s)
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STREET — A paved public or private right-of-way which provides access
to abutting properties from the front. The term includes all facilities,
which normally within the right-of-way, including such other
designations as highway, thoroughfare, parkway, expressway, road,
pike, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, court, but shall not include an
alley or pedestrian way.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any change in the supporting
members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or
girders or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls, not
Section
405.390
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.390
AO:548
including, however, changes in doors or windows or alterations which
affect primarily the appearance and not the life of the structure.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials constructed or erected at
a fixed location including, but not limited to, a building, wall, parking
deck or other such uses which require location on the ground or
attachment to something located on the ground.
STUDIO (ART GALLERY/STUDIO) — A facility used by an artist,
sculptor, photographer.
TAVERNS/BARS — Establishments other than a wine bar as defined in
this Section used primarily for the serving of alcoholic beverages by the
drink to the general public and where food does not constitute at least
fifty-one percent (51%) of gross sales of the establishment. Taverns and
bars are prohibited in all zoning districts.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign attached to the interior of or displayed in
a window or door for a limited period, constructed of paper, cloth or
similar material in order to direct the attention of persons outside the
building to a particular sale of merchandise or a change in the status of
a business.
TOTAL HEIGHT (WIND TURBINE) — The vertical distance from
average grade at the base of the system to the tip of a wind generator
blade when the tip is at its highest point.
TOWER — Any structure that is used to support a wind turbine and is
attached to the ground. 108
USE — The purpose(s) or activity(ies) for which land or a building
is designed, arranged, intended or used and shall include any
performances of such activity(ies) in compliance with the requirements
of this Chapter.
USE LIMITATIONS — Regulations intended to limit or emphasize the
nature and quality of uses permitted within a zoning district.
USE REGULATIONS — Regulations which relate to a specific
quantifiable use condition such as density or intensity or to building
size, bulk or sitting conditions occurring anywhere and for any type of
building located within a given zoning district.
VARIANCE — A granting of relief from the requirements of this Chapter
to permit construction or use in a manner otherwise prohibited by
this Chapter where specific enforcement would result in an extreme
hardship or severe practical difficulty because of the shape of the lot,
topography or other natural situation not the fault of the applicant.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL/CLINIC — Facilities primarily for the practice
of veterinary medicine, dentistry or surgery for small or companion
animals, which can include accessory accommodations for overnight
patients.[Ord. No. 6527, 3-13-2018]
108. Editor's Note: The former definition of Town House, which immediately followed, was
repealed 11-28-2017 by Ord. No. 6509. See now definition for Dwelling, Townhouse.
Section
405.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.390
AO:549
WHOLESALE SALE — The sale of goods, merchandise and commodities
for resale.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy conversion system
consisting of a wind turbine, freestanding or attached to a structure,
and associated control or conversion electronics; provided however,
that wind energy systems in the City shall be limited to those which
have a rated capacity of ten (10) kilowatts or less and are used for onsite
consumption.
WIND TURBINE — The blades and associated components mounted on
top of a tower whose purpose is to convert kinetic energy of the wind
into rotational energy used to generate electricity.
WINE BAR — A type of restaurant (as defined in this Section) with
a floor area not exceeding one thousand five hundred (1,500) gross
square feet which serves food and only beer, wine and non-alcoholic
beverages and where the sale of food consumed on the premises
constitutes at least twenty percent (20%) of gross sales of the
establishment.
YARD — An open space, other than a courtyard, on the same lot with
a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion
thereof from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein.
In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining its width, the
average depth between the building and lot line shall be used.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the front of a lot between the
side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the
front lot line and the main building or any projection thereof, other than
steps, uncovered balconies, uncovered porches and terraces. On corner
lots, the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon
which the lot has its least dimension. An accessory building that is not
part of the principal structure shall be located not less than sixty (60)
feet from the front property line.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured
between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance
between the rear lot line and the main building or any projections other
than steps, uncovered balconies, uncovered porches or terraces. The
Section
405.390
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.390
AO:550
Section 405.400. through Section 405.410. (Reserved)
rear yard shall, in all cases, be at the opposite end of the lot from the
front yard.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between the building and the side lot line
extending between the front and rear yards, being the minimum
horizontal distance between the side lot line and the main building
or any projections other than steps, uncovered balconies, uncovered
porches or terraces.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR — The Director of Planning and
Development Services or duly authorized representative.
ZONING DISTRICT — Any section of the City for which the regulations
governing the use, height and area of buildings and property are
uniform.
Section
405.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.400
AO:551

ARTICLE IV
Non-Conforming Uses
Section 405.420. Purpose and Intent [Ord. No. 5814 §1(4.1),
4-27-2004]
Within the City of Clayton certain lots, structures and uses of land which
were lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance
may have become prohibited under the terms of this revision. This Article
is intended to declare that such non-conformities are incompatible with the
permitted or conditional uses but to permit non-conformities to continue
until they are removed. This Article prohibits non-conformities from being
extended, expanded, enlarged or increased in intensity.
Section 405.430. Non-Conforming Structures [Ord. No. 5814
§1(4.2), 4-27-2004]
Section 405.440. Non-Conforming Uses [Ord. No. 5814 §1(4.3),
4-27-2004]
A. Any non-conforming structure which is associated with a conforming
use may remain as a non-conforming structure, subject to the following
provisions:
1. Enlargement, repair, alterations. Any such structure may be
enlarged, maintained, repaired or remodeled; provided however,
that no such enlargement, maintenance, repair or remodeling shall
either create any additional non-conformity or increase the degree
of existing non-conformity of all or any part of such structure.
2. Moving. No non-conforming structure shall be moved in whole or in
part for any distance whatever, to any other location on the same or
any other lot, unless the entire structure shall thereafter conform
to the provisions of the zoning district in which it is located after
being moved.
A. Any non-conforming use of part or all of a structure or any nonconforming
use of land may be continued, so long as otherwise lawful,
subject to the following provisions:
1. Ordinary repair and maintenance. Normal maintenance and
incidental repair or replacement, installation or relocation of nonbearing
walls, non-bearing partitions, fixtures wiring or plumbing
may be performed on any structure.
2. Remodeling. No structure shall be remodeled unless the use
thereof shall thereafter conform to all provisions of the Zoning
Code. For purposes of this Section, the term "remodel" shall mean
to reconstruct or relocate exterior walls, bearing walls or bearing
partitions; or to substantially alter the exterior appearance of a
building by adding or removing architectural elements by changing
Section
405.420
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.440
AO:553
Section 405.450. Restoration of Damaged Non-Conforming
Structures or Uses [Ord. No. 5814 §1(4.4), 4-27-2004]
When a building containing a non-conforming use is damaged by natural
or manmade disaster to the extent of sixty percent (60%) or more of
its replacement value, it may only be restored in conformance with the
regulations of the Zoning Code. When damaged by fire, explosion, flood,
winds or other acts of God or the public enemy or by any other cause
unrelated or unattributable to the owner to an extent of less than sixty
percent (60%) of its replacement value, a non-conforming building may only
the roof line or by closing up or relocating door or window
openings.
3. Expansion of use. No non-conforming use of a lot or building shall
be enlarged, expanded or extended to occupy a greater area of a lot
or building than was occupied on the effective date of this Zoning
Code or amendment thereto and no additional accessory use,
building or structure shall be established thereon.
4. Enlargement of building or structure. No building or structure that
is devoted in whole or in part to a non-conforming use shall be
enlarged or added to in any manner, unless such building or
structure addition and the entire use thereof (both existing space
and the addition) shall thereafter conform to all provisions of the
Zoning Code.
5. Moving. No structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming
use shall be moved in the whole or in part for any
distance whatsoever, to any location on the same or any other lot,
unless the entire structure and use thereof shall conform to all
provisions of the zoning district in which it is located after being so
moved.
6. Change in use. A non-conforming use shall not be changed to any
use other than a use permitted in the zoning district in which the
use is located. When a non-conforming use has been changed to
any permitted use, it shall not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming
use.
7. Abandonment or discontinuance. In the event that the nonconforming
use of any building or premises is discontinued for a
period of one (1) year, regardless of any reservations of an intent
not to abandon or resume such use, any subsequent use or
occupancy of such structures shall comply with provisions of this
Chapter including those of the zoning district in which the
structure is located.
8. Non-conforming accessory uses. No use which is accessory to a
primary non-conforming use shall continue after such primary use
shall cease or terminate.
Section
405.440
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.450
AO:554
be restored upon the issuance of a variance by the Board of Adjustment.
A right to continue a non-conformity may be lost if the damage is done
intentionally by the owner or on behalf of the owner.
Section 405.460. through Section 405.480. (Reserved)
Section
405.450
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.460
AO:555

ARTICLE V
Occupancy Permits
Section 405.490. Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(5.1), 4-27-2004]
No land shall be occupied or used and no commercial building or other
building (except as per the provisions of the City of Clayton Property
Maintenance Code) shall be occupied or used in whole or in part, for
any purpose whatsoever, until the Director of Planning and Development
Services or his/her designee has issued an occupancy permit. The use,
occupancy or tenancy of a building or part thereof shall not be changed
without an occupancy permit being issued by the Director of Planning and
Development Services or his/her designee.
Section 405.500. Application [Ord. No. 5814 §1(5.2), 4-27-2004]
Whenever the sale of a building results in a change in the occupant or
whenever premises are rented to an occupant or whenever there is a
change in use of the premises, it shall be required to apply for and receive
an occupancy permit in accordance with the provisions of the Property
Maintenance Code, this Zoning Code and all other applicable ordinances
and regulations of the City.
Section 405.510. Issuance [Ord. No. 5814 §1(5.3), 4-27-2004]
Section 405.520. Expiration [Ord. No. 5814 §1(5.4), 4-27-2004]
An occupancy permit shall remain in effect and not expire for owneroccupied
residential dwelling units in accordance with the provision of the
Property Maintenance Code provided that no change of occupancy occurs.
For non-owner-occupied units, an occupancy permit shall be valid for five
(5) years. An occupancy permit renewal shall be required after five (5) years
from the date of issuance if tenancy does not change.
Section 405.530. Record of All Certificates of Occupancy [Ord. No.
5814 §1(5.5), 4-27-2004]
A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office
of the Director of Planning and Development Services or his/her designee
and copies may be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary
or tenancy interest in land or building affected by such certificate of
occupancy.
A. The occupancy permit shall not be issued by the Director of Planning
and Development Services or his/her designee until the premises has
been inspected and the application for such permit has been approved
indicating that the proposed use and any buildings or structures
involved comply in all respects with the provisions of the Property
Maintenance Code, this Zoning Code and all other applicable codes.
B. Temporary occupancy permit(s) will not be issued.
Section
405.490
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.540
AO:557
Section 405.540. through Section 405.560. (Reserved)
Section
405.540
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.540
AO:558
ARTICLE VI
Board of Adjustment
Section 405.570. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §1(8.1),
4-27-2004]
The establishment of a Board of Adjustment is hereby authorized. The word
"Board", when used in this Article, shall be construed to mean the Board
of Adjustment. Board members and alternate members shall be appointed
by the Mayor and approved by the Board of Aldermen. Board members and
alternate members shall serve without monetary compensation. Any or all
Board members or alternate members may be removed for just cause by the
Board of Aldermen upon substantiated written charges and after a public
hearing conducted by the Board of Aldermen.
Section 405.580. Constitution of Board [Ord. No. 5814 §1(8.2),
4-27-2004]
Section 405.590. Meetings and Records [Ord. No. 5814 §1(8.3),
4-27-2004]
A. The Board shall consist of five (5) regular members and three (3)
alternate members, all of whom shall be residents of the City of Clayton
and shall hold no other office or position in the City government. The
term of office of the regular and alternate members of the Board shall
be for five (5) years. The three (3) alternate members shall serve, at the
request of the Chairperson, in the absence of or the disqualification of
the regular members. The Board shall elect its own Chairperson and
Vice Chairperson who shall serve for one (1) or more terms of one (1)
year each.
B. Vacancies on the Board shall be filled by the Mayor with the approval of
the Board of Aldermen for the unexpired term of the vacating member.
A. Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the
Chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. The
Chairman, or in his/her absence the Acting Chairman, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The Board of Adjustment
shall keep minutes of all meetings, showing the vote of each member
upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact
and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all
of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the City Clerk and
shall be public record. All testimony, objections thereto and rulings
thereon shall be taken down by a reporter employed by the Board for
that purpose.
B. The City of Clayton Code of Ordinances, including the Zoning
Ordinance and Zoning District Map, the City's Master Plan which are or
may hereafter be in force, shall automatically be part of the evidence at
each hearing of the Board to the extent applicable without being
specifically introduced at the hearing.
Section
405.570
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.600
AO:559
Section 405.600. Error By Municipal Officer [Ord. No. 5814 §1(8.4),
4-27-2004]
The Board shall hear and decide appeals in which it is alleged there is
an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
the Building Official or an administrative official in the enforcement of the
Zoning Ordinance (that Chapter of the Municipal Code which governs land
use patterns and developments within the City of Clayton) and/or the State
of Missouri Enabling Act, Sections 89.010 et seq., RSMo., as the same may
be amended from time to time.
Section 405.610. Area Variances [Ord. No. 5814 §1(8.5), 4-27-2004]
Section 405.620. Use Variances [Ord. No. 5814 §1(8.6), 4-27-2004]
A. Area variances are a granting of relief from the requirements of this
Chapter to permit construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by
this Chapter where specific enforcement would result in an extreme
hardship or severe practical difficulty because of the shape of the lot,
topography or other natural situation not the fault of the applicant. In
passing upon appeals, the Board of Adjustment is authorized to grant
an area variance only upon findings that:
1. There are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships associated
with the strict application of the Zoning Ordinance due to
exceptional or unique circumstances or conditions such that strict
application would deprive the owner of the reasonable use of the
property; and
2. Granting the variance requested would observe the spirit of the
Zoning Ordinance and secure public safety and welfare; and
3. The deviation from strict application of the Zoning Ordinance
authorized by the area variance would not constitute a change in
the district map, impair an adequate supply of light and air to
adjacent property, increase congestion in public streets, increase
the danger of fire, materially diminish or impair established
property values within the surrounding area and would not in any
other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals and
welfare of the City of Clayton.
B. If an appeal for an area variance is granted, the Board shall grant the
minimum variance necessary to allow the applicant reasonable use of
his/her land.
A. Use variances are a granting of relief from the requirements of this
Chapter to permit a use in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
Chapter where specific enforcement would result in an extreme
hardship because of the shape of the lot, topography or other natural
situation not the fault of the applicant. The Board of Adjustment is
authorized to grant use variances upon application or appeal in
Section
405.600
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.620
AO:560
Section 405.630. Other Variances and Jurisdictions [Ord. No. 5814
§1(8.7), 4-27-2004]
accordance with the State of Missouri Enabling Act, City of Clayton
Code of Ordinances the City's Zoning Ordinance and the procedures set
forth herein only upon findings that:
1. The applicant will be deprived of all beneficial use of the property
under any of the permitted uses in the zoning district in which the
property is located, all beneficial use being lost only where the
property is not suitable for any use permitted in the Zoning
Ordinance for that zoning district; and
2. The applicant has sufficiently demonstrated unnecessary hardship
by expert testimony and/or documentation and not mere
conclusionary or lay opinion that the property in question cannot
yield a reasonable return if used only for a purpose or purposes
permitted in the zoning district in which that property is located;
and
3. The plight of the owner is due to exceptional or unique
circumstances and not due to general conditions in the
neighborhood; and
4. The use to be authorized by the variance would not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood; and
5. The proposed use to be authorized by the use variance would not
constitute a change in the district map, impair an adequate supply
of light and air to adjacent property, increase congestion in public
streets, increase the danger of fire, materially diminish or impair
established property values within the surrounding area and would
not in any other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort,
morals and welfare of the City.
A. The Board may grant variances from parking, loading and unloading
regulations of the Zoning Ordinance, where the character or use of the
building or premises make unnecessary the full provision of parking or
loading or unloading facilities or when such regulations would impose
an unreasonable hardship upon the use of the lot or tract of land, as
contrasted with merely granting an advantage or convenience.
B. The Board may permit the extension of a district where the boundary
line of a district divides a lot of record in single ownership.
C. The Board may grant an extension of time for the reconstruction of a
non-conforming building which has been damaged by less than sixty
percent (60%) of its replacement value by fire, explosion, flood, winds
or other acts of God or the public enemy or by any other cause
unrelated or unattributable to the owner.
Section
405.620
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.630
AO:561
Section 405.640. Application Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(8.8),
4-27-2004]
An application form for an appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall be
completed and filed with the Building Official or his/her designee. An appeal
to the Board of Adjustment, on any matter over which the Board is
specifically granted jurisdiction, may be taken by any person aggrieved or
affected by any rule, requirement, decision or determination. The appeal
must be filed within thirty (30) days of the order, requirement, decision or
determination. The application must specify the grounds for appeal.
Section 405.650. Submission By Applicant [Ord. No. 5814 §1(8.9),
4-27-2004]
Section 405.660. Staff Review [Ord. No. 5814 §1(8.10), 4-27-2004]
Section 405.670. Board of Adjustment Procedure [Ord. No. 5814
§1(8.11), 4-27-2004]
D. The Board may interpret the provision of the Zoning Ordinance where
the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as
shown on the official Zoning District Map fixing the districts, which map
shall be on file at the Clayton City Hall and available for review and
inspection.
E. In exercising the above-mentioned powers and all other powers
authorized by law, the Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed
from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination
as ought to be made and to that end shall have all the powers of the
officer from whom the appeal is taken.
A. The applicant must submit one (1) original and fourteen (14) copies of
the application and all required documentation to the Building Official
or his/her designee.
B. At the time that an appeal is filed, the applicant shall pay a fee as
required by the fee schedule approved by the Board of Aldermen. The
fee shall be paid to the City of Clayton to the credit of the General
Revenue Fund of the City.
A. Upon receipt of an appeal, the Building Official or his/her designee shall
transmit to the Board all the documentation constituting the record
upon which the appeal is taken.
B. Notice of public hearing shall be published at least fifteen (15) days
prior to the hearing on each appeal in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City. The Board shall also give due notice to the
appellant and persons owning adjoining property of the subject of the
appeal. Any interested party may appear at the Board's hearing in
person or by agent or attorney.
Section
405.630
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.670
AO:562
Section 405.680. Vote [Ord. No. 5814 §1(8.12), 4-27-2004]
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to
reverse or modify any order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Building Official or his/her designee or to decide in favor of the applicant on
any matter upon which it is required to pass under this Chapter.
Section 405.690. Withdrawal [Ord. No. 5814 §1(8.13), 4-27-2004]
An appeal may be withdrawn prior to the vote of the Board of Adjustment
upon written notice to the Building Official or his/her designee.
Section 405.700. Time Limit On Approval [Ord. No. 5814 §1(8.14),
4-27-2004]
Applications for building permits, authorized by a decision of the Board,
must be submitted within one (1) year after the decision of the Board. If no
application for a building permit is submitted within the one (1) year period,
the variance is automatically rescinded. Any variance granted by the Board
which does not require an application for a building permit is automatically
rescinded after one (1) year from the date of the Board's decision if no use
of the variance is made within the one (1) year period.
Section 405.710. Reapplication [Ord. No. 5814 §1(8.15), 4-27-2004]
In the event that the Board denies an application for variance, no request
for hearing upon the same application will be accepted for a period of at
least one (1) year from date of denial by the Board.
Section 405.720. Appeals From A Board of Adjustment Decision
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(8.16), 4-27-2004]
Any person or persons or any officer, department, board or bureau of the
City, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board may present
to the Circuit Court having jurisdiction in St. Louis County a petition, duly
verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part,
specifying the grounds of the illegality and asking for relief therefrom. Such
A. An appeal to the Board stays all proceedings in furtherance of the order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Building Official or his/
her designee appealed from, unless the Building Official or his/her
designee certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal has been filed,
that by reason of facts stated in the appeal, a stay would, in his/her
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases,
proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order by a court
of competent jurisdiction.
B. The Board shall hear and decide appeals within a reasonable time
period. The order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board
must be made a part of any building permit to be issued due to a
decision of the Board.
Section
405.670
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.720
AO:563
petition must be presented to the Court within thirty (30) days after the
filing of the decision of the Board of Adjustment.
Section 405.730. through Section 405.750. (Reserved)
Section
405.720
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.730
AO:564
ARTICLE VII
Conditional Use Permit
Section 405.760. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §1(9.1),
4-27-2004]
Section 405.770. Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(9.2), 4-27-2004]
Section 405.780. Initiation of The Conditional Use Permit Process
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(9.3), 4-27-2004]
The conditional use permit process must be initiated by submitting a
completed application, providing plans and supporting documentation. The
property owner or leaseholder of a use may file a conditional use permit
application. If an authorized agent or the leaseholder of the use is
requesting the conditional use permit, the property owner must also sign
the conditional use permit application. The Plan Commission or the Board
of Aldermen may also initiate a conditional use permit application.
A. Conditional uses are those types of uses which are considered to be
essentially desirable, necessary or convenient to the community but
which by their nature can create:
1. A tendency to generate additional traffic volume;
2. An anticipated need for parking beyond the development's private
capacity; and/or
3. A detrimental impact on adjacent or neighboring properties due to
noise, pollutants or other characteristics associated with that
particular use.
B. In order to assure that detrimental impact is avoided or mitigated, each
request for conditional use must be reviewed, approved and issued a
conditional use permit (CUP). Conditional uses are listed for each
zoning district.
A. Conditional use permits are required for all conditional uses designated
by this zoning Chapter and for the enlargement, alteration or extension
of existing conditional uses, except as provided for below.
B. For mixed-use buildings approved under the planned unit development
process, a conditional use permit will not be required. In such cases,
the mixed-use building is a conditional use, which may be approved as
part of the planned unit development with added conditions as per
Article X. All individual uses, whether part of a mixed-use building or
not, will require a conditional use permit. For example, a mixed-use
building that includes a restaurant will not require a separate
conditional use permit for the mixed-use building component but will
require a separate conditional use permit for the restaurant
component.
Section
405.760
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.790
AO:565
Section 405.790. Application and Plan Requirements [Ord. No.
5814 §1(9.4), 4-27-2004]
Section 405.800. Submission By Applicant [Ord. No. 5814 §1(9.5),
4-27-2004]
The applicant must submit one (1) original and thirty (30) copies of the
application and all required documentation to the Director of Planning and
Development Services. At the time that an application is filed, the applicant
shall pay a fee as required by the fee schedule approved by the Board
of Aldermen. The fee shall be paid to the City of Clayton to the credit
of the General Revenue Fund of the City. Applications and all required
documentation should be submitted a minimum of twelve (12) days in
advance of the Plan Commission meeting date in order to be considered for
that Plan Commission agenda.
Section 405.810. Staff Review [Ord. No. 5814 §1(9.6), 4-27-2004]
Upon receipt of the conditional use permit application, plans and supporting
documents, the Director of Planning and Development Services shall review
the documents to determine completeness. If the Director determines the
submittal is complete, then the submittal can be forwarded to the Plan
Commission.
Section 405.820. Plan Commission Procedure [Ord. No. 5814
§1(9.7), 4-27-2004]
A. An application form for a conditional use permit shall be completed and
filed with the Department of Planning and Development Services. The
application form is available through the Department of Planning and
Development Services.
B. The application document will provide a description of the plans and
other pertinent information required for submittal by the applicant as
part of the conditional use permit process.
A. The Plan Commission shall hear all applications for conditional use
permits at meetings opened to the public, unless closed pursuant to
State law.
B. The Plan Commission may choose to recommend approval of the
conditional use permit as submitted, recommend additional conditions
to mitigate possible negative impacts or recommend denial of the
conditional use permit.
C. The Plan Commission shall render a decision on a conditional use
permit application within sixty (60) days from the date the Plan
Commission first considers the application. The conditional use permit
shall be deemed to have received a positive recommendation if the Plan
Commission fails to render a decision within the said sixty (60) day
period. The sixty (60) day period may be extended through mutual
Section
405.790
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.820
AO:566
Section 405.830. Board of Aldermen Procedure [Ord. No. 5814
§1(9.8), 4-27-2004]
After receipt of the Plan Commission's recommendation and report, the
Board of Aldermen shall consider the proposed conditional use permit at a
public hearing. The public hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper not
less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing date. A conditional use permit
is approved by resolution. The Board of Aldermen may, at its discretion,
add to or delete conditions recommended by the City Plan Commission. The
Board of Aldermen may refer the application back to the Plan Commission
for further study before making its final decision. The decision rendered
by the Board of Aldermen shall require a simple majority vote except
that a vote of at least five (5) members of the Board of Aldermen will be
required to approve any application contrary to the City Plan Commission
recommendation.
Section 405.840. Criteria For Conditional Use Permit Approval
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(9.9), 4-27-2004]
written agreement between the applicant and the City Plan Commission
Chairperson.
D. The Plan Commission shall submit a written report to the Board of
Aldermen of its decision stating the recommended conditions for
approval or reasons for recommending denial of the conditional use
permit.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to clearly establish that the
following criteria are met:
1. The proposed use is compatible with surrounding uses and with the
surrounding neighborhood;
2. The comparative size, floor area and mass of the proposed use and/
or proposed structure are appropriate and reasonable in relation to
adjacent structures and buildings on surrounding properties and in
the surrounding neighborhood;
3. The proposed use will not adversely affect the general appearance
of the neighborhood due to the location of the proposed use on the
parcel of ground or due to the materials used in the construction of
any proposed buildings being greatly dissimilar to surrounding
appearances of buildings or due to the architecture of any
proposed building being of such nature as to create visual
disharmony within the neighborhood;
4. The landscape plan for premises to be occupied by the proposed
use is adequate in regard to the creation and maintenance of
landscaped areas and the use of buffers for screening of the use;
5. The proposed use will not adversely affect the neighborhood in
terms of water runoff, noise transfer or heat generation due to
Section
405.820
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.840
AO:567
Section 405.850. Amendment To A Conditional Use Permit [Ord.
No. 5814 §1(9.10), 4-27-2004]
significant amount of hard surfaced areas for buildings, sidewalk,
drives, parking and service areas;
6. The frequency and duration of various indoor and outdoor activities
and special events associated with the proposed use will not have a
deleterious impact on the surrounding area;
7. The impact of projected vehicular traffic volumes and site access is
not detrimental with regard to the surrounding traffic flow,
pedestrian safety and accessibility of emergency vehicles and
equipment;
8. The proposed use complies with the parking requirements as set
forth in the Zoning Code and does not add parking demand that
cannot adequately be handled by on-site off-street parking;
9. The number of transit movements on abutting streets and on minor
streets in the neighborhood to be generated by or associated with
the proposed use will not cause significant increases in hourly or
daily traffic levels;
10. The proposed use will not significantly increase demands on fire
and Police protection services in excess of the individual demands
of adjacent land uses and whether the proposed use will not
present any real or potential fire or public safety hazard;
11. Added noise levels generated by activities associated with the
proposed use will not adversely impact the ambient noise level of
the surrounding area and neighborhood;
12. The activities associated with the proposed use will not generate
obnoxious odors to the detriment of the surrounding area;
13. The intensity, duration or frequency of lighting associated with the
proposed use will not adversely impact adjacent properties or
significantly increase the ambient level of night light in the
neighborhood;
14. The proposed use is likely to remain in existence for a reasonable
length of time and not become vacant or unused and whether such
use involves the presence of unusual, single-purpose structures or
components of a temporary nature;
15. The proposed use complies with the standards of the Zoning Code
and good planning practices;
16. Where a proposed use has the potential for adverse impacts,
sufficient measures have been or will be taken by the applicant that
would negate, to an acceptable level, such potentially adverse
impacts.
Section
405.840
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.850
AO:568
A. Any change in the scope, use or aspect of an operation approved for a
conditional use permit which results in a condition that differs from the
provisions contained in the approved conditional use permit requires
the approval of an amendment. All requests for amendments must be
filed on an application form available through the Department of
Planning and Development Services. As part of the application
submission, additional documentation or pertinent information related
to the amendment may be required. At the time that an application is
filed, the applicant shall pay a fee as required by the fee schedule
approved by the Board of Aldermen. The fee shall be paid the City of
Clayton to the credit of the General Revenue Fund of the City.
B. All substantial amendments shall be subject to review and approval by
the Board of Aldermen. The Board of Aldermen may also, in its
discretion, refer such request for amendment to the City Plan
Commission for review and recommendation. The following is a list of
amendments that represent a substantial change from the provisions of
the originally approved conditional use permit:
1. Additional square footage;
2. Expansion of an existing drive through facility (i.e., adding an ATM
machine);
3. Expansion of use;
4. Change in parking;
5. Other changes deemed to be similar by the Director of Planning
and Development Services or his/her designee.
C. Requests for amendments that are deemed by the Director of Planning
and Development Services to represent minor change(s) from the
provisions of the originally approved conditional use permit shall be
reviewed by staff for completeness and subject to approval by the
Director of Planning and Development Services or his/her designee.
The following is a list of amendments that may, at the discretion of the
Director of Planning and Development Services, represent minor
changes from the provisions of the originally approved conditional use
permit:
1. Change in hours of operation;
2. Change in days of operation;
3. Increasing or decreasing outdoor dining capacity;
4. Change in business or trade name, where ownership and nature of
business or trade remains the same.
5. Other changes deemed to be similar by the Director of Planning
and Development Services or his/her designee.
Section
405.850
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.860
AO:569
Section 405.860. Transfer of A Conditional Use Permit [Ord. No.
5814 §1(9.11), 4-27-2004]
Section 405.870. Acceptance of Conditions of Approval [Ord. No.
5814 §1(9.12), 4-27-2004]
Once a conditional use permit, amendment to a conditional use permit or
transfer of a conditional use permit has been approved by the Board of
Aldermen, the permittee must submit a letter accepting all conditions of
approval. The permittee shall within thirty (30) days of the adoption of the
resolution granting the conditional use permit, amendment to a conditional
use permit or transfer of conditional use permit notify the City Clerk of the
City of Clayton in writing that the conditional use permit is accepted and
that the conditions set forth therein are understood and will be complied
A. Any change in the ownership or operating entity named as the
permittee of the approved conditional use permit will require a transfer
of conditional use permit.
B. All requests for transfers must be filed on an application form available
through the Department of Planning and Development Services.
Additional documentation regarding ownership of the operation and
sale/lease arrangements may also be required as part of the application
process. At the time that an application is filed, a fee shall be paid the
City of Clayton to the credit of the General Revenue Fund of the City.
C. All substantial transfers shall be subject to review and approval by the
Board of Aldermen. The Board of Aldermen may also, in its discretion,
refer such request for transfer to the City Plan Commission for review
and recommendation. The following is a list of transfers that represent
a substantial change from the provisions of the originally approved
conditional use permit:
1. A transfer involving a more intensive use;
2. Other changes deemed to represent a substantial change by the
Director of Planning and Development Services or his/her
designee.
D. Requests for transfers that are deemed by the Director of Planning and
Development Services to represent minor change(s) from the provisions
of the originally approved conditional use permit shall be subject to
approval by the Director of Planning and Development Services or his/
her designee. The following is a list of amendments that may, at the
discretion of the Director of Planning and Development Services,
represent minor changes from the provisions of the originally approved
conditional use permit:
1. A transfer of ownership not affecting the intensity of the use;
2. Other changes deemed to represent a minor change by the Director
of Planning and Development Services or his/her designee.
Section
405.860
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.870
AO:570
with. Failure to notify the City Clerk of the City of Clayton in writing that the
conditional use permit is accepted and that the conditions set forth therein
are understood and will be complied with will result in the rescinding of the
approval.
Section 405.880. Revocation [Ord. No. 5814 §1(9.13), 4-27-2004]
A conditional use permit may be revoked upon recommendation of the City
Manager and approval of the Board of Aldermen should any condition of the
conditional use permit be violated in any manner, provided however, that
the property owner was first served with an order to remove the violation
and the property owner failed to comply with the order within ten (10) days
of receiving the order and following a public hearing held in accordance
with this Article.
Section 405.890. Special Use Permits and Existing Uses [Ord. No.
5814 §1(9.14), 4-27-2004]
Special use permits issued prior to the enactment of conditional use permits
shall be deemed to be the same as a conditional use permit. Uses existing
prior to the provisions for either special use or conditional use permits
shall be deemed to have received a conditional use permit. However, any
enlargement, alteration or extension of a special use or a use deemed
approved requires a conditional use permit approved by the Board of
Aldermen.
Section 405.900. Time Limit On Approvals [Ord. No. 5814 §1(9.15),
4-27-2004]
Approvals shall be void unless a building permit is issued within one (1)
year from the date of approval by the Board of Aldermen. A written request
for an extension of time must be received by the City Clerk not less than
forty-five (45) days prior to the expiration of the original one (1) year period.
The applicant shall bear the burden of providing just cause for delay, proof
that the project remains the same and proof that no circumstances bearing
upon the suitability of the project have changed. Approval for request of
extension is at the sole discretion of the Board of Aldermen.
Section 405.910. Reapplication [Ord. No. 5814 §1(9.16), 4-27-2004]
In the event that the Board of Aldermen denies an application for a
conditional use permit, no request for hearing upon the same application or
substantially similar application will be accepted for a period of at least one
(1) year from the date of denial by the Board of Aldermen.
Section 405.920. Building Permit Issuance [Ord. No. 5814 §1(9.17),
4-27-2004]
Building permits shall be issued in accordance with the approved
conditional use permit plans. A copy of the approved plans shall be retained
in the records of the office of the Department of Planning and Development
Section
405.870
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.920
AO:571
Services and all building and occupancy permits issued by the Director of
Planning or his/her designee shall conform to the provisions of the plans.
Section 405.930. Appeals [Ord. No. 5814 §1(9.18), 4-27-2004]
An aggrieved party may, within fifteen (15) days of the decision for which
redress is sought, file with the Board of Aldermen a written request for
reconsideration and appeal of any decisions of the Board of Aldermen
under this Article. The written request must set forth in a concise manner
the decision being appealed and all grounds known to the appellant as
to wherein and why the decision is allegedly in error. The request for
reconsideration and appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within the
time specified above. A copy of the request and any supporting documents
or materials filed by the aggrieved party must be served by the aggrieved
party on the applicant (if different than the aggrieved party) by certified
U.S. mail, return receipt requested, within three (3) days of filing with the
City Clerk. Proof of service on the applicant must be filed with the City
Clerk within six (6) days of filing of the request. The Board of Aldermen may
consider the appeal on the record of the prior decision by the Architectural
Review Board or may, at its sole discretion, receive additional evidence in
such manner as it deems appropriate in light of the circumstances.
Section 405.940. Action By Board of Aldermen [Ord. No. 5814
§1(9.19), 4-27-2004]
The Board of Aldermen shall hear such interested parties as may desire
to be heard and after said hearing shall approve, modify or disapprove
the application. If the Board of Aldermen approves the application, the
Director of Planning and Development Services or his/her designee shall
promptly issue the requested permit. If the application is approved with
modifications, the Director of Planning and Development Services or his/
her designee will issue a permit after the applicant submits the appropriate
revisions to the plans.
Section 405.950. through Section 405.980. (Reserved)
Section
405.920
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.950
AO:572
ARTICLE VIII
Site Plan Review
Section 405.990. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §1(10.1),
4-27-2004]
Section 405.1000. Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(10.2),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6191 §5, 2-28-2012]
A. In order to maintain the high quality of Clayton's residential
neighborhoods and commercial districts and assure the compatibility of
new development, a site plan review process is hereby established. A
site plan is an accurate, legible drawing which is drawn to scale and
clearly depicts the dimensions and angles of the lot boundary lines,
landscaping, contours, drainage flow, location of trash and HVAC units,
impervious coverage and any existing and proposed improvements to
the property.
B. The purpose of the site plan review process is to provide for a review
of:
1. A project's compatibility with its environment and with other land
uses and buildings existing in the surrounding area.
2. The quantity, quality, utility, size and type of a project's required
open space and proposed landscaping improvements.
3. The ability of a project's traffic circulation system to provide for the
convenient and safe internal and external movement of vehicles
and pedestrians.
4. The type and location of parking provisions.
5. The quantity, quality, utility and type of a project's required
facilities, where applicable.
6. The location and screening of a project's air-conditioning units and
other associated equipment.
7. The location, adequacy and screening for trash.
8. The location and adequacy of a project's provision for drainage and
utilities.
9. The promotion of public safety and benefit to the general welfare,
as evidence that the project is in compliance with good planning
practices and principles.
10. A project's impact will not overtax public utilities, services or other
municipal facilities.
A. The requirements of this Section shall apply to the review of all site
plans meeting the following parameters:
Section
405.990
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1000
AO:573
1. Principal uses—residential. Site plan review will be required for all
new residential construction within all residential zoning districts.
Site plan review is also required for large residential additions
within residential zoning districts, where the total square footage
of the proposed addition is fifty percent (50%) or greater than the
total square footage of the existing principal structure. Site plan
review may also be required for conditional use permits and other
residential additions within residential zoning districts when, in the
judgment of the Director of Planning and Development Services,
the location of the property and/or character of the proposed
conditional use or addition are such that site plan review would be
advisable.
2. Principal uses—commercial. Site plan review approval shall be
required as a condition to receiving a building permit involving new
construction or substantial renovation to buildings or structures
over ten thousand (10,000) square feet for all principal uses
permitted by right in all commercial zoning districts located in the
City of Clayton. Site plan review may also be required for
conditional use permits and other commercial additions within
commercial zoning districts when, in the judgment of the Director
of Planning and Development Services, the location of the property
and/or character of the proposed conditional use or addition are
such that site plan review would be advisable.
3. Accessory structures. Site plan review may be required, at the
discretion of the Director of Planning and Development Services,
for all (commercial and residential) accessory structures whenever
such structures exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total
square footage of the existing principal structure. Additionally, site
plan review may be required, at the discretion of the Director of
Planning and Development Services, for residential accessory
structures, whenever such structures exceed six hundred (600)
square feet in size and/or exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. Site
plan review is required for all ground-mounted wind energy
renewable energy systems pursuant to Article XXVIII; however,
such systems may be reviewed in conjunction with the review of
principal structures.
4. Accessory uses. Site plan review may be required, at the discretion
of the Director of Planning and Development Services, for
accessory uses, such as granny units, whenever such uses occur
within a detached accessory structure.
5. Additional parking. Where a change of use, an increase in density
or additional parking is added to an existing structure, a site plan
and landscape plan shall be submitted for review to ensure that the
change of use, increase in density or additional parking can be
accomplished within the purpose and intent of this Chapter.
Section
405.1000
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1000
AO:574
Section 405.1010. Application and Plan Requirements [Ord. No.
5814 §1(10.3), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6067 §1, 4-14-2009]
6. Excessive grading. Site plan review may be required, at the
discretion of the Director of Planning and Development Services,
for any projects involving massive grading or excessive changes in
existing topography, whenever such grading requires review by the
St. Louis Metropolitan Sewer District.
A. Thirteen (13) copies of a site plan, drawn to a minimum scale of one (1)
inch equals twenty (20) feet (1 inch = 20 feet) or such other scale as the
Director of Planning and Development Services shall deem appropriate
and prepared, stamped and endorsed by a qualified architect,
landscape architect, planner or engineer, shall be submitted with every
application for site plan approval. At the time that an application is
filed, the applicant shall pay a fee as required by the fee schedule
approved by the Board of Aldermen. The fee shall be paid to the City of
Clayton to the credit of the General Revenue Fund of the City. For a site
plan to be accepted for review, the following information shall be either
placed on the site plan or on a separate sheet accompanying the plan as
appropriate:
1. Name, address and telephone number of the person or firm
submitting the plan and the person or firm to whom the review
comments should be forwarded.
2. The current owner's name, name of all owners under contract,
address and telephone number, if different than the applicant, and
the owner's signed consent to the filing of the application.
3. The street address and legal description of the subject property.
4. Zoning district, subdivision name, lot number, dimensions, area
and zoning of adjacent parcels where different than site.
5. A vicinity map with north point, scale and date, indicating the
zoning classifications and current uses of properties within two
hundred fifty (250) feet of the subject property or as deemed
necessary by City staff or other agency.
6. The proposed title of the project and the names, addresses and
telephone numbers of the architect, landscape architect, planner or
engineer on the project and a signature panel for approval by the
Plan Commission.
7. The boundaries of the subject property, all existing property lines,
setback lines, existing streets, buildings, watercourses, water ways
or lakes, wetlands and other existing physical features in or
adjoining the project.
8. Location and identification of all easements (existing and
proposed).
Section
405.1000
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1010
AO:575
9. Dimensions of existing and proposed roadway pavements,
sidewalks and right-of-way width for streets abutting the site.
10. The location and size of sanitary and storm sewers, water, gas,
telephone, electric and other utility lines, culverts and other
underground structures in or affecting the project, including
existing and proposed facilities and easements for these facilities.
The natural drainage pattern of the site shall also be described in
the site plan. In the case of City-owned utilities, such information
shall be provided to the applicant by the Public Works Department.
11. Existing and proposed contour lines or elevations based on mean
sea level data, unless otherwise waived by the Department of
Planning and Development Services. The topographic survey shall
depict the elevation of streets, alleys, buildings, structures,
watercourses and their names. The topography shall be shown by
adequate spot elevations.
a. Significant topographical or physical features of the site,
including any existing or proposed water features.
b. The elevation of the curb (if existing or proposed) in front of
each lot shall be indicated.
c. Elevations of the top of bank and toe of slope, slope ratio of fill
and limits of fill, including access, shall be indicated.
d. The proposed nature and manner of grading of the site,
including proposed treatment of slopes in excess of ten percent
(10%) to prevent soil erosion and excessive runoff.
12. Type, location, height and degree of brightness of all exterior
lighting.
13. Overall dimensions of all structures and the gross floor plans of
each floor within the proposed building.
14. A separate landscape plan prepared in accordance with Article
XXX: Trees and Landscaping Regulations. [Ord. No. 6430 §1,
6-14-2016]
15. Location and screening of trash containers and HVAC units to meet
ARB guidelines.
16. The location, height, type and material of all fences and walls.
17. The materials, architectural style and distance from adjacent
property lines of all proposed structures.
18. The location of all proposed buildings and structures, accessory
and principal, and a tabulation of the total number of stories and
height, number of dwelling units and type and the overall project
density in dwelling units per gross acre, where applicable.
Section
405.1010
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1010
AO:576
19. The location, dimensions and a tabulation of the total square
footage in the project and the percentage and square footage
thereof proposed to be allocated to any commercial uses,
recreation areas, off-street parking, open spaces, parks, other
required amenities and improvements, where applicable.
20. Parking and loading facilities, required and proposed, including the
number, size and location, including those facilities for the
handicapped, as specified in the Building Code adopted by the City,
as amended and as in force at the time of approval of the site plan.
21. Each site plan shall bear the seal, signed and dated, of the licensed
entity who prepared the drawing or under whose immediate
personal supervision the site plan has been prepared. Revised
plans and amended or modified approved plans shall also be so
authenticated by the licensed entity who prepared the revision,
amendment or modification to the drawing or under whose
immediate personal supervision the site plan has been revised,
amended or modified.
22. Where necessary to meet the purposes and intent of this Chapter,
such information shall be provided for the site itself and for an area
within fifty (50) feet, or as required, of any property line of the site;
except, that additional area may be required to be shown to
indicate connections or proposed connections to major utilities.
23. The location, character, size, height and orientation of proposed
signs, as proposed to be erected in accordance with the sign
ordinance of the City of Clayton, and elevations of buildings
showing signs to be placed on exterior walls. Signs which are
approved in accordance with this Article shall be considered a part
of the approved site plan. Thereafter, signs shall not be erected,
painted, constructed, structurally altered, hung, rehung or
replaced except in conformity with the approved site plan. Any
changes in signs from the approved site plan (except for changes in
sign copy to reflect a change in tenancy) or any additions to the
number of signs as shown on the site plan shall be allowed only
after approval of an amendment of the site plan by the Plan
Commission.
24. Additional information to be included in the site plan may be
requested based on a joint review of the plans by authorized
department representatives of the City of Clayton, when such
information is required to assist in the assessment of the proposed
site plan and its impact on adjacent properties.
25. Other professional or technical studies or reports as may be
required by the Director of Planning and Development Services to
clearly understand the project. The applicant shall be responsible
for any costs and/or expenses incurred as a result of engaging such
outside professional assistance.
Section
405.1010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1020
AO:577
Section 405.1020. Scope of Modifications Authorized [Ord. No.
5814 §1(10.4), 4-27-2004]
A. The authority of the Plan Commission through the site plan review
process to require modification of a proposed site development shall
have a principal emphasis on conformity with good planning practices
and compatibility with the existing built and natural environment
including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Traffic and parking.
a. Minimizing dangerous traffic movements.
b. Promoting the smooth and efficient flow of traffic in
accordance with standards in the current Institute of Traffic
Engineers' Transportation and Traffic Engineering Handbook
and other credible professional authorities.
c. Optimizing the efficient use of parking facilities through
provisions for adequate interior circulation, parking stalls and
travel aisles.
d. Providing driveway and garage entrances that are compatible
and efficient with the structure and surrounding
neighborhood.
2. Site layout.
a. Promoting compatibility with adjacent and nearby properties.
b. Preserving and protecting valuable natural features and
amenities to the greatest extent practical.
c. Facilitating the collection of refuse by placing trash
enclosures/alcoves in easily accessible locations and in
accordance with the Architectural Review Board guidelines.
d. Promoting neighborhood aesthetics by placing air-conditioning
units and other associated equipment away from public view
and screening.
e. Promoting a pedestrian oriented environment, within scale of
the existing surroundings, under applicable district standards.
f. Promoting the efficient provision of public services and
utilizing available public utilities.
g. Promoting development which respects and protects the
general welfare and public safety of our community.
3. Environmental protection.
a. Preserving existing healthy and long-lived trees wherever
practically feasible.
Section
405.1020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1020
AO:578
b. Designing drainage facilities to promote the use and
preservation of natural watercourse and patterns of drainage.
c. Minimizing alterations to existing topography.
4. Landscaping.
a. Promoting the use of plant material compatible with the
climate of the region and specific conditions on the site.
b. Promoting the use of plant material compatible and
complementary to the surrounding neighborhood and as
deemed appropriate by the City staff, Plan Commission and
outside professionals contracted by the City.
c. Replacing those trees to be removed with comparable or better
species.
d. Promoting tree replacement on site.
e. Promoting tree replacement to equal or exceed the caliper
inches or tree canopy coverage lost due to the project. [Ord.
No. 6430 §1, 6-14-2016]
f. Ensuring that plant material can be maintained for long-term
health and continued growth.
g. Ensuring that the arrangement of required landscaping
produces the optimal visual effect.
5. Signage (where applicable).
a. Ensuring that all signage complies with all provisions of the
sign ordinance.
b. Ensuring that the location, size and orientation of signage does
not impair visibility or distract motorists.
c. Ensuring that the location, size and orientation of signage
minimize obstructions and hazards to pedestrians.
d. Ensuring that signage contributes to the special ambiance,
quality of life and general welfare of the community.
6. Amenities, plazas, public art.
a. Ensuring architectural distinction and significance.
b. Ensuring the use of high quality materials that will add to the
integrity of the structure.
c. Ensuring such amenities are available for public use and
benefit.
Section
405.1020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1020
AO:579
Section 405.1030. Specific Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(10.5),
4-27-2004]
7. General conformance. The site plan review process shall also
ensure that proposed site development conforms to all applicable
requirements of this Chapter and other ordinances and regulations.
A. Driveways, Sidewalks, Curbs And Gutters. The site plan must state that
all driveways, sidewalks, curbs and gutters are to be installed in
accordance with the standards prescribed by the Public Works
Department.
B. Lighting. All developments shall provide adequate lighting so as to
assure safety and security. Lighting installations shall not have an
adverse impact on traffic safety or on the surrounding area. Light
sources shall be shielded and there shall be no spillover onto adjacent
properties. The site plan must reflect compliance with this requirement.
C. Stormwater Drainage. Provisions for storm surface drainage shall be in
accordance with the design standards of the Public Works Department
indicating location, size, types and grades of sewers, drainage
structures, ditches and connection to existing drainage system.
Stormwater drainage shall be connected to a storm sewer whenever
one is available as determined by the City. Disposal of storm or natural
waters both on and off the site shall be provided in such a manner as
not to have a detrimental effect on the property of others or the public
right-of-way and in keeping with the above standards. The site plan
must reflect compliance with this requirement.
D. Utilities. Provision of hookups to public utilities shall be the
responsibility of the applicant and connections shall be installed in
accordance with the standards of the Public Works Department. All
connections shall be shown on the site plan.
E. Public Safety. The Public Works Department shall be invited to review
all site plans for treatment of bulk trash disposal and other
environmental health matters. The Fire Department shall review all site
plans to determine adequacy of access and other aspects of public
safety.
F. Site Specific Recommendations In The City Master Plan. If any City
Master Plan contains recommendations that are specific to the area
defined by the site plan, the Plan Commission shall review the site plan
to determine its consistency with all applicable recommendations.
G. Landscaping. The applicant is required to submit a separate landscape
plan in accordance with Article XXX: Trees and Landscaping
Regulations. [Ord. No. 6430 §1, 6-14-2016]
H. Waiver Of Site Plan Review Submittal Requirements. The Director of
Planning and Development Services may waive any of the submittal
requirements defined in Subsections of this Section 405.1030 upon
Section
405.1020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1030
AO:580
Section 405.1040. Procedures For Site Plan Review [Ord. No. 5814
§1(10.6), 4-27-2004]
making a determination that such requirements are unnecessary due to
the scope and nature of the proposed development.
A. Pre-Application Conference. Before filing an application for approval of
a site plan, the applicant may, at its election, confer with the Director of
Planning and Development Services and representatives of any other
City departments regarding his/her potential proposal. Such action
does not require formal application fees or filing of a site development
plan or landscape plan and is not to be construed as an application for
formal approval and shall not be in lieu of the same. Comments made by
staff during such conferences shall not constitute representations or
warranties with respect to any matter discussed and shall not be
binding upon staff members or members of the Plan Commission,
Architectural Review Board or Board of Aldermen.
B. Fees. Every site plan submitted for review shall be accompanied by
processing fee. The applicant shall pay a fee as required by the fee
schedule approved by the Board of Aldermen. The fee shall be paid the
City of Clayton to the credit of the General Revenue Fund of the City.
C. Review By City Staff.
1. Upon receipt by the Director of Planning and Development
Services or his/her designee of a complete site plan in compliance
with the site plan requirements stated in Sections 405.1010
through 405.1030, the plan shall be reviewed at the next regularly
scheduled site plan review meeting. At such meeting, joint review
of the plans by the departments listed below shall occur. Such
meetings shall be held regularly at a time agreed upon by the
departments concerned. Within seven (7) calendar days of the
meeting date, a letter shall be forwarded to the person or firm
submitting the plan stating the comments of the reviewing
departments. Sixty (60) days from the date on the comment letter,
revised plans addressing the listed comments and concerns must
be submitted for further review. If revised plans are not submitted
within the said time limit, review of the site plan will be suspended.
If there are no comments, then within seven (7) calendar days of
the meeting, a letter shall be forwarded to the person or firm
submitting the plan requesting that plans be submitted as per
Section 405.1010 above, which can then be forwarded to the Plan
Commission.
2. Site plans may be reviewed for completeness by one (1) or more of
the following departments: Public Works, Planning and
Development Services and Clayton Fire in accordance with the
following:
a. Department of Public Works review.
Section
405.1030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1040
AO:581
(1) The Department of Public Works shall review and approve
the right-of-way, pavement required, curb cuts and other
design features to abutting public streets or private or new
streets (other than multiple-family access drives within the
development connecting the development with a major
street or streets).
(2) Plans shall be reviewed and approved for conceptual
compliance with the various codes and ordinances relating
to grading, drainage, silt control, storm sewer services,
floodplain (as it affects the development), topographical
changes and other applicable requirements.
(3) At such times as a development is proposed adjacent to a
public right-of-way and that development imposes an
additional burden on the said public right-of-way due to an
increase in vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic, then the
proponent shall be required to improve that portion of the
said public right-of-way adjacent to the development in
accordance with the City of Clayton, Department of Public
Works standards or cause the same to be done.
Additionally, the proponent may be required to improve
any portion of the said public right-of-way not immediately
adjacent to the development, which the Director of Public
Works deems to have been negatively impacted as a result
of the development in accordance with the City of Clayton
Department of Public Works standards or cause the same
to be done. At the conclusion of the construction of any
proposed development, the applicant shall restore the
adjacent public right-of-way in accordance with the City of
Clayton, Department of Public Works standards or shall
cause the same to be done.
(4) The Department of Public Works shall review and approve
the plans for compliance with the various codes and
ordinances relating to sanitary sewers.
b. Department of Planning and Development Services review.
(1) The Department of Planning and Development Services
shall review and approve the internal vehicular and
pedestrian circulation system, landscaping, parking areas
and additional characteristics of site design as deemed
appropriate. Landscaping may include recontouring, earth
berms, vegetative covering, existing and proposed trees,
screening or other material alteration of the site as
deemed appropriate to enhance areas outside the public
right-of-way or to preserve the integrity of the subject
properties and/or adjacent properties. Internal circulation
shall include the location, nature, extent, construction and
design of internal driveway lanes, parking lots, driveways
Section
405.1040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1040
AO:582
to or through parking lots and any other facilities that
provide vehicular access to buildings, structures and
improvements upon a given lot or tract.
(2) The Department of Planning and Development Services
shall review the architectural design of the project in
regard to the location, size and design of the structures,
parking areas, driveways, landscaping, topography and
any other feature determined to affect the site or the
adjacent properties. The Department of Planning and
Development Services shall also review all components of
the project in relation to the adjacent structures and
compatibility with the neighborhood. This review will
include but not limited to: height, density, design of
structures, landscaping, buffer zones, drainage and
topographical features as they relate to adjacent
properties and the surrounding neighborhood.
c. The City of Clayton Fire Department shall review and approve
the site plans for compliance with the all currently adopted fire
codes as modified.
d. All departments shall review and approve the plans for
compliance with all applicable requirements of the adopted
Building Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, Electrical
Code, Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance, Public Right-
Of-Way Standards and any other applicable City ordinances,
codes, standards, guidelines and good planning practices. This
site plan review shall not constitute, or substitute for,
compliance with applicable technical codes and the application
and approval process required for issuance of building and
other required permits.
3. The Director of Planning and Development Services or his/her
designee shall submit the site plan to the Plan Commission, at such
time the plan is complete and satisfactory to the staff. Developer
and staff may confer until the plan is determined to be complete
and satisfactory. City staff will make every effort to insure the site
plan is processed in a timely manner.
D. Review By Plan Commission.
1. The Plan Commission shall render a decision on a site plan review
application within sixty (60) days from the date first considered by
the Plan Commission. "First considered" shall mean that the
application request appears on the Plan Commission agenda and is
discussed. The site plan shall be deemed approved if the Plan
Commission fails to render a decision within the sixty (60) day
period, unless said time period is extended by mutual agreement,
in writing, of the Plan Commission and the applicant to extend the
sixty (60) day deadline.
Section
405.1040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1040
AO:583
Section 405.1050. Amendments or Modifications [Ord. No. 5814
§1(10.7), 4-27-2004]
2. In considering and acting upon site plans, landscape plans and
other applicable plans, the Plan Commission shall take the
following objectives into consideration through the site plan review
process:
a. Creation of a desirable environment.
b. Promotion of a creative approach to the use of land and related
physical facilities resulting in better design and development,
including aesthetic amenities.
c. Combination and coordination of architectural styles, building
forms and building relationships.
d. Preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics
such as natural topography, vegetation and geologic features
and the prevention of soil erosion.
e. Preservation of buildings which are architecturally or
historically significant or contribute to the character of the
City.
f. Use of design, landscape or architectural features to create a
pleasing environment.
g. Inclusion of special features.
h. Elimination of deteriorated structures or incompatible uses
through redevelopment or rehabilitation.
E. Certification By Plan Commission. The action of the Plan Commission
approving the application shall be noted on all copies of the site plan,
landscape plan and other applicable plans to be retained in the record,
referenced and attached to any changes or condition determined. One
(1) such copy shall be returned to the applicant and others retained as
required for records or further action by the Plan Commission or other
appropriate department of the City.
A. Proposed amendments or modifications to approved site plans and/or
landscape plans must be submitted to the Director of Planning and
Development Services or his/her designee in writing with a copy of the
original plan depicting the amendment(s) thereon.
B. Such amendments or modifications shall be submitted in accordance
with the procedures and requirements of this Article and shall be
distributed to the appropriate departments for review.
C. The City Manager or his/her designee may waive review by other
departments where the City Manager or his/her designee has
determined that such modification of the original site plan and/or
Section
405.1040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1050
AO:584
Section 405.1060. Time Limit On Approval [Ord. No. 5814 §1(10.8),
4-27-2004]
Approval of the site plan, landscape plan and other applicable plans shall be
void unless a building permit has been issued within one (1) year from the
date of approval. A written request for an extension must be received by the
Director of Planning and Development Services not less than forty-five (45)
days prior to the expiration of the original one (1) year period. The applicant
shall bear the burden of providing just cause for delay, proof that the project
remains the same and proof that no circumstances bearing on the suitability
of the project have changed. Approval of a request for an extension is at the
sole discretion of the Plan Commission.
Section 405.1070. Reapplication [Ord. No. 5814 §1(10.9),
4-27-2004]
In the event that the City Plan Commission denies an application, no request
for a hearing upon the same application or substantially similar application
will be accepted for a period of at least one (1) year from date of denial by
the City Plan Commission.
Section 405.1080. Building Permit Issuance [Ord. No. 5814
§1(10.10), 4-27-2004]
Building permits shall be issued in accordance with approved site plans. A
copy of an approved site plan shall be retained in the records of the office
of the Department of Planning and Development Services and all building
and occupancy permits issued by the Director of Planning and Development
Services or his/her designee shall conform to the provisions of the approved
site plan.
Section 405.1090. Appeals [Ord. No. 5814 §1(10.11), 4-27-2004]
An aggrieved party may, within fifteen (15) days of the decision for which
redress is sought, file with the Board of Aldermen a written request for
reconsideration and appeal of any decision of the Plan Commission under
this Article. The written request must set forth in a concise manner the
decision being appealed and all grounds known to the appellant as to
wherein and why the decision is allegedly in error. The request for
reconsideration and appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within the
time specified above. A copy of the request and any supporting documents
or materials filed by the aggrieved party must be served by the aggrieved
party on the applicant (if different than the aggrieved party) by certified
U.S. mail, return receipt requested, within three (3) days of filing with the
City Clerk. Proof of service on the applicant must be filed with the City
Clerk within six (6) days of filing of the request. The Board of Aldermen
landscaping plan has no impact on the original proposal and still
remains in conformance with City standards and regulations. Such
determination shall be made in writing to the applicant.
Section
405.1050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1090
AO:585
may consider the appeal on the record of the prior decision by the Plan
Commission or may, at its sole discretion, receive additional evidence in
such manner as it deems appropriate in light of the circumstances.
Section 405.1100. Action By The Board of Aldermen [Ord. No. 5814
§1(10.12), 4-27-2004]
The Board of Aldermen shall hear such interested parties as may desire
to be heard and after said hearing shall approve, modify or disapprove
the application. If the Board of Aldermen approves the application, the
Director of Planning and Development Services or his/her designee shall
promptly issue the requested permit. If the application is approved with
modifications, the Director of Planning and Development Services or his/
her designee will issue a permit after the applicant submits the appropriate
revisions to the plans and/or specifications required by the Board of
Aldermen.
Section 405.1110. Stop Work Order [Ord. No. 5814 §1(10.13),
4-27-2004]
A stop work order shall be put on the project if any or all provisions of
the approved site plan, landscape plan or other applicable plans are not
adhered to during the development of the site.
Section 405.1120. through Section 405.1150. (Reserved)
Section
405.1090
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1120
AO:586
ARTICLE IX
Special Development District
Section 405.1160. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. A),
§11.1, 7-8-2008]
A. Special developments are a distinct zoning district and are appropriate
where a development project is proposed to be large-scale and
constructed in multiple phases.
B. Special development designation is appropriate where a development
project is proposed on a lot or, when combined, a series of lots which
total at least three (3) acres in size and is unable to meet the
established zoning criteria due to unusual circumstances in project
size, phasing, configuration or particular design features. The special
development process provides the flexibility needed to encourage
efficient use of land and resources, promoting greater efficiency in
public and utility services while encouraging innovation in the planning
and building of a large-scale development which involves a multiphased,
multi-year timeframe.
C. The special development process is to enable compatible development,
provide a public benefit as itemized in Section 405.1190 and achieve
the following objectives:
1. Allow for a complex, large scale project to be phased in a manner
advantageous to the City, developer and adjacent neighborhoods;
2. Development of a large tract of land which is vacant or
underutilized in a coordinated manner;
3. Creation of a more desirable environment than would be possible
through strict application of other City land use regulations
designed for smaller projects;
4. Promotion of a creative approach to the use of land and related
physical facilities resulting in better design and development,
including aesthetic amenities;
5. Combination and coordination of architectural styles, building
forms and building relationships covering different phases within a
single development project;
6. Preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics
such as natural topography, vegetation and geologic features and
the prevention of soil erosion;
7. Preservation of buildings which are architecturally or historically
significant or contribute to the character of the City;
8. Use of design, landscape or architectural features to create a
pleasing environment;
Section
405.1160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1160
AO:587
Section 405.1170. Zoning Amendment [Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. A),
§11.2, 7-8-2008]
Section 405.1180. Special Development Plan and Subdistricts
(Phases) [Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. A), §11.3, 7-8-2008]
A special development plan shall be submitted which provides the general
components of the proposed development. To ensure that various
components of the project meet the criteria of the special development plan,
subdistricts shall be required for each phase of the project. The subdistricts
shall be identified as part of the rezoning for special development districts.
In addition, each subdistrict shall be subject to the provisions of Article
VIII of Chapter 405, "Site Plan Review" and Article III of Chapter 400,
"Architectural Review".
Section 405.1190. Public Benefit [Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. A), §11.4,
7-8-2008]
9. Inclusion of special features;
10. Elimination of deteriorated structures or incompatible uses
through redevelopment or rehabilitation; and
11. Facilitate implementation of the recommendations of the Business
Districts Master Plan, where applicable.
A. The special development district is a zoning amendment intended to
provide a method of consideration for a multi-phased development in a
unified land plan that will improve the quality of the subject properties
and have a beneficial effect on adjacent areas.
B. Rezoning to a special development district is allowed only in areas
where the existing zoning designation is "C-1", "C-2", High Density
Commercial (HDC) and "S-1", inclusive.
A. In exchange for waivers of certain requirements of this Chapter, public
benefit shall be provided as determined by the Plan Commission and
Board of Aldermen. The public benefits to the City that are intended to
be derived from the approval of special developments may include, but
are not limited to:
1. Use of large tracts of land in a manner which provides a cohesive
phased development and minimizes construction impact;
2. Extraordinary landscaping and greenspace provisions;
3. Garage entryways by virtue of their location, materials and design
that blend with the architecture of the surrounding neighborhood;
4. Architectural distinction and significance that would make the
development noteworthy;
Section
405.1160
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1190
AO:588
Section 405.1200. Application and Plan Requirements [Ord. No.
6022 §1(Att. A), §11.5, 7-8-2008]
5. Extensive use of high quality building materials that would add
significant value to the property and benefit adjacent properties;
6. Provision of new public infrastructure including, but not limited to,
streets, curbs, sidewalks, sanitary sewers, storm water sewers,
lighting and public parking;
7. Provisions for reduced sale or rental for a percentage of the
residential units to encourage the goal of affordable housing, if
residential is proposed;
8. Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED)
certification from the U.S. Green Building Council at a minimum
"Certified" level including applicable regional priorities or an
equivalent nationally recognized third party verification
organization as determined by the Plan Commission.
B. For projects proposed within the Central Business District, the public
benefits specific to the Central Business District that are intended to be
derived from the approval of Special Development Districts may
include, but are not limited to, the following accessory complimentary
features:
1. Inclusion of below grade public parking facility located underneath
the proposed development;
2. Inclusion of public parking spaces in excess of what is required by
Chapter 405, Article XXV, "Off-Street Parking And Loading
Regulations" of the Municipal Code;
3. Inclusion of street level landscape garden, plaza or park available
for public use;
4. Inclusion of special access features or provisions to existing or
planned public transit facilities;
5. Inclusion of a mixed use development plan where no single use
exceeds eighty percent (80%) of the total floor area;
6. Public art;
7. Architectural distinction and significance that would make the
building(s) noteworthy; and
8. Extensive use of high quality building materials that would add to
the assessed valuation of the structure(s).
A. An applicant shall file an application for rezoning and Special
Development District on a form provided by the Department of Planning
and Development Services. When a project requires multiple approvals
Section
405.1190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1200
AO:589
and plan sets (such as site plan and architectural review), the applicant
may submit the same plans (combined plan sets) for all applicable
approvals, provided the combined sets include all of the information
required for each applicable project review. At the time that an
application is filed, the applicant shall pay a fee as required by the fee
schedule approved by the Board of Aldermen. The fee shall be paid to
the City of Clayton to the credit of the general revenue fund of the City.
B. The application process for a designated Special Development District
includes a request for rezoning pursuant to the provisions of Article XI
"Text Amendments And Rezoning" of this Chapter. Rezoning must be
completed concurrently with the approval process for the special
development.
1. Application and submission requirements for a Special
Development District. The Special Development District
application shall be submitted on a form provided by the
Department of Planning and Development Services accompanied
by such number of copies of documents as the Director of Planning
and Development Services, or his/her designee, may require for
processing of the application and shall include at a minimum the
following general information:
a. The applicant's name, address, telephone number and interest
in the property;
b. Certification that the applicant is registered to do business in
the State of Missouri and is in good standing to develop the
site;
c. The owner's name, address and telephone number, if different
than the applicant, and the owner's signed consent to the filing
of the application;
d. A certificate of disclosure of ownership interest;
e. The street address and legal description of the subject
property;
f. The current zoning classification, proposed zoning district
boundaries and present use of the subject property;
g. A vicinity map with north arrow, scale and date indicating the
zoning classifications and current uses of properties within two
hundred fifty (250) feet of the subject property;
h. The proposed title of the project and the names, addresses and
telephone numbers of the architect, landscape architect,
planner and/or engineer on the project.
2. Special development plan. The special development plan shall be
drawn at a scale of one inch equals twenty feet (1 inch = 20 feet) or
Section
405.1200
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1200
AO:590
larger, unless otherwise approved by the Director of Planning and
Development Services, setting forth at least the following:
a. The location, dimensions and total area of the site;
b. Identification of each subdistrict within the special
development plan and a schedule stating the approximate
beginning and completion time for each subdistrict, including
substantiation that each of the phases identified will be
constructed;
c. The location and use of each proposed building or structure;
d. The maximum height of each building or structure;
e. The maximum number and type of dwelling units in each
building and the overall maximum dwelling unit density (if
residential uses are proposed);
f. The location of permanent open spaces including landscape
buffers;
g. Graphics, including building massing diagrams, if requested by
the Director of Planning and Development Services;
h. The minimum number and general location of parking spaces
and loading facilities;
i. The general traffic circulation pattern within the area of the
development, including the location and description of public
improvements to be installed, including streets and future
easements;
j. A traffic impact analysis prepared by a registered traffic
engineer depicting the project's impact on vehicular and
pedestrian traffic;
k. A parking study if shared parking is proposed and a shadow
study if requested by the Director of Planning and
Development;
l. Other professional or technical studies or reports as may be
required by the Director of Planning and Development
Services to clearly understand the project. The applicant shall
be responsible for any costs and/or expenses incurred as a
result of engaging such outside professional assistance;
m. The general drainage plan for the development;
n. Copies of any restrictive covenants that are to be recorded
with respect to property in the proposed special development;
Section
405.1200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1200
AO:591
Section 405.1210. Criteria For Approval — Special Development
Plan [Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. A), §11.6, 7-8-2008]
o. A statement showing the relationship of the proposed special
development to the goals of the City's Master Plan, if
applicable, or justification for variations;
p. A preliminary plat of survey of the parcel of land, lot(s),
block(s) or parts or portions thereof, drawn to scale, showing
the actual dimensions of the parcel, lot(s), block(s), or parts or
portions thereof, according to the registered or recorded plat
of such land.
Each drawing shall be sealed, signed and dated by
the licensed entity who prepared the drawing or under
whose immediate personal supervision the plan has
been prepared. Revised plans and amended or
modified approved plans shall also be so authenticated
by the licensed entity who prepared the revision,
amendment or modification to the drawing or under
whose immediate personal supervision the plan has
been revised, amended or modified.
A. The approval criteria are designed to achieve the goals as set forth in
Section 405.1160 of this Article. The Plan Commission shall recommend
to the Board of Aldermen approval, approval with conditions or denial
of the special development plan. In considering and acting upon the
special development plan, the Plan Commission and Board of Aldermen
shall take the following objectives into consideration through the
special development process:
1. The proposed development, including proposed phases and
schedule, is in harmony with general purposes and intent of
Chapter 405 of the Municipal Code and is compatible with and
implements the planning goals and objectives of the City;
2. Streets or other means of access to the proposed development
meet City of Clayton standards and are suitable to carry anticipated
traffic;
3. The internal circulation system of the proposed development
encourages safe movement for vehicles and pedestrians;
4. Existing or proposed utility services are adequate for the proposed
development;
5. Appropriate buffering is provided to protect adjacent land uses
from light, noise and visual impacts;
6. The proposed development preserves unique environmental
features of the property;
Section
405.1200
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1210
AO:592
Section 405.1220. Procedures For Approval of A Special
Development Plan [Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. A), §11.7, 7-8-2008]
Upon the review of an application and plans, the Director of Planning and
Development Services, or his/her designee, shall notify the applicant of
any deficiencies and/or modifications necessary to perfect the application.
Once the submittal is deemed complete, the application is forwarded to
the Plan Commission and Board of Aldermen for their consideration and
approval, respectively. The application for a special development district
shall be reviewed and decided upon in accordance with the procedures for
a zone change established by Article XI "Text Amendments And Rezoning"
of this zoning ordinance. Approval of the special development district is
determined solely in the legislative discretion of the Board of Aldermen.
Once approved, the special development district plan and subdistricts
become the specific zoning regulations of the property.
Section 405.1230. Conditions of Approval For Special Development
Plan [Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. A), 11.8, 7-8-2008]
7. The proposed height, arrangement and uses of the proposed
development are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood
and the City as a whole;
8. The proposed development complies with all other applicable codes
and ordinances.
A. The Board of Aldermen may impose such conditions and limitations as
may be necessary or appropriate to prevent or minimize adverse effects
upon other property and improvements in the vicinity of the special
development district, upon the City as a whole or upon public facilities
and services. These conditions may include, but are not limited to,
conditions concerning use, construction, character, location,
landscaping, screening, parking, maintenance, operational elements
that would impact adjoining land uses and other matters relating to the
purposes and objectives of these regulations. Such conditions shall be
expressly set forth in the ordinance authorizing the special
development plan. Violation of any such condition or limitation shall be
a violation of these regulations and subject the offender to the penalties
prescribed for the violation of this Chapter. Additionally, violation of any
such condition or limitation shall be a violation of these regulations and
shall constitute grounds for revocation of the approval authorizing the
special development.
B. The ordinance approving a special development shall contain a legal
description of the property subject to the special development. The
ordinance, along with the development plan, shall be recorded by the
applicant in the office of County Recorder of Deeds. The applicant must
present proof of such recording before any permits may be issued.
C. Following special development approval, the special development plan
and the associated subdistrict plans, rather than any other provision of
Section
405.1210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1230
AO:593
Section 405.1240. Special Development Plan Subdistricts (Phases)
[Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. A), §11.9, 7-8-2008]
Chapter 405, shall govern the use, parking, loading, sign, bulk, space
and yard regulations applicable to the subject property, and no use or
development, other than temporary uses, shall be permitted within the
area of the special development district pursuant to the zoning district
regulations otherwise applicable to such area.
A. In addition to approval of the special development plan by the Board of
Aldermen, the applicant shall be required to submit a subdistrict
development plan for each identified phase which provides detailed
information related to a specific phase of the development. The
subdistrict development plan shall be in substantial conformance with
the special development plan as determined by the Board of Aldermen
upon recommendation of the Plan Commission. The subdistrict
development plan shall be in addition to any other required approvals
such as site plan review or architectural review and may be submitted
concurrently.
1. Subdistrict development plan. The subdistrict development plan to
be considered for each phase shall be drawn at a scale of one inch
equals twenty feet (1 inch = 20 feet) or larger, unless otherwise
approved by the Director of Planning and Development Services,
setting forth at least the following:
a. The location, dimensions and total area of the phase under
consideration;
b. The location and use of each proposed building or structure,
including floor areas and height of each in the subject phase;
c. The number and type of dwelling units in each building and the
overall dwelling unit density (if residential uses are proposed);
d. A separate landscape plan in accordance with Article XXX:
Trees and Landscaping Regulations; [Ord. No. 6430 §1,
6-14-2016]
e. Architectural drawings including exterior elevations, floor
plans and cross sections for each of the buildings/structures in
the subject phase;
f. The number and location of parking spaces and loading
facilities associated with the subject phase;
g. The traffic circulation pattern within the subject phase,
including the location and description of public improvements
and streets to be installed;
h. Verification that the traffic impact has not substantially
changed from the special development plan approval and that
Section
405.1230
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1240
AO:594
Section 405.1250. Criteria For Approval — Subdistrict Development
Plan [Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. A), §11.10, 7-8-2008]
the subdistrict plan provides the mitigation measures as
required in the original Traffic Impact Study;
i. The drainage plan for the development phase;
j. Copies of any restrictive covenants or easements/dedications
that are to be recorded with respect to property in the
proposed subdistrict phase plan;
k. Depictions on plans showing the subdistrict phase plan is in
compliance with approved special development district plan;
l. A plat of survey of the parcel of land, lot(s), block(s) or parts or
portions thereof, drawn to scale, showing the actual
dimensions of the parcel, lot(s), block(s) or parts or portions
thereof according to the registered or recorded plat of such
land;
m. Other professional or technical studies or reports as may be
required by the Director of Planning and Development
Services to clearly understand this phase of the project. The
applicant shall be responsible for any costs and/or expenses
incurred as a result of engaging such outside professional
assistance.
2. Each drawing shall be sealed, signed and dated by the licensed
entity who prepared the drawing or under whose immediate
personal supervision the plan has been prepared. Revised plans
and amended or modified approved plans shall also be so
authenticated by the licensed entity who prepared the revision,
amendment or modification to the drawing or under whose
immediate personal supervision the plan has been revised,
amended or modified.
A. The approval criteria are designed to achieve the goals of the special
development plan as set forth in Section 405.1160 of this Article. The
Plan Commission shall recommend to the Board of Aldermen approval,
with conditions or denial of the subdistrict development plan. In
considering and acting upon development plans, landscape plans and
other applicable plans, the Plan Commission shall take the following
objectives into consideration through the special development process:
1. The proposed development is consistent with the special
development plan for this site;
2. Streets or other means of access to the proposed phase of
development meet City of Clayton standards and are suitable and
adequate to carry anticipated traffic;
Section
405.1240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1250
AO:595
Section 405.1260. Procedures For Approval of A Subdistrict
Development Plan [Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. A), §11.11, 7-8-2008]
Upon the review of an application and plans, the Director of Planning and
Development Services, or his/her designee, shall notify the applicant of
any deficiencies and/or modifications necessary to perfect the application.
Once the submittal is deemed complete, the application is forwarded to
the Plan Commission and Board of Aldermen for their consideration and
approval, respectively. The application for a subdistrict development plan
shall be reviewed and decided upon in accordance with the criteria outlined
in Section 405.1230 of this Article. Approval of the subdistrict development
plan is determined by consideration of the phase's compliance with the
3. The internal circulation system of the proposed phase encourages
safe movement for vehicles and pedestrians and is in compliance
with the special development plan;
4. Existing or proposed utility services are adequate for the proposed
subdistrict and is in conformance with the special development
plan;
5. Appropriate buffering is provided to protect adjacent land uses
from light, noise and visual impacts;
6. Architecture and building materials are consistent with the design
of the special development plan, are consistent with other phases
and are compatible with the adjacent neighborhood;
7. Trees and landscaping are appropriate with the scale of the
development and consistent with Article XXX: Trees and
Landscaping Regulations. [Ord. No. 6430 §1, 6-14-2016]
8. Topography. Every attempt shall be made to preserve the
topography of the property. If the topography must be altered to
accommodate construction, the plan must contain specific
information regarding the proposed topography change and its
impact on the flow of drainage on adjacent properties.
9. New plantings. New developments should be screened from
adjacent properties by use of high caliper tree plantings. [Ord. No.
6430 §1, 6-14-2016]
10. Tree preservation. The preservation of mature trees is encouraged.
[Ord. No. 6430 §1, 6-14-2016]
11. The materials, design and uses are compatible with the
neighborhood surrounding the proposed development phase and
the City as a whole.
12. The proposed development phase complies with all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
Section
405.1250
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1260
AO:596
special development plan and good planning practices in the legislative
discretion of the Board of Aldermen.
Section 405.1270. Re-Application [Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. A), §11.12,
7-8-2008]
In the event the Board of Aldermen denies an application for a special
development district, no request for hearing upon the same application or
substantially similar application will be accepted for a period of at least one
(1) year from the date of denial by the Board of Aldermen.
Section 405.1280. Appeals [Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. A), §11.13,
7-8-2008]
An aggrieved party may, within fifteen (15) days of the decision for which
redress is sought, file with the Board of Aldermen a written request for
reconsideration and appeal of any decisions of the Board of Aldermen
under this Article. The written request must set forth in a concise manner
the decision being appealed and all grounds known to the appellant as
to wherein and why the decision is allegedly in error. The request for
reconsideration and appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within the time
specified above. A copy of the request and any supporting documents or
materials filed by aggrieved party must be served by the aggrieved party on
the applicant (if different than the aggrieved party) by certified U.S. mail,
return receipt requested, within three (3) days of filing with the City Clerk.
Proof of service on the applicant must be filed with the City Clerk within
six (6) days of filing of the request. The Board of Aldermen may consider
the appeal on the record of the prior decision or may, at its sole discretion,
receive additional evidence in such manner as it deems appropriate in light
of the circumstances.
Section 405.1290. Time Limit On Approved Special Development
[Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. A), §11.14, 7-8-2008]
There shall be no time limit on an approved special development plan;
however, the subdistrict development plan shall be valid for a period no
longer than one (1) year after approval by the Board of Aldermen unless a
building permit is issued and construction is actually begun and is diligently
pursued within that period. A written request for an extension of a
subdistrict development plan must be received by the City Clerk not less
than forty-five (45) days prior to the expiration of the original one (1) year
period. The applicant shall bear the burden of providing just cause for delay,
proof that the project remains the same and proof that no circumstances
bearing on the suitability of the project have changed. Approval of a request
for an extension is at the sole discretion of the Board of Aldermen.
Section 405.1300. Building Permit Issuance [Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att.
A), §11.15, 7-8-2008]
Section
405.1260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1300
AO:597
Section 405.1310. Revocation [Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. A), §11.16,
7-8-2008]
The City shall have the authority to order the abatement, removal and/
or conformity of any special development, including subdistricts, or any
portion thereof that is contrary to any of the conditions and/or provisions
of the approved special development. Provided however, that the property
owner was first served with an order to abate, remove and/or bring into
conformity the violation(s), and the property owner failed to comply with
the order within ten (10) days of receiving the order and following a public
hearing held in accordance with this Article. If the construction is deemed
hazardous by the City, immediate action may be taken by the City to correct
the situation.
Section 405.1320. Adjustments [Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. A), §11.17,
7-8-2008]
A. The approval of a proposed special development by the Board of
Aldermen shall not authorize the establishment or extension of any use
nor the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving
of any building or structure, but shall authorize the preparation, filing
and processing of applications for any permits or approvals that may be
required by the regulations of the City including, but not limited to, a
building permit, certificate of occupancy and, where applicable,
subdivision approval.
B. Building permits shall be issued in accordance with the approved
subdistrict development plan. A copy of the approved subdistrict plans
shall be retained in the records of the Department of Planning and
Development Services and all building and occupancy permits issued by
the Director of Planning and Development Services, or his/her
designee, shall conform to the provisions of the approved subdistrict
development plan.
A. No adjustment shall be made in the construction, development or use
without a new application under the provisions of these regulations.
However, minor adjustments may be made subject to written approval
by the City Manager. Additionally, a request for an extension to the date
of completion may be approved by the Board of Aldermen upon
recommendation from the Director of Planning and Development
Services.
B. Minor Adjustments.
1. The City Manager may authorize minor adjustments to the
approved subdistrict development plan when such adjustments
appear necessary in light of technical or engineering
considerations. Such minor adjustments shall be limited to the
following elements:
Section
405.1300
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1320
AO:598
a. Adjusting the distance as shown on the approved subdistrict
development plan between any one (1) structure or group of
structures and any other structure or group of structures, or
any vehicular circulation element or any boundary of the site.
b. Adjusting the location of any open space.
c. Adjusting any final grade.
d. Altering the types of landscaping elements and their
arrangement within the required landscaping buffer area.
e. The City Manager may decline to approve such minor
adjustments if he/she deems the changes are significant and
refer the application to the Board of Aldermen (see Major
Amendments).
2. Such minor adjustments shall be consistent with the intent and
purpose of these regulations and the approved special development
plan and subdistrict development plan, and shall be the minimum
necessary to overcome the particular difficulty and shall not be
approved if such adjustments would result in a violation of any
standard or requirement of these regulations.
C. Major Amendments.
1. All major amendments to the approved subdistrict development
plan will require a public hearing held by the Board of Aldermen
and notice to all property owners whose properties are located
within two hundred (200) feet of the special development
subdistrict. A request for an amendment to the approved
subdistrict development plan shall be considered a major
amendment, only if the following apply:
a. An increase or decrease in square footage or density from the
original proposal;
b. Change in the number of parking spaces from the original
approval;
c. Changes in proposed land uses (office become retail/
restaurant);
d. Significant changes to the site, landscaping and/or
streetscape;
e. The amendment requires a modification of any written
conditions of approval or recorded easements;
f. Upon finding that any changes in the plan as approved will not
be in substantial conformity with the approved subdistrict
development plan.
Section
405.1320
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1320
AO:599
Section 405.1330. through Section 405.1350. (Reserved)
2. If the Board of Aldermen determines that a major amendment is not
in substantial conformity with the approved subdistrict
development plan, then the Board of Aldermen shall review the
request and approve or disapprove the amendment. The fee for a
major amendment to the approved subdistrict development plan
shall be as set forth in the fee schedule as approved by the Board of
Aldermen.
Section
405.1320
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1330
AO:600
ARTICLE X
Planned Unit Development District
Section 405.1360. Purpose Statement. [Ord. No. 6611,
8-27-2019109]
Section 405.1365. Definitions. [Ord. No. 6611, 8-27-2019]
For the purposes of the PUD zone, certain terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives shall be construed as specified in this Section. Words used in
the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular. The word
"shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. Words and phrases
A. The purpose of the planned unit development process is to foster
appropriate use of existing buildings and enable compatible
redevelopment which provides public benefits as identified in Section
405.1380 and achieves the following objectives:
1. Creation of a planned mixture of land uses while maintaining a
more desirable environment through the combination and
coordination of architectural styles, building forms, common
facilities and buffers between uses;
2. Promotion of a creative approach to the use of land and related
physical facilities resulting in better design and development,
including aesthetics and public amenities;
3. More open space or natural resource protection than likely under
as-of-right zoning;
4. Land use designs that incorporate natural terrain features, to
preserve natural open spaces and desirable site characteristics
such as restoration and maintenance of natural systems, native
vegetation and geologic features;
5. Preservation of buildings which are architecturally or historically
significant or contribute to the character of the City;
6. A greater mix of housing types and mix of residential and
commercial land uses designed in a complementary manner to
maintain community character;
7. Creating or contributing to neighborhoods that are more
pedestrian and public transit-oriented;
8. Elimination of deteriorated structures or incompatible uses
through redevelopment or rehabilitation; and,
9. Implement the recommendations of the Clayton Master Plan and
Downtown Master Plan.
109. Editor's Note: Former Article X, Planned Unit Development, containing Sections 405.1360
through 405.1490, was repealed 8-27-2019 by Ord. No. 6611.
Section
405.1360
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1365
AO:601
not herein defined shall have the meanings given to them in Article III,
Definitions; otherwise not defined shall be given their usual meaning except
where the context clearly indicates a different or specific meaning.
COMMON AREAS — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water or a
combination of land and water within the site designated for planned unit
development and designated and intended for the use and enjoyment of
residents and employees of a planned unit development. Common areas
may contain such complimentary structures and improvements as are
necessary and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of residents and
employees of the planned unit development.
MIXED USE PUD — A planned unit development where there will result in
a mix of two (2) or more types of authorized land uses or development.
OPEN SPACE — Green areas on a parcel or parcels of land or an area of
water or a combination of land and water within the site designated for
a planned unit development which are without above-ground structures or
buildings, parking lots or public sidewalks of any nature whatsoever and
which shall be included but not limited to landscape areas, green areas in
parks, garden areas, lawns, yards and other undeveloped areas.
RESIDENTIAL PUD — Any planned unit development designed and
intended primarily for residential use regardless of the type of building in
which such residence is located, i.e., conventional single-family residences,
townhouses, duplexes, multi-family structures or apartments.
YARDS — Areas created by setbacks and lot lines.
Section 405.1370. General Requirements. [Ord. No. 6611,
8-27-2019]
A. Distinct Zoning District. Planned Unit Development (PUD) is a distinct
zoning district and requires a request for a change in the zoning district
designation, as described by the official zoning map. It is intended to
provide a means for the redevelopment of an area in a unified land
development that will improve the quality of the subject properties and
have a beneficial effect on adjacent properties.
B. Types Of PUD Districts. There are two (2) types of PUD zoning districts:
1. Residential.
2. Mixed Use.
C. Residential. Rezoning to a residential planned unit development district
is allowed only in areas where the existing zoning designation is
Residential, where one hundred percent (100%) of the gross square feet
of the buildings is used for residential purposes and when the project is
developed on a lot at least thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in size.
D. Mixed Use. Rezoning to a mixed use planned unit development district
is allowed only in areas where the existing zoning designation is nonresidential,
the proposed building(s) totals fifty thousand (50,000) gross
Section
405.1365
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1370
AO:602
square feet or more, and in overlay districts requiring planned unit
development designation.
Mixed use planned unit developments are appropriate when the project
incorporates at least two (2) of the following four (4) categories of use
and the existing zoning allows for mixed use development.
The first floor of any mixed-use building shall be dedicated to
commercial land uses with public entrances to these uses that front
along a major street; non-residential uses are also allowed on other
floors of a mixed-use building.
1. Office use;
2. Commercial land uses such as, retail, restaurant, entertainment
venues, etc.;
3. Residential use;
4. Hotel;
5. Hotel and public restaurant (shall qualify as a mixed-use project
and the gross square foot limitation per 405.1370(E) shall not
apply).
E. Minimum Standards To Apply For Planned Unit Development Rezoning.
At a minimum, the proposed development shall meet the standards for
LEED Silver certification; or an equivalent standard as determined by
the Board of Aldermen. The project does not have to achieve actual
LEED certification; however, the developer must submit the LEED
checklist and documentation to the City as part of the application
process, approved by a LEED Accredited Professional (LEED-AP), that
shows that the project will comply with LEED Silver requirements.
F. Uses Allowed. All permitted uses in the underlying district(s) shall be
allowed unless otherwise specified in the PUD ordinance. They shall be
identified in the PUD document through a cross reference to applicable
underlying zoning district(s).
G. Additional Uses. The Board of Aldermen may authorize additional uses
in the zoning district in which the planned unit development is located
as provided below.
1. Conditional Uses. Any conditional use allowed in the underlying
district(s) may be included within a planned unit development,
upon making each of the required findings for conditional use
permits in Section 405.840, as follows:
2. Residential Uses. Dwelling units that require a conditional use
permit in the underlying zoning district shall not be required to
submit a separate conditional use permit and shall be considered
as a part of the findings and review of the planned unit
development.
Section
405.1370
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1370
AO:603
Section 405.1380. Public Benefit And Code Alternatives Point
System. [Ord. No. 6611, 8-27-2019]
3. Non-Residential Uses. Non-residential uses that require a
conditional use permit in the underlying zoning district may submit
a separate conditional use permit application and findings, per use,
as a part of the planned unit development review. Uses approved
through this process shall then be deemed permitted by right in the
PUD except for entertainment uses pursuant to the Entertainment
District Overlay which shall not be eligible to apply for a
conditional use permit concurrent with the PUD rezoning process
to be permitted by right but for purposes of identifying allowable
uses in the PUD, shall be identified in the PUD document as
allowable with the approval of a conditional use permit.
H. Site Layout. A PUD must achieve a better site design and public
benefits. A PUD may not be simply used as a method to avoid zoning
regulations or subdivision regulations such as required setbacks,
maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) or building height.
I. Authority To Modify Regulations. The City Board of Aldermen shall have
the authority in approving the PUD to alter, improve, or create anew
any provisions of the Clayton Zoning Regulations, Overlay and Urban
Design Zoning Districts and Subdivision Regulations, pursuant to
Section 405.1420.
J. Ownership. The tract of land to be developed as a PUD must be under
single ownership or control. The property included in the PUD shall be
planned and development as a single unit/phase.
K. Plat Required. The planned unit development project shall consist of
and shall be conterminous with a single lot described in a recorded plat
of subdivision.
A. Generally.
1. A PUD must provide public benefits to the surrounding
neighborhoods and to the City above and beyond what can be
reasonably achieved by application of the zoning provisions
applicable to the underlying zoning district.
2. The Board of Aldermen may approve alternatives to the zoning
regulations, subdivision regulations or design standards applicable
to the property proposed to be rezoned to a planned unit
development, in exchange for developer provided public benefits,
as authorized in this Section.
3. Section 405.1380(B)(1 — 15), characterizes those public benefits
that are considered appropriate examples of benefits and Table
405.1390.1 assigns each listed benefit a maximum point value. All
planned unit developments shall provide at least one (1) public
benefit or combination of public benefits that total at least ten (10)
Section
405.1370
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1380
AO:604
points beyond those additional points required for any desired
code alternatives, even if no code alternative is requested. Public
benefits are not limited to those outlined in Section 405.1380(B)(1
— 15), and a developer may propose different public benefits in
their application for PUD rezoning per 405.1380(B)(16).
4. After the minimum ten (10) points are achieved, for each code
alternative requested thereafter, the developer shall provide a
public benefit or combination of public benefits totaling at least five
(5) points. For multiple requests of the same alternative (i.e., side
yard setback alternatives on two (2) sides) only one (1) public
benefit totaling five (5) points shall be required.
5. Any revisions made to an already approved planned unit
development, prior to the adoption of this Code, shall require a
maximum five (5) points per alternative requested, as outlined
above, however the initial ten-point minimum shall not apply.
6. The Board of Aldermen shall have full discretion to determine
whether a proposed public benefit shall receive the full point value
assigned to it in Table 405.1380.1. Points may not be awarded when
a proposed public benefit is merely replacing an existing public
benefit with equal or greater value to the community.
7. The maximum points identified in Table 405.1380.1 is not
guaranteed. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to provide a
property owner with any property right or other legal right to
compel the City to grant alternatives to the applicable City
ordinances.
B. Public Benefits.
1. Constructing buildings exhibiting Architectural distinction and
significance that would make the development unique.
2. Projects which provide or enhance public parks, and public park or
trail access, or bicycle lanes.
3. Provision of new or enhanced public infrastructure, greater than
the minimum code requirements or as required as a result of a
traffic, parking or similar study, and including, but not limited to,
the establishment of on-site common areas (exclusive of yards as
defined herein), streets, curbs, sidewalks, sanitary sewers,
stormwater sewers, landscape buffers, lighting and public parking.
4. Greater housing density with enhanced design standards where
appropriate and which results in more affordable housing and
ensures that community character is maintained.
5. Sustainable building design and construction, above the minimum
required to apply for a PUD rezoning, including, but not limited to:
a. Efficient heating and cooling systems;
Section
405.1380
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1380
AO:605
b. Alternative energy sources such as solar;
c. Appropriate building siting;
d. Reused or recycled building materials;
e. On-site power generation — solar, ground source heat pumps,
wind power;
f. On-site waste management such as green roofs that filter and
control stormwater runoff;
g. Use of renewable resources for construction materials;
h. Inclusion of at least three (3) publicly available vehicle
charging stations.
6. Projects which provide and protect green infrastructure such as
planned and managed networks of open spaces (including parks)
and features that use natural means such as vegetation to capture,
store and infiltrate stormwater runoff (including bioswales, green
roofs, and rain gardens).
7. Dedication of land to the City for the purposes of widening or
improving the adjoining right-of-way or for other public purposes
(when otherwise not required as part of a traffic study or other
applicable study).
8. Inclusion of a below grade parking facility with spaces specifically
available and designated for public parking and located underneath
the proposed development.
9. Inclusion of parking spaces specifically available and designated
for public parking.
10. Inclusion of a below grade parking facility which meets the parking
requirements for the project.
11. Inclusion of special access features or provisions to existing or
planned public transit facilities.
12. A significant form of public art in any media that has been planned
and executed with the intention of being staged on private
property, outside and which is accessible to the public.
13. An appropriate amount of open space is provided and available for
active or passive use by the public such as courtyards, grassed
areas, patios, landscaped spaces.
14. Preservation of buildings which are architecturally or historically
significant or contribute to the character of the City.
Section
405.1380
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1380
AO:606
15. Enhancements to off-site City owned parks or other Public Facilities
such as the replacement of recreation related facilities or the
installation of streetscape standards where none currently exists.
16. Any other public benefit which is determined by the Board of
Aldermen to meet the purpose and objectives set forth in Section
405.1360.
Table 405.1380.1.
Public Benefit
(as set forth in
405.1380(B))
Maximum Point
Ranges
Standards (as set
forth in
405.1380(B))
405.1380(B)(1) 0 — 5 Constructing
buildings exhibiting
Architectural
distinction and
significance that
would make the
development unique.
405.1380(B)(2) 0 — 5 Projects which
provide or enhance
public open space,
public parks, and
public park or trail
access.
405.1380(B)(3) 0 — 2 per
enhancement
Provision of new or
enhanced public
infrastructure,
greater than the
minimum code
requirements,
including, but not
limited to, the
establishment of onsite
common areas
(exclusive of yards as
defined herein),
streets, curbs,
sidewalks, sanitary
sewers, stormwater
sewers, landscape
buffers, lighting.
Section
405.1380
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1380
AO:607
Table 405.1380.1.
Public Benefit
(as set forth in
405.1380(B))
Maximum Point
Ranges
Standards (as set
forth in
405.1380(B))
405.1380(B)(4) 0 — 5 Greater housing
density with
enhanced design
standards where
appropriate and
which results in more
affordable housing
and ensures that
community character
is maintained.
405.1380(B)(5)(a —
h)
0 — 1 point per
design standard
Sustainable Building
Design and
Construction.
405.1380(B)(6) 0 — 5 Projects which
provide and protect
green infrastructure
such as planned and
managed networks of
open spaces
(including parks) and
features that use
natural means such
as vegetation to
capture, store and
infiltrate stormwater
runoff (including
bioswales, green
roofs, and rain
gardens).
405.1380(B)(7) 0 — 10 Dedication of land to
the City for the
purposes of widening
or improving the
adjoining right-ofway
(when otherwise
not required) or for
other public
purposes, over and
above City
requirements.
Section
405.1380
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1380
AO:608
Table 405.1380.1.
Public Benefit
(as set forth in
405.1380(B))
Maximum Point
Ranges
Standards (as set
forth in
405.1380(B))
405.1380(B)(8) 0 — 10 Inclusion of a below
grade public parking
facility located
underneath the
proposed
development.
405.1380(B)(9) 0 — 5 Inclusion of parking
spaces specifically
available and
designated for public
parking.
405.1380(B)(10) 0 — 5 Inclusion of a below
grade parking facility
which meets the
parking
requirements for the
development.
405.1380(B)(11) 0 — 2 Inclusion of special
access features or
provisions to existing
or planned public
transit facilities.
405.1380(B)(12) 0 — 5 A significant form of
public art in any
media that has been
planned and
executed with the
intention of being
staged on private
property, outside and
which is accessible to
the public.
405.1380(B)(13) 0 — 5 An appropriate
amount of open
space is provided and
available for active or
passive use by the
public such as
courtyards, grassed
areas, patios,
landscaped spaces.
Section
405.1380
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1380
AO:609
Section 405.1390. Application Procedure And Plan Requirements.
[Ord. No. 6611, 8-27-2019]
Table 405.1380.1.
Public Benefit
(as set forth in
405.1380(B))
Maximum Point
Ranges
Standards (as set
forth in
405.1380(B))
405.1380(B)(14) 0 — 7 Preservation of
buildings which are
architecturally or
historically
significant or
contribute to the
character of the City.
405.1380(B)(15) As determined by
the Board of
Aldermen
Enhancements to offsite
City owned parks
or other Public
Facilities such as the
replacement of
recreation related
facilities or the
installation of
streetscape
standards where
none currently exists.
405.1380(B)(16) As determined by
the Board of
Aldermen
Any other public
benefit which is
determined by the
Board of Aldermen to
meet the purpose
and objectives set
forth in Section
405.1360.
A. The following requirements shall be submitted for all PUD rezoning
applications, unless otherwise specified in the text of this Chapter.
Additional requirements may be required by the Director of Planning
and Development Services prior to or upon review of the application.
1. Pre-Application Conference. Prior to applying for a PUD, the
applicant shall participate in a pre-application conference with City
staff. The purpose of the pre-application conference is to allow City
staff to review and provide comments on the suitability of the
development concept as a PUD, as well as to provide guidance to
applicant on the procedures and standards for PUD approval.
Section
405.1380
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1390
AO:610
2. Community Conference. Prior to applying for a PUD, the applicant
shall conduct a community conference as set forth in Section
405.1400.
3. PUD Document And Plan. Applications for amendments to, or
rezoning to PUD shall be in the form of a PUD document in a form
set forth by the City and which lists permitted and accessory uses,
development standards, location of land uses, number of dwelling
units, square footage of non-residential uses, developer
commitments, etc., and shall include a schematic plan of the
property showing the general location of all land use types,
landscape buffers, preliminary open space amenities and trail plan,
site circulation and vehicular access points. The PUD document
shall also include a list of any proposed deviations from the Zoning
Regulations, including any applicable Overlay and Urban Design
Overlay districts.
4. Application And Submission Requirements. An application for a
PUD shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the City. All
formal applications for a PUD shall include at least the following
information:
a. The applicant's name, address, telephone number and interest
in the property;
b. Certification that the applicant is registered to do business in
the State of Missouri and is in good standing to develop the
site;
c. The owner's name, address and telephone number, if different
than the applicant, and the owner's signed consent to the filing
of the application;
d. A certificate of disclosure of ownership interest;
e. The street address and legal description of the subject
property;
f. The zoning classification, zoning district boundaries and
present use of the subject property;
g. A vicinity map with north arrow, scale and date, indicating the
zoning classifications and current uses of properties within two
hundred fifty (250) feet of the subject property;
h. The proposed title of the project and the name, addresses and
telephone numbers of the architect, landscape architect,
planner or engineer on the project;
i. A completed traffic impact study and a parking study (if
requesting a modification to the required parking spaces). The
scope of any study shall be coordinated with the City at least
Section
405.1390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1390
AO:611
six (6) weeks prior to the application for PUD rezoning and
shall prepared by a registered traffic engineer;
j. Other professional or technical studies or reports as may be
required by the Director of Planning and Development
Services to clearly understand the project. The applicant shall
be responsible for any costs and/or expenses incurred as a
result of engaging such outside professional assistance;
k. Copies of any restrictive covenants that are to be recorded
with respect to property in the proposed planned unit
development;
l. A plat of survey of the parcel of land, lot(s), block(s) or parts or
portions thereof, drawn to scale, showing the actual
dimensions of the parcel, lot(s), block(s) or parts or portions
thereof according to the registered or recorded plat of such
land;
m. Soils and subsurface conditions, if requested;
n. The required application fee as set forth in the fee schedule as
approved by the Board of Aldermen;
o. The required PUD document in the form and content
prescribed by the City;
p. A tree preservation plan prepared by a registered Landscape
Architect or Arborist;
q. LEED checklist and documentation to the City as part of the
application process, approved by a LEED Accredited
Professional (LEED-AP), that shows that the project will
comply with LEED Silver requirements.
5. PUD Document. The applicant shall submit a PUD document as
prescribed by the City's model PUD document and shall comply
with the format and content established in the "Model PUD and
Guidelines for Submission," published by the Planning and
Development Services Department. The following information shall
be included:
a. The location, dimensions, floor area, type of construction and
proposed use of each proposed building or structure;
b. The number, the size and type of dwelling units in each
building and the overall dwelling unit density (if residential
uses are proposed);
c. The number, location and dimensions of parking spaces and
loading docks, with means of ingress and egress;
Section
405.1390
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1390
AO:612
Section 405.1400. Community Conference. [Ord. No. 6611,
8-27-2019]
d. The location and proposed treatment of any historical
structure or other historical design element or feature;
e. A written statement showing the relationship of the proposed
planned unit development to the Master Plan or Downtown
Master Plan and justification for any proposed variations;
f. A written statement addressing each of the standards set forth
in Section 405.1410 below and such additional standards, if
any, as may be applicable under the specific provisions of these
regulations. The statement shall explain specifically how the
proposed planned unit development relates to and meets each
such standard;
g. A written description showing why the proposed planned unit
development is compatible with other property in the
neighborhood;
h. When the proposed planned unit development includes
provisions for common open space or recreational facilities, a
statement describing the provision that is to be made for the
care and maintenance of such open space or recreational
facilities. If it is proposed that such open space be owned and/
or maintained by any entity other than a government authority,
copies of the proposed articles of incorporation and bylaws of
such entity shall be submitted.
6. Site Plan Required. Pursuant to Article VIII, Site Plan Review, a site
plan application for the project shall be submitted and approved in
accordance with the requirements and procedures set forth in
Article VIII. Approval of the PUD site plan is determined by
consideration of the site plans compliance with the PUD
development standards set forth in the approved PUD document
and schematic plan, the City's Land Use Regulations and good
planning practices. The site plan application shall be submitted
with the application for PUD rezoning and architectural review.
7. Architectural Review Required. Pursuant to Article III,
Architectural Review Board, an Architectural Review Board
application shall be filed in accordance with Article III and shall
include architectural graphics including typical floor plans and
elevations, colored renderings, profiles and cross sections and
digital representation of the project providing street level views of
each elevation. The Architectural Review Board application shall be
submitted with the application for PUD rezoning, and site plan.
A. Purpose. The community conference is an informal public meeting
hosted by the applicant prior to submittal of a PUD application. The
Section
405.1390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1400
AO:613
purpose of the meeting is to provide early and informal notification
to the public, to generate discussion, and make the applicant aware
of community concerns relative to the proposed project. It is intended
to provide a means by which the applicant and the public can work
together in a productive and creative manner. However, options and
issues raised may not be all-inclusive and no decisions or guarantees on
the project design or outcome are made. Revision of the proposal based
on input from the community conference is solely at the discretion of
the applicant.
B. Process. The community conference shall be held in a place that is
readily available to the public and large enough to accommodate the
anticipated number of people who may be present at the meeting, such
as the Clayton Center or another public or private meeting facility.
Notice of the date, time and location and a project description shall be
provided to the City and by mail to all owners of property within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the PUD site two (2) weeks prior to the
scheduled meeting date. All mailing requirements are the responsibility
of the project applicant and shall be documented by affidavit to the City.
City staff shall post the site, post a copy of the developer's notice at
Clayton City Hall and on the City's website.
The applicant shall:
1. Explain the project concept to the audience and solicit input as to
the issues which concern them; and,
2. Prepare a written report documenting the community meeting,
summarizing the issues raised, and describing how the proposed
project, as submitted, addresses the issues raised in the project
design and/or explains why it does not; and,
3. Submit said written report to the City for inclusion with the PUD
application materials; and,
4. Provide a copy of the report to all the community meeting
attendees prior to or concurrent with submittal of the PUD
application materials to the City.
C. Expectations. The applicant can expect the following results from the
community conference:
1. The more information an applicant can provide for a community
conference, the earlier the applicant can address community
concerns in the proposed project;
2. Any information or opinions expressed by the applicant shall not be
binding on the final decision or constitute approval or denial of the
proposed project;
3. The public and the applicant should discuss creative approaches to
address challenging site constraints or potential mitigations;
Section
405.1400
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1400
AO:614
Section 405.1410. Criteria For PUD Rezoning Approval. [Ord. No.
6611, 8-27-2019]
4. The public will be invited to speak to issues related to the proposal,
but their input shall not be considered public testimony regarding
the application when and if submitted.
A. The approval criteria are designed to achieve the objectives as set forth
in Section 405.1360 of this Article. The Plan Commission may
recommend, and the Board of Aldermen may adopt modifications to
requirements contained in Chapter 405, Sections 405.010 et. seq.,
titled Zoning Regulations as amended and Chapter 415, Sections
415.010 et. seq., titled Subdivision Regulations as amended, as part of
its consideration and approval of a planned unit development. In
considering and acting upon development plans, landscape plans and
other applicable plans, the Plan Commission and Board of Aldermen
shall take the following criteria into consideration through the planned
unit development process:
1. The proposed development is in harmony with general purposes
and intent of Chapter 405 of the Municipal Code and is compatible
with and implements the planning goals and objectives of the City
as set forth in the City's Master Plans;
2. Open Space And Landscaping. The quality and quantity of public
and common open space and landscaping provided are consistent
with higher standards of design and amenities expected of a PUD.
Common spaces are adequate in size and design to accommodate
public use;
3. External Circulation. Streets, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, bike
paths, off-street parking and loading as appropriate to the planned
land uses are provided and meet the City of Clayton standards.
They will not unduly interfere with the safety and capacity of
adjacent streets, or other means of access to the site;
4. Internal Circulation. The internal circulation system of the
proposed development encourages safe movement for vehicles and
pedestrians, and provides public access to green areas and open
space preserved on site which are designated for public use;
5. Design. The PUD represents a more creative approach to the
unified planning of development and incorporates a higher
standard of integrated design and amenity than could be achieved
under otherwise applicable zoning district and subdivision
regulations;
6. Existing or proposed utility services are adequate for the proposed
development;
7. Appropriate buffering is provided to protect adjacent land uses
from light, noise and visual impacts;
Section
405.1400
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1410
AO:615
Section 405.1420. Procedures For Approval Of A Planned Unit
Development. [Ord. No. 6611, 8-27-2019]
8. Natural Features. The design of the PUD is as consistent as
practical with the preservation of natural features of the site such
as stands of mature trees, steep slopes, natural drainage ways,
wetlands, or other areas of sensitive or valuable environmental
character. The topography of the property is preserved to the
greatest extent possible;
9. The proposed site layout and uses are compatible with the
neighborhood surrounding the proposed development and the City
as a whole;
10. The proposed development complies with all other applicable codes
and ordinances;
11. The proposed development preserves buildings which are
architecturally or historically significant or contribute to the
character of the City;
12. The proposed development provides the required number of points
to the extent outlined in Section 405.1380;
13. Public Welfare. The PUD will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety or general welfare.
A. Upon the review of an application and plans, the Director of Planning
and Development Services or his/her designee shall notify the applicant
of any deficiencies and/or modifications necessary to perfect the
application. Once the submittal is deemed complete, the application is
forwarded to the Plan Commission and Board of Aldermen for their
consideration and approval, respectively. The Plan Commission may
recommend, and the Board of Aldermen may adopt, modifications to
development standards from the following as part of its consideration
and approval of a planned unit development:
1. Chapter 405: Zoning Regulations.
2. Chapter 410: Overlay and Urban Design Districts.
3. Chapter 415: Subdivision Regulations (limited to the following
standards from Article VII: Minimum Design Standards):
a. Section 415.590: Blocks.
b. Section 415.600: Lots.
c. Section 415.630: Street Design Standards (minimum right-ofway,
minimum tree lawn width, horizontal radius of centerline,
and medians only).
Section
405.1410
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1420
AO:616
Section 405.1430. Conditions Of Approval. [Ord. No. 6611,
8-27-2019]
Section 405.1440. Reapplication. [Ord. No. 6611, 8-27-2019]
In the event the Board of Aldermen denies an application for planned
unit development, no request for hearing upon the same application or
d. Section 415.640: Intersections and Street Alignment (curb
radius only).
B. The application for a development plan shall be reviewed and decided
upon in accordance with the procedures for a zone change established
by Article XI of this Zoning Ordinance. Approval of the planned unit
development is determined solely in the legislative discretion of the
Board of Aldermen. Once approved, the planned unit development
becomes the specific zoning regulations of the property.
A. The Board of Aldermen may impose such conditions and limitations as
may be necessary or appropriate to prevent or minimize adverse effects
upon other property and improvements near the planned unit
development, upon the City as a whole or upon public facilities and
services. These conditions, may include, but are not limited to,
conditions concerning use, construction, character, location,
landscaping, screening, parking, maintenance, operational elements
that would impact adjoining land uses and other matters relating to the
purposes and objectives of these regulations. Such conditions shall be
expressly set forth in the PUD document which shall be an exhibit
attached to the PUD ordinance authorizing the planned unit
development. Violation of any such condition or limitation shall be a
violation of these regulations and subject the offender to the penalties
prescribed for the violation of this Chapter. Additionally, violation of any
such condition or limitation shall be a violation of these regulations and
shall constitute grounds for revocation of the approval authorizing the
planned unit development.
B. The ordinance approving a planned unit development shall contain a
legal description of the property subject to the planned unit
development. The ordinance along with the PUD document and
approved site plan shall be recorded by the applicant in the office of
County Recorder of Deeds. The applicant must present proof of such
recording before any permits may be issued.
C. Following planned unit development plan approval, the PUD document
and approved site plan, rather than any other provision of Chapter 405,
shall govern the use, parking, loading, height, building locations, open
space and yard regulations applicable to the subject property and no
use or development, other than temporary uses, shall be permitted
within the area of the planned unit development pursuant to the zoning
district regulations otherwise applicable to such area.
Section
405.1420
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1440
AO:617
substantially similar application will be accepted for a period of at least one
(1) year from the date of denial by the Board of Aldermen.
Section 405.1450. Appeals. [Ord. No. 6611, 8-27-2019]
An aggrieved party may, within fifteen (15) days of the decision for which
redress is sought, file with the Board of Aldermen a written request for
reconsideration and appeal of any decisions of the Board of Aldermen
under this Article. The written request must set forth in a concise manner
the decision being appealed, and all grounds known to the appellant as
to wherein and why the decision is allegedly in error. The request for
reconsideration and appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within the
time specified above. A copy of the request and any supporting documents
or materials filed by the aggrieved party must be served by the aggrieved
party on the applicant (if different than the aggrieved party) by certified
U.S. mail, return receipt requested, within three (3) days of filing with the
City Clerk. Proof of service on the applicant must be filed with the City
Clerk within six (6) days of filing of the request. The Board of Aldermen
may consider the appeal on the record of the prior decision or may, at its
sole discretion, receive additional evidence in such manner as it deems
appropriate in light of the circumstances.
Section 405.1460. Time Limit On Approved Planned Unit
Development. [Ord. No. 6611, 8-27-2019]
No planned unit development permit shall be valid for a period longer than
one (1) year unless a building permit is issued, and construction is actually
begun and is diligently pursued within that period. A written request for an
extension must be received by the City Clerk not less than forty-five (45)
days prior to the expiration of the original one-year period. The applicant
shall bear the burden of providing just cause for delay, proof that the project
remains the same and proof that no circumstances bearing on the suitability
of the project have changed. Approval of a request for an extension is at the
sole discretion of the Board of Aldermen.
Section 405.1470. Building Permit Issuance. [Ord. No. 6611,
8-27-2019]
A. The approval of a proposed planned unit development by the Board of
Aldermen shall not authorize the establishment or extension of any use
nor the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving
of any building or structure, but shall authorize the preparation, filing
and processing of applications for any permits or approvals that may be
required by the regulations of the City, including, but not limited to, a
building permit, certificate of occupancy and, where applicable,
subdivision approval.
B. Building permits shall be issued in accordance with the approved site
development plan.
Section
405.1440
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1480
AO:618
Section 405.1480. Revocation. [Ord. No. 6611, 8-27-2019]
The City shall have the authority to order the abatement, removal and/or
conformity of any planned unit development or any portion thereof that is
contrary to any of the conditions and/or provisions of the approved planned
unit development. Provided, however, that the property owner was first
served with an order to abate, remove and/or bring into conformity the
violation(s) and the property owner failed to comply with the order within
ten (10) days of receiving the order and following a public hearing held in
accordance with this Article.
Section 405.1490. Adjustments. [Ord. No. 6611, 8-27-2019]
A. No adjustment shall be made in the construction, development or use
without a new application under the provisions of these regulations.
However, minor adjustments may be made subject to written approval
by the City Manager. Additionally, a request for an extension to the date
of completion may be approved by the Board of Aldermen upon
recommendation from the Director of Planning and Development
Services.
1. Minor Adjustments. The City Manager may authorize minor
adjustments to the approved development plan when such
adjustments appear necessary considering technical or
engineering considerations. Such minor adjustments shall be
limited to the following elements:
a. Adjusting the distance as shown on the approved development
plan between any one (1) structure or group structures and
any other structure or group of structures or any vehicular
circulation element or any boundary of the site.
b. Adjusting the location of any open space.
c. Adjusting any final grade.
d. Altering the types of landscaping elements and their
arrangement within the required landscaping buffer area.
e. The City Manager may decline to approve such minor
adjustments if he/she deems the changes are significant and
refer the application to the Board of Aldermen (see Major
Amendments). Such minor adjustments shall be consistent
with the intent and purpose of these regulations and the
approved development plan and shall be the minimum
necessary to overcome the particular difficulty and shall not be
approved if such adjustments would result in a violation of any
standard or requirement of these regulations.
2. Major Amendments. All major amendments will require a public
hearing held by the Board of Aldermen and notice to all property
owners whose properties are located within two hundred (200) feet
Section
405.1480
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1490
AO:619
Section 405.1500. through Section 405.1519. (Reserved)
of the planned unit development. A request for a major amendment
to the approved development plan shall be considered a major
amendment, only if the following apply:
a. An increase in square footage or density from the original
proposal.
b. Change in the number of parking spaces from the original
approval.
c. Changes in proposed land uses (office becomes retail/
restaurant, etc.).
d. Significant changes to the outside appearance of the building
including decorative lighting, building materials, colors, etc.,
the site, landscaping and/or streetscape.
e. The amendment requires a modification of any written
conditions of approval or recorded easements.
f. Changes in the PUD plan as approved shall be in substantial
conformity with the approved site plan or an amendment to the
approved site plan shall be submitted and approved by the Plan
Commission/Architectural Review Board.
Section
405.1490
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1500
AO:620
ARTICLE X-A
Residential Historic Preservation District
Section 405.1520. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 6054 §1,
1-27-2009]
Section 405.1521. Architectural Review Board [Ord. No. 6054 §1,
1-27-2009]
The Architectural Review Board (ARB) shall be the Board responsible for
considering the certificates of appropriateness for eligible projects (noncontributing
structures are not subject to this review) within a designated
local historic district. All regulations governing the ARB as described in
Title IV (Land Use), Chapter 400 (Planning, City Plan Commission and
Architectural Review Board), Article III (Architectural Review Board) shall
also govern activities of the Architectural Review Board under this Article,
except as specifically noted to the contrary. The ARB may, with the approval
of the Board of Aldermen and upon execution of a suitable agreement
by the City Manager, contract with one (1) or more historic preservation
consultants to provide reports and testimony which may assist the ARB in
making a decision regarding issuance of a certificate of appropriateness.
The applicant shall be responsible for costs associated with consulting
services.
Section 405.1522. Historic Areas [Ord. No. 6054 §1, 1-27-2009]
A. To encourage the preservation of historic structures/districts in the City
of Clayton and to assure that owners of properties in historic districts
are given the opportunity to preserve specific properties/areas. The
goals of this Article are as follows:
1. To allow national historic districts to voluntarily preserve all
contributing structures within the residential section of the
designated neighborhood;
2. To provide a mechanism to identify and preserve the distinctive
historic characteristics of the City of Clayton which represents
elements of the City's cultural, social, economic, political and
architectural history;
3. To foster civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of
the past as represented in the City's landmarks and historic
districts;
4. To promote the use of landmarks and historic districts for the
education, pleasure and welfare of the people of the City.
A. All residential areas, except areas within Urban Design Districts, that
are listed on the National Register of Historic Places are eligible for
local designation. Designation of an area is voluntary based upon the
criteria described below.
Section
405.1520
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1522
AO:621
Section 405.1523. Board of Aldermen Procedure [Ord. No. 6054 §1,
1-27-2009]
B. A National Register Historic District will be considered by the Plan
Commission for local designation if a petition containing signatures of
owners of no less than fifty-one percent (51%) of the residential
properties in an area designated as a National Historic District on the
attached Map "A" (or as may be amended in the future) (which is on file
in the City offices) is received requesting local designation. The Plan
Commission will hold a public information session. After the public
information session, a ballot will be sent to the owner of each property
in the proposed district to vote on the designation. Only the owner of
property is eligible to vote. Each property will be given one (1) vote. An
affirmative vote of sixty-six percent (66%) of the properties in the
proposed district must be received within forty-five (45) days to
continue the process. If the requisite affirmative votes are received
within forty-five (45) days from the mailing date, notice of the proposed
designation and a public hearing to be conducted by the Plan
Commission will be sent by first class mail to all owners within the
proposed district as shown by St. Louis County records.
C. The public hearing notification will follow the process for rezoning as
outlined in Chapter 405 (Zoning Regulations), Article XI (Text
Amendments and Rezoning). A majority of the Plan Commission must
vote to recommend the area a locally designated district. The
recommendation for designation will then be forwarded to the Board of
Aldermen for final approval.
Exception: Current and future areas designated as Urban Design
Districts (UDDs) are excluded from consideration, even if located in
a National Register Historic District. These Urban Design District
standards are already special zoning areas with standards specific
to each district and are not intended to preclude new development,
but rather to encourage quality development whose size, scale, mass
and architectural design respects the character of the district and
surrounding area. These areas have and will continue to experience
redevelopment that has been accommodated by the UDD Standards.
A. Upon receipt of the recommendation from the Plan Commission, the
City Clerk shall schedule a public hearing on the nomination. Notice of
the time and place of the public hearing shall be sent to the owner(s) of
record within the district at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of
the hearing and shall be published in a newspaper having a general
circulation within the City at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of
the hearing. The Board of Aldermen may approve the recommendation
of the Plan Commission, with or without modification, or may decline to
adopt the proposed designation. Approval shall be by way of an
ordinance and such ordinance shall identify the reasons for the historic
designation.
Section
405.1522
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1523
AO:622
Section 405.1524. Moratorium On Applications For Alteration or
Demolition While Designation Pending [Ord. No. 6054 §1,
1-27-2009]
No application for a permit to demolish, construct or alter any structure
located in a proposed historic district will be considered by the City after
ballots for designation of the proposed district have been received and
the required affirmative vote of sixty-six percent (66%) of the properties
has been attained. However, should one hundred eighty (180) calendar
days elapse after receipt of all the required ballots with no final decision
by the Board of Aldermen, the permit application may proceed to the
Plan Commission/Architectural Review Board or other approval process, as
appropriate.
Section 405.1525. Applications For Certificates of Appropriateness
[Ord. No. 6054 §1, 1-27-2009]
B. Designation of Declaration. Within ten (10) days of adoption of an
ordinance by the Board of Aldermen, the City Clerk shall provide
written notification of such action by regular mail to the owner(s) of
record in the designated historic district. A copy of the designation
ordinance shall also be sent to the Plan Commission.
C. The Designation Ordinance. Upon designation, locally designated
historic districts shall be classified as an "H" Historic District. The "H"
designation will be a zoning classification and impact all properties
within the local designation except those properties/locations exempt
as described in Section 405.1522. The official Zoning District Map of
the City of Clayton shall be amended to show the location of the "H"
Historic Districts.
A. A certificate of appropriateness shall be required before the following
actions affecting the exterior architectural appearance of any property
in a locally designated historic district may be undertaken:
1. Any construction, alteration or off-site relocation requiring a
building permit. The ARB may, at its discretion, refer the
application to the City Manager for administrative review if the
exterior change is not visible from the street;
2. Any demolition, in whole or in part, requiring a demolition permit;
3. Any off-site relocation of a historic district property.
B. Applications for a certificate of appropriateness shall include proposed
plans and specifications in sufficient detail for the ARB to have full
knowledge of the requested action, including how the proposed actions
will affect the appearance, materials and architectural design of the
building, structure or land within the designated district and the
contemplated use of the building or land.
Section
405.1523
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1526
AO:623
Section 405.1526. Certificate of Appropriateness [Ord. No. 6054 §1,
1-27-2009]
Section 405.1527. Standards For Review [Ord. No. 6054 §1,
1-27-2009]
A. Construction-related activities in locally designated districts must
receive a certificate of appropriateness granted by the ARB prior to the
issuance of any building or demolition permit. Procedures for the
granting of certificates of appropriateness are as follows:
1. No building permit for the alteration or modification to the exterior
or site of a property in a locally designated district shall be issued
by the City until the plans and specifications have been submitted
to the ARB for review and approval. This approval is not required
for changes to the interior of a historical property. The ARB shall be
guided by the Secretary of Interior's "Standards for Rehabilitating
Historic Buildings". All complete applications shall be reviewed by
the ARB within sixty (60) days of the first (1st) ARB meeting
following receipt of a completed application, unless the applicant
agrees to extend the time for review.
2. No demolition permit or permit for relocation shall be issued by the
City for any property within a historic district until the plans have
been submitted to the ARB for review and approval. Upon
submission to the ARB of any such application for a demolition
permit or a relocation permit, the ARB shall have the power to
review and withhold approval for a period of one hundred eighty
(180) days. During this period, the ARB and/or their designee shall
confer with the owner with respect to any or all means or methods
considered feasible and proper for the preservation of such
property. The "period of review" shall begin the date the completed
application for review is submitted to the ARB.
3. No building permit, demolition permit or permit for relocation shall
be issued until such time as the ARB has completed its review
hereunder and has recommended approval of such permit
provided. However, in the event the ARB fails to make a
determination within the period of review specified above, the
application shall be deemed to be approved by the ARB. The ARB
shall then continue to discharge any review authority it may have
under other applicable provisions of the City's ordinances in
accordance with all such applicable provisions.
A. In considering an application for a building or demolition permit for a
certificate of appropriateness, the ARB shall take into consideration the
Secretary of Interior's "Standards for Rehabilitating Historic
Buildings", some of which are as follows:
Section
405.1526
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1527
AO:624
1. A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a
new use that requires minimal change to the defining
characteristics of the building and its site and environment.
2. The historic character of a property shall be retained and
preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of
features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided.
3. Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time,
place and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical
development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural
elements from other buildings, shall not be undertaken.
4. Most properties change over time—those changes that have
acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained
and preserved.
5. Distinctive features, finishes and construction techniques or
examples of craftsmanship that characterize a historic property
shall be preserved.
6. Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement
of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in
design, color, texture and other visual qualities and, where
possible, materials.
7. Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause
damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface
cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the
gentlest means possible.
8. Significant archaeological resources affected by a project shall be
protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed,
mitigation methods shall be undertaken.
9. New additions, exterior alterations or related new construction
visible from the street shall not destroy historic materials that
characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated
from the old and shall be comparable with the massing, size, scale
and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the
property and its environment.
10. New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be
undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the
essential form and integrity of the historic property and its
environment would be unimpaired.
11. If demolition is approved, new construction shall be compatible
with the surrounding historical area.
Section
405.1527
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1527
AO:625
Section 405.1528. Approval of Certificate of Appropriateness [Ord.
No. 6054 §1, 1-27-2009]
The ARB shall consider the application for a certificate of appropriateness
and approve, approve with conditions or deny issuance. The ARB, at its
discretion, may either continue the application until conditions are met or
process the application either by referring to staff for the standard site plan
review process or, for smaller projects, consider the project through the
standard approval process. A certificate of appropriateness shall become
void unless construction is commenced within twelve (12) months of date
of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of
eighteen (18) months and are renewable. If the project is not completed
according to the guidelines provided in the certificate of appropriateness, it
shall be a violation of this Article.
Section 405.1529. Denial of A Certificate of Appropriateness [Ord.
No. 6054 §1, 1-27-2009]
A denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by a
statement of the reasons for denial. The ARB may make recommendations
to the applicant concerning changes, if any, that might cause the ARB to
reconsider its denial. Notwithstanding any resubmission time restrictions
elsewhere in this Code of Ordinances, an applicant may resubmit an
amended application that addresses and/or responds to recommendation of
the ARB.
Section 405.1530. Appeal Provision [Ord. No. 6054 §1, 1-27-2009]
An aggrieved party (per the definition of the Zoning Ordinance) may, within
fifteen (15) days of the decision for which redress is sought, file with the
Board of Aldermen a written request for reconsideration and appeal of any
decisions of the ARB under this Article. The written request must set forth
in a concise manner the decision being appealed and all grounds known to
the appellant as to wherein and why the decision is allegedly in error. The
request for reconsideration and appeal must be filed with the City Clerk
within the time specified above. A copy of the request and any supporting
documents or materials filed by aggrieved party must be served by the
aggrieved party on the applicant (if different than the aggrieved party) by
certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, within three (3) days of filing
with the City Clerk. Proof of service on the applicant must be filed with
the City Clerk within six (6) days of filing of the request. The Board of
Aldermen may consider the appeal on the record of the prior decision or
The listing of specified portions or aspects of the "Standards"
herein is not intended to exclude consideration of other items,
issues, circumstances or considerations included in the
Secretary's "Standards" specified above, all of which are to be
considered to the extent they may be relevant to a given
application.
Section
405.1527
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1530
AO:626
may, at its sole discretion, receive additional evidence in such manner as it
deems appropriate in light of the circumstances.
Section 405.1531. Stop Work Order [Ord. No. 6054 §1, 1-27-2009]
Whenever the Building Official or the ARB has reason to believe that an
action for which a certificate of appropriateness is required has been
initiated or is about to be initiated or that a violation of the conditions
of a building permit or certificate of appropriateness has occurred, the
Building Official shall make every reasonable effort to contact the owners,
occupants, contractor or subcontractor and inform him/her of proper
procedures. If the Building Official determines that a stop work order is
necessary to halt an action, the Building Official shall post said stop work
order on the property. All workers will then be required to vacate the
premises until the stop work order has been lifted by the City.
Section
405.1530
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1531
AO:627

ARTICLE XI
Text Amendments and Rezoning
Section 405.1540. Intent and Purpose [Ord. No. 5814 §1(13.1),
4-27-2004]
To establish procedures for amending this Chapter, zoning district
boundaries or classification of property. Included are regulations for the
filing of petitions, required public hearing notices and powers of the City
Plan Commission and Board of Aldermen in reviewing requested changes.
Section 405.1550. Initiation [Ord. No. 5814 §1(13.2), 4-27-2004]
Section 405.1560. Application [Ord. No. 5814 §1(13.3), 4-27-2004]
A. Text Amendment. A text amendment may be initiated by the Board of
Aldermen, Plan Commission, City Administration and/or via an
application from other interested parties with ownership interest in the
subject property or authorized representatives of such interested
parties.
B. Rezoning. A request for a change in the zoning district designation, as
described by the official Zoning Map, may be initiated by the Board of
Aldermen, Plan Commission, City Administration and/or via an
application from other interested parties with ownership interest in the
subject property or authorized representatives of such interested
parties.
A. Text Amendment.
1. A petition for amendment to the written text of this Chapter shall
be addressed to the Board of Aldermen and filed with the Director
of Planning and Development Services. An application form shall be
completed and filed with the Department of Planning and
Development Services. The application form is available through
the Department of Planning and Development Services. The
application shall set forth the new text to be added and existing text
to be deleted.
2. The applicant must submit one (1) original and thirty (30) copies of
the application and all required documentation to the Director of
Planning and Development Services. Any plan sets submitted as
part of an application must be folded to approximately eight and
one-half (8½) by eleven (11) inches or eight and one-half (8½) by
fourteen (14) inches. At the time that an application is filed, the
applicant shall pay a fee as required by the fee schedule approved
by the Board of Aldermen. The fee shall be paid to the City of
Clayton to the credit of the General Revenue Fund of the City.
Applications and all required documentation should be submitted a
minimum of twelve (12) days in advance of the Plan Commission
Section
405.1540
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1560
AO:629
Section 405.1570. Limitations of Filing [Ord. No. 5814 §1(13.4),
4-27-2004]
Section 405.1580. Staff Review [Ord. No. 5814 §1(13.5), 4-27-2004]
Upon receipt by the Director of Planning and Development Services or
his/her designee of an application for text amendment or rezoning, the
application and supporting documentation shall be reviewed at the next
regularly scheduled site plan review meeting. At such meeting, joint review
of the application and supporting documents by the City staff shall occur.
Such meetings shall be held regularly at a time agreed upon by the
meeting date in order to be considered for that Plan Commission
agenda.
B. Rezoning.
1. A petition for a change in the zoning district designation as
described by the official Zoning Map shall be addressed to the
Board of Aldermen and filed with the Director of Planning and
Development Services. An application form shall be completed and
filed with the Department of Planning and Development Services.
The application form is available through the Department of
Planning and Development Services. The application shall include a
legal description of the property to be changed from one category
to another, as well as a map or overlay on the existing map
graphically describing said change.
2. The applicant must submit one (1) original and thirty (30) copies of
the application and all required documentation to the Director of
Planning and Development Services. At the time that an application
is filed, the applicant shall pay a fee as required by the fee schedule
approved by the Board of Aldermen. The fee shall be paid to the
City of Clayton to the credit of the General Revenue Fund of the
City. Applications and all required documentation should be
submitted a minimum of twelve (12) days in advance of the Plan
Commission meeting date in order to be considered for that Plan
Commission agenda.
A. An application for amendment or rezoning shall not be accepted by the
Director of Planning and Development Services:
1. If the request change does not comply with all the requirements of
this Article and any regulation adopted pursuant thereto.
2. If a previous application for rezoning the same property was
approved or denied within twelve (12) months of this new
application. The application shall be accepted, however, if the
Director of Planning and Development Services verifies that
substantial new facts which warrant reapplication have been
established.
Section
405.1560
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1580
AO:630
departments concerned. Within seven (7) calendar days of the meeting date,
a letter shall be forwarded to the person or firm submitting the application
stating any deficiencies with the application or supporting documentation.
Thirty (30) days from the date on the comment letter, all deficiencies must
be addressed and submitted for further review. If the deficiencies are not
addressed within the said time limit, review of the application will be
terminated. If there are no comments, then within seven (7) calendar days
of the meeting, a letter shall be forwarded to the person or firm submitting
the plan requesting that plans be submitted as per Section 405.1560 above.
Section 405.1590. Plan Commission [Ord. No. 5814 §1(13.6),
4-27-2004]
The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for
amendment, rezoning, modification or revision of the Zoning Ordinance and
decide whether or not to recommend approval. The Plan Commission shall
render a decision on an application within sixty (60) days from the date the
Plan Commission first considers the application. The application shall be
deemed to have received a positive recommendation if the Plan Commission
fails to render a decision within the said sixty (60) day period. The sixty (60)
day period may be extended through mutual written agreement between
the applicant and the City Plan Commission Chairperson.
Section 405.1600. Public Hearing [Ord. No. 5814 §1(13.7),
4-27-2004]
A. Text Amendment. Text amendments to the Zoning Ordinance that are
general in nature and not pertaining to a specific property, as in the
case of a change in the boundaries of a zoning district, shall require
publication of notice at least twice in a newspaper of general
circulation, the first (1st) notice of which shall be published at least
fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing date.
B. Text Amendments (Procedural Matters). It shall not be necessary to
publish notice or hold public hearings on text amendments to this
Chapter pertaining to procedural matters and to the duties and powers
of officials, officers, boards, commissions and bureaus in carrying out
the regulations of this Chapter.
C. Rezoning. Once the public hearing date has been established, the City
Clerk shall cause notice of the public hearing to be published at least
twice in a newspaper of general circulation, the first (1st) of which
notice shall be published at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing
date.
D. The City Clerk shall cause written notification to be sent by first class
mail at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date to the last known
abode of the owners (according to City tax records) of properties within
two hundred (200) feet of the boundaries of the amendment under
consideration.
Section
405.1580
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1600
AO:631
Section 405.1610. Board of Aldermen Consideration [Ord. No. 5814
§1(13.8), 4-27-2004]
Section 405.1620. Protest Petition [Ord. No. 5814 §1(13.9),
4-27-2004]
The affirmative vote of at least five (5) members of the Board of Aldermen
shall be required to authorize a text amendment or rezoning, when a protest
against said text amendment or rezoning is presented to the City Clerk
in writing at least five (5) full days (including weekends and holidays)
in advance of the Board of Aldermen meeting at which the matter is to
be considered. Therefore, protest petitions must be received by 5:00 P.M.
Central Standard Time (CST) the day preceding the required five (5) days.
The protest shall be duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of thirty
percent (30%) or more, either of the areas of the land (exclusive of streets
and alleys) included in such proposed change or within an area determined
by lines drawn parallel to and one hundred eighty-five (185) feet distant
from the boundaries of the district proposed to be changed. The provisions
relative to public hearing and official notice shall apply equally to all
changes and amendments.
Section 405.1630. through Section 405.1650. (Reserved)
E. The City Clerk shall cause the posting of a public hearing notice in five
(5) public places, including the property or properties to be considered
for rezoning, at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing date.
A. After receipt of the Plan Commission's recommendation and report, the
Board of Aldermen shall consider the proposed text amendment or
rezoning at a public hearing. The Board of Aldermen may, at its
discretion, add to or delete conditions recommended by the City Plan
Commission. The Board of Aldermen may refer the application back to
the Plan Commission for further study before making its final decision.
The decision rendered by the Board of Aldermen shall require a simple
majority vote except in the following circumstances:
1. A vote of at least five (5) members of the Board of Aldermen will be
required to approve a decision contrary to the City Plan
Commission recommendation.
2. The affirmative vote of at least five (5) members of the Board of
Aldermen shall be required to authorize a text amendment or
rezoning, when a protest against said text amendment or rezoning
is presented to the City Clerk in writing at least five (5) full days
(including weekends and holidays) in advance of the Board of
Aldermen meeting at which the matter is to be considered.
Section
405.1600
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1630
AO:632
ARTICLE XII
"R-1" Large Lot Single-Family Dwelling District
Section 405.1660. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §1(14.1),
4-27-2004]
The "R-1" Large Lot Single-Family Dwelling District (hereinafter known in
this Article as the "R-1" District) is the most restrictive form of residential
land use in the City of Clayton allowing for only single-family dwellings
and intended to maintain high standards for quality residential living. This
district also allows for non-residential land uses, which provide services to
the residential district on a conditional use permit basis.
Section 405.1670. Permitted Uses [Ord. No. 5814 §1(14.2),
4-27-2004]
The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in the
Table of Permitted Uses found at the end of this Article. If a "P" (permitted
by right) or a "C" (permitted by conditional use permit) is not indicated for
a use in this table or a use is not included on the table, it is prohibited.
Section 405.1680. Maximum Building Height [Ord. No. 5814
§1(14.3), 4-27-2004]
The maximum building height in the "R-1" District is two (2) stories or forty
(40) feet above grade, whichever is less. Partial stories under sloping roofs
shall be permitted provided the limit in feet is not exceeded. Accessory
structures may not exceed twenty (20) feet in height.
Section 405.1690. Minimum Lot Width [Ord. No. 5814 §1(14.4),
4-27-2004]
The minimum width for lots in the "R-1" District shall be eighty (80) feet.
Modifications may be allowed subject to Section 405.1710.
Section 405.1700. Minimum Lot Area [Ord. No. 5814 §1(14.5),
4-27-2004]
The minimum lot area in the "R-1" District shall be twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet. Modifications may be allowed subject to Section
405.1710.
Section 405.1710. Exceptions To The Minimum Lot Width and Area
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(14.6), 4-27-2004]
Where a lot of record established prior to April 14, 1959, has less width or
area than herein required in the district in which it is located, such lot shall
be considered a conforming lot.
Section 405.1720. Impervious Coverage [Ord. No. 5814 §1(14.7),
4-27-2004]
Section
405.1660
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1720
AO:633
Section 405.1730. Setback Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(14.8),
4-27-2004]
A. No more than forty-five percent (45%) of the required front yard
setback may be covered by impervious material. No more than fifty-five
percent (55%) of the total lot may be covered by impervious material.
Properties located within an urban design district must comply with the
requirements for the specific urban design district.
B. In instances where an applicant can demonstrate just cause, the Plan
Commission shall have the authority to approve a modification of up to
an additional five percent (5%) over the impervious coverage
requirement; that is up to fifty percent (50%) in the front yard and up to
sixty percent (60%) overall lot coverage; unless the property is located
within an urban design district, then the requirements found therein
shall apply.
A. The following are the setback requirements for a principal building
located in an "R-1" District and modifications to those requirements
when certain conditions exist.
1. Front yard setbacks. The required setback in an "R-1" District is
measured by calculating twenty-five percent (25%) of the depth of
the lot measured from the front to the rear property line. The
calculated setback must be a minimum of forty (40) feet from the
front building facade to the front property line. The front yard
setback is not required to exceed a maximum of one hundred (100)
feet, although these regulations do not preclude a deeper than
maximum setback at the discretion of the property owner.
Modifications to the required front yard setback are permitted
under the following conditions:
a. Where fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage along any
block face is improved with buildings that have observed a
front yard line with a variation in depth of not more than ten
(10) feet, the average of such front yard lines shall be the
minimum setback observed in such a block face in lieu of the
required front yard setback. For example, when calculating the
average setback for a block face with ten (10) homes, where
nine (9) homes have setbacks ranging from twenty-five (25)
feet to thirty-five (35) feet and the remaining home has a forty
(40) foot setback, the home with the forty (40) foot setback is
not included in the calculation for the average. No front yard
shall be required to exceed the maximum of one hundred (100)
feet.
b. Where lots have double frontages or are corner lots, the
required front yard setback provisions shall be provided on all
streets.
Section
405.1720
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1730
AO:634
c. If at or below the first (1st) floor level of the principal
structure, an open, uncovered porch may project into the
required front yard setback a distance of up to ten (10) feet or
an open, covered porch or paved terrace may project into a
required front yard a distance of up to five (5) feet and
associated roof eaves may project up to an additional three (3)
feet.
d. Front yard masonry garden walls, planting boxes, retaining
walls, plantings or ornamental or decorative fences may be
erected as part of new construction, up to four (4) feet above
the grade level in the front yard, provided such structure is an
integral part of the architectural feature of the principal
structure, is in compliance with sight distance standards and is
approved by the Architectural Review Board. Additionally, for
properties located on a corner lot, no such plantings, masonry
garden walls, planting boxes, retaining walls or ornamental or
decorative fences shall be maintained higher than three and
one-half (3½) feet above the established street grades within
twenty (20) feet of any street intersection to comply with sight
distance standards.
e. Roof eaves may project up to three (3) feet into the required
front yard setback.
f. Windowsills, bay windows, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project up to two (2) feet into the required front yard
setback.
g. Balconies may project up to five (5) feet into the required front
yard setback.
h. Any accessory building that is not a part of the principal
structure shall be located not less than sixty (60) feet from the
front lot line.
i. Lots in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet and
having one hundred (100) lineal feet of frontage or more may
install two (2) drive approaches to accommodate a turnaround,
with the written approval from the Director of Public Works
and subject to Architectural Review Board approval (all other
lots shall be limited to one (1) drive approach).
j. Basements and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the front yard setback but may
not transverse the property line.
2. Rear yard setbacks. The required setback in an "R-1" District is
measured by calculating twenty-five percent (25%) of the depth of
the lot measured from the front to the rear property line. The
calculated setback must be a minimum of forty (40) feet from the
Section
405.1730
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1730
AO:635
furthest rear wall of the principal structure to the rear property
line. The rear yard setback is not required to exceed a maximum
of seventy (70) feet, although these regulations do not preclude
a deeper than maximum setback at the discretion of the property
owner. Modifications to the required rear yard setback are
permitted under the following conditions:
a. Open, uncovered porches, patios and above ground decks may
project up to twelve (12) feet into a required rear yard,
provided that the floor level is at or below the level of the first
(1st) floor of the principal structure. Balconies at any height
may project into the required rear yard a maximum distance of
five (5) feet.
b. Where a corner lot exists and thereby two (2) front yards, the
property line opposite to the front yard line with the greater
street frontage shall be considered the side yard and the
property line opposite to the front yard line with the lesser
street frontage shall be considered the rear yard.
c. One (1) or more accessory buildings may be located in the rear
yard. However, the combined footprint may not occupy more
than thirty-five percent (35%) of the required rear yard area
and no accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to
the principal building nor closer than five (5) feet to any rear
property line. Additionally, accessory buildings may not exceed
twenty (20) feet in height.
d. Outside stairways, deck stairs, tower balconies and fire
escapes may project up to four (4) feet into the required rear
yard setback.
e. Roof eaves may project up to three (3) feet into the required
rear yard setback.
f. Windowsills, bay windows, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project up to two (2) feet into the required rear yard
setback.
Section
405.1730
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1730
AO:636
Section 405.1740. General Non-Conformance With The Setback
Provisions [Ord. No. 5814 §1(14.9), 4-27-2004]
Those parts of existing building that violate yard regulations may be
repaired and remodeled but not reconstructed or structurally altered.
g. Basements and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the rear yard setback but may
not transverse the property line.
3. Side yard setbacks. The required setback in an "R-1" District is
measured by calculating ten percent (10%) of the width of the total
lot. The calculated setback must be a minimum of twelve (12) feet
up to a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet, although these
regulations do not preclude a wider than maximum setback at the
discretion of the property owner. Modifications to the required side
yard setback are permitted under the following conditions:
a. Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this
Chapter is less than fifty (50) feet in width, the required side
yard may be reduced to less than the required ten percent
(10%) of the width of the lot, provided however, that no side
yard shall be less than five (5) feet from the structure to the
side property line.
b. On a corner lot, the side yard facing the street shall be set back
in conformance with the required front yard on that street;
provided however, that the buildable width of such lot shall not
be reduced to less than thirty-five (35) feet.
c. No accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to the
principal building nor closer than five (5) feet to any side
property line.
d. An unenclosed porte-cochere or canopy may project into a
required side yard but may not encroach further than five (5)
feet from the side property line.
e. Outside stairways, tower balconies or fire escapes may project
up to four (4) feet into the required side yard setback.
f. Roof eaves may project up to three (3) feet into the required
side yard setback.
g. Windowsills, bay windows, balconies, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project up to two (2) feet into the required side yard
setback.
h. Basements and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the side yard setback but may
not transverse the property line.
Section
405.1730
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1750
AO:637
Section 405.1750. Off-Street Parking [Ord. No. 5814 §1(14.10),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6333 §1, 8-26-2014]
See Article XXV, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations, of this
Chapter.
Section 405.1760. Resubdivision of Lots [Ord. No. 5814 §1(14.11),
4-27-2004]
No existing lot of record within the "R-1" District shall be resubdivided
unless the resubdivided lots conform to the area and frontage requirements
of this zoning district and in addition are consistent with the lots located in
the immediate neighborhood with regard to size, frontage and arrangement
so as to provide an orderly pattern of development. No flag lot(s) shall be
created as a result of any resubdivision.
Section 405.1770. Compliance With Other Plans or Regulations
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(14.12), 4-27-2004]
Any development proposed within the "R-1" Zoning District shall be
reviewed for compliance with other plans and/or regulations of the City
of Clayton. Compliance with other plans and/or regulations shall include,
but not be limited to, the master plan, overlay district regulations, urban
design district regulations, any other land use plan or relevant standards
and guidelines to the specific site which have been accepted or adopted by
the Board of Aldermen.
Section 405.1780. Permitted Uses For The "R-1" Zoning District
[Ord. No. 5814 § 1(14.13), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6010 § 3, 1-22-2008;
Ord. No. 6067 § 2, 4-14-2009; Ord. No. 6191 § 3, 2-28-2012]
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-1" ZONING DISTRICT "R-1"
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to
permitted uses not involving the conduct of business,
including a private garage.
P
Amateur radio, home antennas and associated equipment
(subject to Article XXVI).
P
Section
405.1750
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1780
AO:638
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-1" ZONING DISTRICT "R-1"
Group homes for the physically and/or mentally handicap,
provided that 8 or fewer unrelated persons may reside
therein and further provided that no more than 2 additional
persons acting as house parents or guardians, who need not
be related to one another or any of the residents, may also
reside therein, and provided further, however, that the
maximum occupancy limitations for the structure as
established by the Property Maintenance Code and Fire
Code, if applicable, adopted by the City and as amended
and in force at the time of approval of occupancy, may not
be exceeded.
No group care home shall be permitted within 500 feet
from any existing group care home
P
Home occupations (as regulated and defined in Article II
and III respectively).
P
Parks and playgrounds. P
Places of religious worship, but no new or enlarged place of
religious worship shall be located upon a lot or tract
containing less than 1 acre. Places of religious worship may
be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet if the building
is set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for each foot
of additional building height above the height limit
otherwise permitted in the district in which the building is
built.
P
Residential--single-family dwelling unit 20,000 square feet
minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
P
Child day care home. C
Church spires, belfries, monuments, ornamental towers and
spires and chimneys exceeding the maximum height in the
zoning district may be erected to such height authorized by
the Board of Aldermen of the City by conditional use permit
or general ordinance.
C
Facilities (subject to Article XXVII) P
Section
405.1780
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1780
AO:639
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-1" ZONING DISTRICT "R-1"
Properties fronting the south side of Forsyth Boulevard
from University Lane on the west to the east City limits: this
area presents special use and aesthetic characteristics
which require careful balance and special attention. The
patent residential character of the structures in this area is
a predominant feature which must be preserved for
harmony with internal and contiguous residential uses,
while the area's proximity to Washington University
suggests reasonable allowance for ancillary educationrelated
activities. Therefore, in this part of the "R-1" District
only, education and institutional uses may be conditionally
permitted in existing residential structures provided such
uses are limited to guest lodging, offices, conference and
meeting facilities and similar ancillary activities if, in
addition to the other standards for conditional uses
provided in this Chapter, all parking for such a proposed
use is provided outside the "R-1" District and:
C
1. The residential appearance of the structure and
yard areas is preserved;
2. Hours of operation are limited to times which will
not interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of
residential properties in and adjacent to the area;
and
3. The use will not result in excess traffic or light,
smoke, noise or other emissions in compatible with
residential neighborhoods in the City of Clayton.
Properties fronting the south side of Forsyth Boulevard
from University Lane on the west to the east City limits:
private schools, nursery, pre-kindergarten, kindergarten,
play and special schools. No additions or structural
alterations shall be made on the exterior of the building,
except those determined to be minor, compatible and
desirable.
C
Second units (carriage houses/granny units) (as regulated
and defined in Article II and III respectively).
C
Solar energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
P
Solar energy systems, ground-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
C
Wind energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
C
Section
405.1780
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1780
AO:640
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-1" ZONING DISTRICT "R-1"
P = Permitted by right
C = Permitted with conditional use permit
Note: Uses not appearing in this table are prohibited.
Section 405.1790. through Section 405.1820. (Reserved)
Section
405.1780
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1790
AO:641

ARTICLE XIII
"R-2" Single-Family Dwelling District
Section 405.1830. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §1(15.1),
4-27-2004]
The "R-2" Single-Family Dwelling District (hereinafter known in this Article
as the "R-2" District) is intended to allow single-family residential use but
at a slightly higher density than the "R-1" zoning district. This district
also allows for non-residential land uses which provide services to the
residential district on a conditional use permit basis.
Section 405.1840. Permitted Uses [Ord. No. 5814 §1(15.2),
4-27-2004]
The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in the
Table of Permitted Uses found at the end of this Article. If a "P" (permitted
by right) or a "C" (permitted by conditional use permit) is not indicated for
a use in this table or a use is not included on the table, it is prohibited.
Section 405.1850. Maximum Building Height [Ord. No. 5814
§1(15.3), 4-27-2004]
The maximum building height in the "R-2" District is two (2) stories or thirty
(30) feet above grade, whichever is less. Partial stories under sloping roofs
shall be permitted provided the limit in feet is not exceeded. Accessory
structures may not exceed twenty (20) feet in height.
Section 405.1860. Minimum Lot Width [Ord. No. 5814 §1(15.4),
4-27-2004]
The minimum width for lots in the "R-2" District shall be sixty (60) feet.
Modifications may be allowed subject to Section 405.1880.
Section 405.1870. Minimum Lot Area [Ord. No. 5814 §1(15.5),
4-27-2004]
The minimum lot area in the "R-2" District shall be seven thousand five
hundred (7,500) square feet. Modifications may be allowed subject to
Section 405.1880.
Section 405.1880. Exceptions To The Minimum Lot Width and Area
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(15.6), 4-27-2004]
Where a lot of record established prior to April 14, 1959, has less width or
area than herein required in the district in which it is located, such lot shall
be considered a conforming lot.
Section 405.1890. Impervious Coverage [Ord. No. 5814 §1(15.7),
4-27-2004]
Section
405.1830
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1890
AO:643
Section 405.1900. Setback Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(15.8),
4-27-2004]
A. No more than forty-five percent (45%) of the required front yard
setback may be covered by impervious material. No more than fifty-five
percent (55%) of the total lot may be covered by impervious material.
Properties located within an urban design district must comply with the
requirements for the specific urban design district.
B. In instances where an applicant can demonstrate just cause, the Plan
Commission shall have the authority to approve a modification of up to
an additional five percent (5%) over the impervious coverage
requirement; that is up to fifty percent (50%) in the front yard and up to
sixty percent (60%) overall lot coverage; unless the property is located
within an urban design district, then the requirements found therein
shall apply.
A. The following are setback requirements for a principal building located
in an "R-2" District and modifications to those requirements when
certain conditions exist.
1. Front yard setbacks. The required setback in an "R-2" District is
measured by calculating twenty-five percent (25%) of the depth of
the lot measured from the front to the rear property line. The
calculated setback must be a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the
front building facade to the front property line. The front yard
setback is not required to exceed a maximum of sixty (60) feet,
although these regulations do not preclude a deeper than
maximum setback at the discretion of the property owner.
Modifications to the required front yard setback are permitted
under the following conditions:
a. Where fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage along any
block face is improved with buildings that have observed a
front yard line with a variation in depth of not more than ten
(10) feet, the average of such front yard lines shall be the
minimum setback observed in such a block face in lieu of the
required front yard setback requirements. For example, when
calculating the average setback for a block face with ten (10)
homes, where nine (9) homes have setbacks ranging from
twenty-five (25) feet to thirty-five (35) feet and the remaining
home has a forty (40) foot setback, the home with the forty (40)
foot setback is not included in the calculation for the average.
No front yard shall be required to exceed the maximum of one
hundred (100) feet.
b. Where lots have double frontages or are corner lots, the
required front yard setback provisions shall be provided on all
streets.
Section
405.1890
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1900
AO:644
c. If at or below the first (1st) floor level of the principal
structure, an open, uncovered porch may project into the
required front yard a distance of up to ten (10) feet or an open,
covered porch or paved terrace may project into a required
front yard a distance of up to five (5) feet and associated roof
eaves may project up to an additional three (3) feet.
d. Front yard masonry garden walls, planting boxes, retaining
walls, plantings or ornamental or decorative fences may be
erected as part of new construction, up to four (4) feet above
the grade level in the front yard, provided such structure is an
integral part of the architectural feature of the principal
structure, is in compliance with sight distance standards and is
approved by the Architectural Review Board. Additionally, for
properties located on a corner lot, no such plantings, masonry
garden walls, planting boxes, retaining walls or ornamental or
decorative fences shall be maintained higher than three and
one-half (3½) feet above the established street grades within
twenty (20) feet of any street intersection to comply with sight
distance standards.
e. Roof eaves may project up to three (3) feet into the required
front yard setback.
f. Windowsills, bay windows, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project up to two (2) feet into the required front yard
setback.
g. Balconies may project up to five (5) feet into the required front
yard setback.
h. Any accessory building that is not a part of the principal
structure shall be located not less than sixty (60) feet from the
front lot line.
i. Lots in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet and
having one hundred (100) lineal feet of frontage or more may
install two (2) drive approaches to accommodate a turnaround
with the written approval from the Director of Public Works
and subject to Architectural Review Board approval (all other
lots shall be limited to one (1) drive approach).
j. Basements and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the required front yard
setback but may not transverse the property line.
2. Rear yard setbacks. The required setback in an "R-2" District is
measured by calculating twenty-five percent (25%) of the depth of
the lot measured from the front to the rear property line. The
calculated setback must be a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the
rear property line to the closest rear wall of the principal structure.
Section
405.1900
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1900
AO:645
The rear yard setback is not required to exceed a maximum of
fifty (50) feet, although these regulations do not preclude a deeper
than maximum setback at the discretion of the property owner.
Modifications to the required rear yard setback are permitted
under the following conditions:
a. Open, uncovered porches, patios and above ground decks may
project up to twelve (12) feet into a required rear yard,
provided that the floor level is at or below the level of the first
(1st) floor of the principal structure. Balconies at any height
may project into the required rear yard a maximum distance of
five (5) feet.
b. Where a corner lot exists and thereby two (2) front yards, the
property line opposite to the longer front yard line with the
greater street frontage shall be considered the side yard and
the property line opposite to the front yard line with the lesser
street frontage shall be considered the rear yard.
c. One (1) or more accessory buildings may be located in the rear
yard. However, the combined footprint may not occupy more
than thirty-five percent (35%) of the required rear yard area
and no accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to
the principal building nor closer than five (5) feet to any rear
property line. Additionally, accessory buildings may not exceed
twenty (20) feet in height.
d. Outside stairways, deck stairs, tower balconies and fire
escapes may project up to four (4) feet into the required rear
yard setback.
e. Roof eaves may project up to three (3) feet into the required
rear yard setback.
f. Windowsills, bay windows, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project up to two (2) feet into the required rear yard
setback.
Section
405.1900
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1900
AO:646
Section 405.1910. General Non-Conformance With The Setback
Provisions [Ord. No. 5814 §1(15.9), 4-27-2004]
Those parts of existing building that violate yard regulations may be
repaired and remodeled but not reconstructed or structurally altered.
g. Basements and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the rear yard setback but may
not transverse the property line.
3. Side yard setbacks. The required setback in an "R-2" District is
measured by calculating ten percent (10%) of the width of the total
lot. The calculated setback must be a minimum of five (5) feet up to
a maximum of fifteen (15) feet, although these regulations do not
preclude a wider than maximum setback at the discretion of the
property owner. Modifications to the required side yard setback are
permitted under the following conditions:
a. Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this
Chapter is less than fifty (50) feet in width, the required side
yard may be reduced to less than the required ten percent
(10%) of the width of the lot, provided however, that no side
yard shall be less than five (5) feet from the structure to the
side property line.
b. On a corner lot, the side yard facing the street shall be set back
in conformance with the required front yard on that street;
provided however that the buildable width of such lot shall not
be reduced to less than thirty (30) feet.
c. No accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to the
principal building nor closer than five (5) feet to any side
property line.
d. An unenclosed porte-cochere or canopy may project into a
required side yard but may not encroach further than five (5)
feet from the side property line.
e. Outside stairways, tower balconies or fire escapes may project
up to four (4) feet into the required side yard setback.
f. Roof eaves may project up to three (3) feet into the required
side yard setback.
g. Windowsills, bay windows, balconies, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project up to two (2) feet into the required side yard
setback.
h. Basements and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the side yard setback but may
not transverse the property line.
Section
405.1900
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1920
AO:647
Section 405.1920. Off-Street Parking [Ord. No. 5814 §1(15.10),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6333 §1, 8-26-2014]
See Article XXV, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations, of this
Chapter.
Section 405.1930. Resubdivision of Lots [Ord. No. 5814 §1(15.11),
4-27-2004]
No existing lot of record in the "R-2" District shall be resubdivided unless
the resubdivided lots conform to the area and frontage requirements of
this zoning district and in addition are consistent with the lots located in
the immediate neighborhood with regard to size, frontage and arrangement
so as to provide an orderly pattern of development. No flag lot(s) shall be
created as a result of any resubdivision.
Section 405.1940. Compliance With Other Plans or Regulations
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(15.12), 4-27-2004]
Any development proposed within the "R-2" Zoning District shall be
reviewed for compliance with other plans and/or regulations of the City
of Clayton. Compliance with other plans and/or regulations shall include,
but not be limited to, the master plan, overlay district regulations, urban
design district regulations, any other land use plan or relevant standards
and guidelines to the specific site which have been accepted or adopted by
the Board of Aldermen.
Section 405.1950. Permitted Uses For The "R-2" Zoning District
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(15.13), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6010 §3, 1-22-2008;
Ord. No. 6067 §2, 4-14-2009; Ord. No. 6191 §3, 2-28-2012]
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-2" ZONING DISTRICT "R-2"
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to
permitted uses not involving the conduct of business,
including a private garage.
P
Amateur radio, home antennas and associated equipment
(subject to Article XXVI).
P
Group homes for the physically and/or mentally handicap,
provided that 8 or fewer unrelated persons may reside
therein and further provided that no more than 2 additional
persons acting as house parents or guardians, who need not
be related to one another or any of the residents, may also
reside therein, and provided further, however, that the
maximum occupancy limitations for the structure as
established by the Property Maintenance Code and Fire
Code, if applicable, adopted by the City and as amended and
in force at the time of approval of occupancy, may not be
exceeded.
P
Section
405.1920
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1950
AO:648
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-2" ZONING DISTRICT "R-2"
No group care home shall be permitted within 500 feet from
any existing group care home.
Home occupations (as regulated and defined in Article II and
III respectively).
P
Parks and playgrounds. P
Places of religious worship, but no new or enlarged place of
religious worship shall be located upon a lot or tract
containing less than 1 acre. Places of religious worship may
be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet if the building is
set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for each foot of
additional building height above the height limit otherwise
permitted in the district in which the building is built.
P
Residential—single-family dwelling unit 7,500 square feet
minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
P
Child day care home. C
Church spires, belfries, monuments, ornamental towers and
spires and chimneys exceeding the maximum height in the
zoning district may be erected to such height authorized by
the Board of Aldermen of the City by conditional use permit
or general ordinance.
C
Colleges and universities, provided that buildings shall not
occupy more than 1/3 of the area site and the height,
location and use of such buildings will not have a serious
and depreciating effect on any adjacent residential property.
Public buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools, when
permitted in a district, may be erected to a height, not
exceeding 110 feet if the building is set back from each yard
line at least 1 foot for each foot of additional building height
above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district in
which the building is built.
C
Community buildings, recreation facilities, recreation fields. C
Day care, nursery, pre-kindergarten, play and special
schools and kindergarten.
C
Facilities (subject to Article XXVII). P
Public buildings erected or used by any department of the
City, County, State or Federal Government. Public buildings,
hospitals, institutions or schools, when permitted in a
district, may be erected to a height not exceeding 110 feet if
the building is set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for
each foot of additional building height above the height limit
otherwise permitted in the district in which the building is
built.
C
Section
405.1950
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.1950
AO:649
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-2" ZONING DISTRICT "R-2"
Public and private elementary, middle and secondary
schools, provided that the height, location and use of such
buildings will not have a serious and depreciating effect on
any adjacent residential property. Public buildings, hospitals,
institutions or schools, when permitted in a district, may be
erected to a height not exceeding 110 feet if the building is
set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for each foot of
additional building height above the height limit otherwise
permitted in the district in which the building is built.
C
Second units (carriage houses/granny units) (as regulated
and defined in Article II and III respectively).
C
Solar energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
P
Solar energy systems, ground-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
C
Wind energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
C
P = Permitted by right
C = Permitted with conditional use permit
Note: Uses not appearing in the table are prohibited.
Section 405.1960. through Section 405.1970. (Reserved)
Section
405.1950
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.1960
AO:650
ARTICLE XIV
"R-3" One and Two-Family Dwelling District
Section 405.1980. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §1(16.1),
4-27-2004]
The "R-3" One- and Two-Family Dwelling District (hereinafter known in
this Article as the "R-3" District) is intended to allow single-family and
two-family residential uses at a higher density than single-family zoning
districts. This district also allows for non-residential land uses which
provide services to the residential district on a conditional use permit basis.
Section 405.1990. Permitted Uses [Ord. No. 5814 §1(16.2),
4-27-2004]
The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in the
Table of Permitted Uses found at the end of this Article. If a "P" (permitted
by right) or a "C" (permitted by conditional use permit) is not indicated for
a use in this table or a use is not included on the table, it is prohibited.
Section 405.2000. Maximum Building Height [Ord. No. 5814
§1(16.3), 4-27-2004]
The maximum building height in the "R-3" District is two (2) stories or
thirty-five (35) feet above grade, whichever is less. Partial stories under
sloping roofs shall be permitted provided the limit in feet is not exceeded.
Accessory structures may not exceed twenty (20) feet in height.
Section 405.2010. Minimum Lot Width [Ord. No. 5814 §1(16.4),
4-27-2004]
The minimum lot widths for the "R-3" District shall be fifty (50) feet.
Modifications may be allowed subject to Section 405.2030.
Section 405.2020. Minimum Lot Area [Ord. No. 5814 §1(16.5),
4-27-2004]
A. The minimum lot area in the "R-3" District shall be five thousand (5,000)
square feet and the following lot areas shall be provided for each
dwelling unit:
1. Single-family—five thousand (5,000) square feet per dwelling unit.
2. Two-family—two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet per
dwelling unit.
B. Modifications may be allowed subject to Section 405.2030.
Section
405.1980
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2030
AO:651
Section 405.2030. Exceptions To The Minimum Lot Width and Area
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(16.6), 4-27-2004]
Where a lot of record established prior to April 14, 1959, has less width or
area than herein required in the district in which it is located, such lot shall
be considered a conforming lot.
Section 405.2040. Impervious Coverage [Ord. No. 5814 §1(16.7),
4-27-2004]
Section 405.2050. Setback Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(16.8),
4-27-2004]
A. No more than forty-five percent (45%) of the required front yard
setback may be covered by impervious material. No more than fifty-five
percent (55%) of the total lot may be covered by impervious material.
Properties located within an urban design district must comply with the
requirements for the specific urban design district.
B. In instances where an applicant can demonstrate just cause, the Plan
Commission shall have the authority to approve a modification of up to
an additional five percent (5%) over the impervious coverage
requirement; that is up to fifty percent (50%) in the front yard and up to
sixty percent (60%) overall lot coverage; unless the property is located
within an urban design district, then the requirements found therein
shall apply.
A. The following are setback requirements for a principal building located
in an "R-3" District and modifications to those requirements when
certain conditions exist.
1. Front yard setbacks. The required setback in an "R-3" District is
measured by calculating thirty percent (30%) of the depth of the lot
measured from the front to the to the rear property line. The
calculated setback must be a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the
front building facade to the front property line. The front yard
setback is not required to exceed a maximum of sixty (60) feet,
although these regulations do not preclude a deeper than
maximum setback at the discretion of the property owner.
Modifications to the required front yard setback are permitted
under the following conditions:
a. Where fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage along any
block face is improved with buildings that have observed a
front yard line with a variation in depth of not more than ten
(10) feet, the average of such front yard lines shall be the
minimum setback observed in such a block face in lieu of the
required front yard setback requirements. For example, when
calculating the average setback for a block face with ten (10)
homes, where nine (9) homes have setbacks ranging from
twenty-five (25) feet to thirty-five (35) feet and the remaining
Section
405.2030
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2050
AO:652
home has a forty (40) foot setback, the home with the forty (40)
foot setback is not included in the calculation for the average.
No front yard shall be required to exceed the maximum of one
hundred (100) feet.
b. Where the required building line is greater than the required
minimum thirty (30) feet, the allowable building area shall be
calculated on a thirty (30) foot building line, but any resulting
building shall not project beyond the average front yard
setback established for the block.
c. Where lots have double frontages or are corner lots, the
required front yard setback provisions shall be provided on all
streets.
d. If at or below the first (1st) floor level of the principal
structure, an open, uncovered porch may project into the
required front yard setback a distance of up to ten (10) feet or
an open, covered porch or paved terrace may project into a
required front yard a distance of up to five (5) feet and
associated roof eaves may project up to an additional three (3)
feet.
e. No plantings, masonry garden walls, planting boxes, retaining
walls or ornamental or front yard masonry garden walls,
planting boxes, retaining walls, plantings or ornamental or
decorative fences may be erected as part of new construction,
up to four (4) feet above the grade level in the front yard,
provided such structure is an integral part of the architectural
feature of the principal structure, is in compliance with sight
distance standards and is approved by the Architectural
Review Board. Additionally, for properties located on a corner
lot, no such plantings, masonry garden walls, planting boxes,
retaining walls or ornamental or decorative fences shall be
maintained higher than three and one-half (3½) feet above the
established street grades within twenty (20) feet of any street
intersection to comply with sight distance standards.
f. Roof eaves may project up to three (3) feet into a required front
yard setback.
g. Windowsills, bay windows, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project up to two (2) feet into the required front yard
setback.
h. Balconies may project up to five (5) feet into a required front
yard setback.
i. Any accessory building that is not a part of the principal
structure shall be located not less than sixty (60) feet from the
front lot line.
Section
405.2050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2050
AO:653
j. Lots in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet and
having one hundred (100) lineal feet of frontage or more may
install two (2) drive approaches to accommodate a turnaround
with the written approval from the Director of Public Works
and subject to Architectural Review Board approval (all other
lots shall be limited to one (1) drive approach).
k. Basements and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the front yard setback but may
not transverse the property line.
2. Rear yard setbacks. The required setback in an "R-3" District is
measured by calculating thirty percent (30%) of the depth of the lot
measured from the front to the rear property line. The calculated
setback must be a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the rear
property line to the closest rear wall of the principal structure. The
rear yard setback is not required to exceed a maximum of fifty (50)
feet, although these regulations do not preclude a deeper than
maximum setback at the discretion of the property owner or the
required setback may be reduced to twenty percent (20%) of the lot
depth with a thirty (30) foot minimum rear yard setback, provided
that no more than eighty percent (80%) of the buildable area is
improved by a building. Modifications to the required rear yard
setback are permitted under the following conditions:
a. Open, uncovered porches, patios and above ground decks may
project not more than twelve (12) feet into a required rear
yard, provided the floor level of any such structure is at or
below the level of the first (1st) floor of the building. Balconies
may project into the required rear yard a maximum distance of
five (5) feet.
b. Where a corner lot exists and thereby two (2) front yards, the
property line opposite to the front yard line with the greater
Section
405.2050
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2050
AO:654
street frontage shall be considered the side yard and the
property line opposite to the front yard line with the lesser
street frontage shall be considered the rear yard.
c. One (1) or more accessory buildings may be located in the rear
yard. However, the combined footprint may not occupy more
than thirty-five percent (35%) of the required rear yard area
and no accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to
the principal building nor closer than five (5) feet to any rear
property line. Additionally, accessory buildings may not exceed
twenty (20) feet in height.
d. Outside stairways, deck stairs, tower balconies and fire
escapes may project up to four (4) feet into the required rear
yard setback.
e. Roof eaves may project up to three (3) feet into the required
rear yard setback.
f. Window sills, bay windows, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well rain leaders and chimneys, may
project up to two (2) feet into the required rear yard setback.
g. Basements and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the rear yard setback but may
not transverse the property line.
3. Side yard setbacks. The required setback in an "R-3" District is
measured by calculating ten percent (10%) of the width of the total
lot. The calculated setback must be a minimum of six (6) feet up to
a maximum of fifteen (15) feet, although these regulations do not
preclude a wider than maximum setback at the discretion of the
property owner. Modifications to the required side yard setback are
permitted under the following conditions:
a. For the purposes of side yard regulations, a two-family
dwelling shall be considered as one (1) building occupying one
(1) lot.
b. Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this
Chapter is less than fifty (50) feet in width, the required side
Section
405.2050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2050
AO:655
Section 405.2060. General Non-Conformance With The Setback
Provisions [Ord. No. 5814 §1(16.9), 4-27-2004]
Those parts of existing building that violate yard regulations may be
repaired and remodeled but not reconstructed or structurally altered.
yard may be reduced to less than the required ten percent
(10%) of the width of the lot, provided however, that no side
yard shall be less than five (5) feet from the structure to the
side property line.
c. On a corner lot, the side yard facing the street shall be set back
in conformance with the required front yard on that street;
provided however that the buildable width of such lot shall not
be reduced to less than thirty (30) feet.
d. No accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to the
principal building nor closer than five (5) feet to any side
property line.
e. An unenclosed porte-cochere or canopy may project into a
required side yard but may not encroach further than five (5)
feet from the side property line.
f. An attached two-family dwelling may be constructed on two (2)
individual lots (fee simple) with a party wall connecting the
units and, in such cases, each individual lot shall meet the
minimum lot width and lot area requirements as per Section
405.2010 and Section 405.2020, but the side yard requirement
at the common wall between units shall not apply.
g. An attached two-family dwelling constructed on a single lot
(i.e., condominium not fee simple) with a party wall connecting
the units must meet the minimum lot area requirements per
Section 405.2020, but the side yard requirement at the
common wall between units shall not apply.
h. Outside stairways, tower balconies or fire escapes may project
up to four (4) feet into the required side yard setback.
i. Roof eaves may project up to three (3) feet into the required
side yard setback.
j. Windowsills, bay windows, balconies, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project up to two (2) feet into the required side yard
setback.
k. Basements and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the side yard setback but may
not transverse the property line.
Section
405.2050
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2070
AO:656
Section 405.2070. Off-Street Parking [Ord. No. 5814 §1(16.10),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6333 §1, 8-26-2014]
See Article XXV, Off- Street Parking and Loading Regulations, of this
Chapter.
Section 405.2080. Resubdivision of Lots [Ord. No. 5814 §1(16.11),
4-27-2004]
No existing lot of record in the "R-3" District shall be resubdivided unless
the resubdivided lots conform to the area and frontage requirements of
the "R-3" District and in addition be consistent with the lots located in the
immediate neighborhood with regard to size, frontage and arrangement so
as to provide an orderly pattern of development. No flag lot(s) shall be
created as a result of any resubdivision.
Section 405.2090. Compliance With Other Plans or Regulations
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(16.12), 4-27-2004]
Any development proposed within the "R-3" Zoning District shall be
reviewed for compliance with other plans and/or regulations of the City
of Clayton. Compliance with other plans and/or regulations shall include,
but not be limited to, the master plan, overlay district regulations, urban
design district regulations, any other land use plan or relevant standards
and guidelines to the specific site which have been accepted or adopted by
the Board of Aldermen.
Section 405.2100. Permitted Uses For The "R-3" Zoning District
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(16.13), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6010 §3, 1-22-2008;
Ord. No. 6067 §2, 4-14-2009; Ord. No. 6191 §3, 2-28-2012]
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-3" ZONING DISTRICT "R-3"
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to
permitted uses not involving the conduct of business,
including a private garage.
P
Amateur radio, home antennas and associated equipment
(subject to Article XXVI).
P
Group homes for the physically and/or mentally handicap,
provided that 8 or fewer unrelated persons may reside
therein and further provided that no more than 2 additional
persons acting as house parents or guardians, who need not
be related to one another or any of the residents, may also
reside therein, and provided further, however, that the
maximum occupancy limitations for the structure as
established by the Property Maintenance Code and Fire
Code, if applicable, adopted by the City and as amended and
in force at the time of approval of occupancy, may not be
exceeded.
P
Section
405.2070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2100
AO:657
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-3" ZONING DISTRICT "R-3"
No group care home shall be permitted within 500 feet from
any existing group care home.
Home occupations (as regulated and defined in Article II and
III respectively).
P
Parks and playgrounds. P
Places of religious worship, but no new or enlarged place of
religious worship shall be located upon a lot or tract
containing less than 1 acre. Places of religious worship may
be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet if the building is
set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for each foot of
additional building height above the height limit otherwise
permitted in the district in which the building is built.
P
Residential—single-family dwelling unit 5,000 square feet
minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
P
Residential—Two-family dwellings 2,500 square feet
minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
P
An attached two-family dwelling may be constructed on 2
individual lots (fee simple) with a party wall connecting the
units and, in such cases, each individual lot shall meet the
minimum lot width and lot area requirements as per Section
405.2010 and Section 405.2020, but the side yard
requirement at the common wall between units shall not
apply.
C
Child day care home. C
Church spires, belfries, monuments, ornamental towers and
spires and chimneys exceeding the maximum height in the
zoning district may be erected to such height authorized by
the Board of Aldermen of the City by conditional use permit
or general ordinance.
C
Colleges and universities, provided that buildings shall not
occupy more than 1/3 of the area site and the height,
location and use of such buildings will not have a serious
and depreciating effect on any adjacent residential property.
Public buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools, when
permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not
exceeding 110 feet if the building is set back from each yard
line at least 1 foot for each foot of additional building height
above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district in
which the building is built.
C
Community buildings, recreation facilities, recreation fields. C
Day care, nursery, pre-kindergarten, play and special
schools and kindergarten.
C
Section
405.2100
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2100
AO:658
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-3" ZONING DISTRICT "R-3"
Detached multi-unit housing/multiple structures on a single
lot (subject to Section 405.290).
C
Facilities (subject to Article XXVII) P
Public and private elementary, middle and secondary
schools, provided that the height, location and use of such
buildings will not have a serious and depreciating effect on
any adjacent residential property. Public buildings, hospitals,
institutions or schools, when permitted in a district, may be
erected to a height not exceeding 110 feet if the building is
set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for each foot of
additional building height above the height limit otherwise
permitted in the district in which the building is built.
C
Public buildings erected or used by any department of the
City, County, State or Federal Government. Public buildings,
hospitals, institutions or schools, when permitted in a
district, may be erected to a height not exceeding 110 feet if
the building is set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for
each foot of additional building height above the height limit
otherwise permitted in the district in which the building is
built.
C
Solar energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
P
Solar energy systems, ground-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
C
Wind energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
C
P = Permitted by right
C = Permitted with conditional use permit
Note: Uses not appearing in the table are prohibited.
Section 405.2110. through Section 405.2130. (Reserved)
Section
405.2100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2110
AO:659

ARTICLE XV
"R-4" Low Density Multiple-Family Dwelling District
Section 405.2140. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §1(17.1),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(17.1), 7-11-2006]
The "R-4" Low Density Multiple-Family Dwelling District (hereinafter known
in this Article as the "R-4" District) is intended to allow single-family, twofamily
and low density multi-family dwellings. This district also allows for
non-residential land uses which provide services to the residential district
on a conditional use permit basis.
Section 405.2150. Permitted Uses [Ord. No. 5814 §1(17.2),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(17.2), 7-11-2006]
The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in the
Table of Permitted Uses found at the end of this Article. If a "P" (permitted
by right) or a "C" (permitted by conditional use permit) is not indicated for
a use in this table or a use is not included on the table, it is prohibited.
Section 405.2160. Maximum Building Height [Ord. No. 5814
§1(17.3), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(17.3), 7-11-2006]
The maximum building height in the "R-4" District is three (3) stories or
forty-five (45) feet above grade, whichever is less. Partial stories under
sloping roofs shall be permitted provided the limit in feet is not exceeded.
Accessory structures may not exceed twenty (20) feet in height.
Section 405.2170. Minimum Lot Width [Ord. No. 5814 §1(17.4),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(17.4), 7-11-2006; Ord. No. 6509,
11-28-2017]
Section 405.2180. Minimum Lot Area [Ord. No. 5814 §1(17.5),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(17.5), 7-11-2006; Ord. No. 6509,
11-28-2017]
A. The minimum lot widths for the "R-4" District shall be as follows:
1. Single family – fifty (50) feet.
2. Two-family – fifty (50) feet.
3. Townhouse – twenty (20) feet per unit.
4. Multi-family – fifty (50) feet.
B. Modifications may be allowed subject to Section 405.2190.
A. The minimum lot area in the "R-4" District shall be five thousand (5,000)
square feet and the following minimum lot areas shall be provided for
each dwelling unit:
Section
405.2140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2180
AO:661
Section 405.2190. Exceptions To The Minimum Lot Width and Area
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(17.6), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(17.6),
7-11-2006]
Where a lot of record established prior to April 14, 1959, has less width or
area than herein required in the district in which it is located, such lot shall
be considered a conforming lot.
Section 405.2200. Impervious Coverage [Ord. No. 5814 §1(17.7),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(17.7), 7-11-2006]
Section 405.2210. Setback Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(17.8),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(17.8), 7-11-2006]
1. Single-family—five thousand (5,000) square feet.
2. Two-family—two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
3. Multiple-dwelling—one thousand seven hundred fifty (1,750)
square feet.
4. Townhouse – one thousand nine hundred seventy-four (1,974)
square feet.
B. Modifications may be allowed subject to Section 405.2190.
A. No more than forty-five percent (45%) of the required front yard
setback may be covered by impervious material. No more than fifty-five
percent (55%) of the total lot may be covered by impervious material.
Properties located within an urban design district must comply with the
requirements for the specific urban design district.
B. In instances where an applicant can demonstrate just cause, the Plan
Commission shall have the authority to approve a modification of up to
an additional five percent (5%) over the impervious coverage
requirement; that is up to fifty percent (50%) in the front yard and up to
sixty percent (60%) overall lot coverage; unless the property is located
within an urban design district, then the requirements found therein
shall apply.
A. The following are setback requirements for a principal building located
in an "R-4" District and modifications to those requirements when
certain conditions exist.
1. Front yard setbacks. The required setback in an "R-4" District is
measured by calculating twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the
lot measured from the front to the rear property line. The
calculated setback must be a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the
front building facade to the front property line. The front yard
setback is not required to exceed a maximum of sixty (60) feet,
although these regulations do not preclude a deeper than
maximum setback at the discretion of the property owner.
Section
405.2180
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2210
AO:662
Modifications to the required front yard setback are permitted
under the following conditions:
a. Where fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage along any
block face is improved with buildings that have observed a
front yard line with a variation in depth of not more than ten
(10) feet, the average of such front yard lines shall be the
minimum setback observed in such a block face in lieu of the
required front yard setback requirements. For example, when
calculating the average setback for a block face with ten (10)
homes, where nine (9) homes have setbacks ranging from
twenty-five (25) feet to thirty-five (35) feet and the remaining
home has a forty (40) foot setback, the home with the forty (40)
foot setback is not included in the calculation for the average.
No front yard shall be required to exceed the maximum of one
hundred (100) feet.
b. Where lots have double frontages or are corner lots, the
required front yard setback provision shall be provided on all
streets.
c. If at or below the first (1st) floor level of the principal
structure, an open, uncovered porch may project into the
required front yard setback a distance of up to ten (10) feet or
an open, covered porch or paved terrace may project into a
required front yard a distance of up to five (5) feet and
associated roof eaves may project up to an additional three (3)
feet.
d. Balconies may project up to five (5) feet into the required front
yard setback.
e. Front yard masonry garden walls, planting boxes, retaining
walls, plantings or ornamental or decorative fences may be
erected as part of new construction, up to four (4) feet above
the grade level in the front yard, provided such structure is an
integral part of the architectural feature of the principal
structure, is in compliance with sight distance standards and is
approved by the Architectural Review Board. Additionally, for
properties located on a corner lot, no such plantings, masonry
garden walls, planting boxes, retaining walls or ornamental or
decorative fences shall be maintained higher than three and
one-half (3½) feet above the established street grades within
twenty (20) feet of any street intersection to comply with sight
distance standards.
f. Roof eaves may project up to three (3) feet into the required
front yard setback.
g. Windowsills, bay windows, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
Section
405.2210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2210
AO:663
may project up to two (2) feet into the required front yard
setback.
h. Front yard masonry garden walls, planting boxes, retaining
walls or ornamental or decorative fences may be erected as
part of new construction, up to four (4) feet above the grade
level in the front yard, provided such structure is an integral
part of the architectural feature of the principal structure and
is approved by the Architectural Review Board.
i. Any accessory building that is not a part of the principal
structure shall be located not less than sixty (60) feet from the
front lot line.
j. Lots in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet and
having one hundred (100) lineal feet of frontage or more may
install two (2) drive approaches to accommodate a turnaround
with the written approval from the Director of Public Works
and subject to Architectural Review Board approval (all other
lots shall be limited to one (1) drive approach).
k. Basements/cellars and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the required front yard
setback but may not transverse the property line.
2. Rear yard setbacks. The required setback in an "R-4" District is
measured by calculating twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the
lot measured from the front to the rear property line. The
calculated setback must be a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the
rear property line to the closest rear wall of the principal structure.
The rear yard setback is not required to exceed a maximum of fifty
(50) feet, although these regulations do not preclude a deeper than
maximum setback at the discretion of the property owner.
Modifications to the required rear yard setback are permitted
under the following conditions:
a. Open, uncovered porches, patios and above ground decks may
project not more than twelve (12) feet into a required rear
yard, provided the floor level of any such structure is at or
below the level of the first (1st) floor of the building. Balconies
may project into the required rear yard a maximum distance of
five (5) feet.
b. Where a corner lot exists and thereby two (2) front yards, the
property line opposite to the front yard line with the greater
street frontage shall be considered the side yard and the
property line opposite to the front yard line with the lesser
street frontage shall be considered the rear yard.
Section
405.2210
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2210
AO:664
c. One (1) or more accessory buildings may be located in the rear
yard. However, the combined footprint may not occupy more
than thirty-five percent (35%) of the required rear yard area
and no accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to
the principal building nor closer than five (5) feet to any rear
property line. Additionally, accessory buildings may not exceed
twenty (20) feet in height.
d. Outside stairways, deck stairs, tower balconies and fire
escapes may project up to four (4) feet into the required rear
yard setback.
e. Roof eaves may project up to three (3) feet into the required
rear yard setback.
f. Windowsills, bay windows, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well rain leaders and chimneys, may
project up to two (2) feet into the required rear yard setback.
g. Basements/cellars and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the required front yard
setback but may not transverse the property line.
3. Side yard setbacks. The required setback in an "R-4" District is
measured by calculating ten percent (10%) of the width of the total
lot. The calculated setback must be a minimum of five (5) feet up to
a maximum of fifteen (15) feet, although these regulations do not
preclude a wider than maximum setback at the discretion of the
property owner. Modifications to the required side yard setback are
permitted under the following conditions: [Ord. No. 6509,
11-28-2017]
a. For the purposes of side yard regulations, a multi-family
dwelling shall be considered as one (1) building occupying one
(1) lot.
b. Townhouse dwellings may be constructed on multiple lots (fee
simple) or on one (1) lot (condominium) with a party wall
connecting the units and, in such cases, each individual lot
shall meet the minimum lot width and lot area requirements
Section
405.2210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2210
AO:665
Section 405.2220. General Non-Conformance With The Setback
Provisions [Ord. No. 5814 §1(17.9), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935
§1(17.9), 7-11-2006]
Those parts of existing building that violate yard regulations may be
repaired and remodeled but not reconstructed or structurally altered.
Section 405.2230. Off-Street Parking [Ord. No. 5814 §1(17.10),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(17.10), 7-11-2006; Ord. No. 6333 §1,
8-26-2014]
See Article XXV, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations, of this
Chapter.
provided in this Article, but the side yard requirement at the
common wall between units shall not apply.
c. Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this
Chapter is less than the minimum required width, the required
side yard may be reduced to less than the required ten percent
(10%) of the width of the lot, provided, however, that no side
yard shall be less than five (5) feet from the structure to the
side property line.
d. On a corner lot, the side yard facing the street shall be set back
in conformance with the required front yard on that street;
provided, however, that the buildable width of such lot shall
not be reduced to less than thirty (30) feet.
e. No accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to the
principal building nor closer than five (5) feet to any side
property line.
f. An unenclosed porte-cochere or canopy may project into a
required side yard but may not encroach further than five (5)
feet from the side property line.
g. Outside stairways, tower balconies or fire escapes may project
up to four (4) feet into the required side yard setback.
h. Roof eaves may project up to three (3) feet into the required
side yard setback.
i. Windowsills, bay windows, balconies, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project up to two (2) feet into the required side yard
setback.
j. Basements/cellars and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the required front yard
setback but may not transverse the property line.
Section
405.2210
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2240
AO:666
Section 405.2240. Resubdivision of Lots [Ord. No. 5814 §1(17.11),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(17.11), 7-11-2006]
No existing lot of record in the "R-4" District shall be resubdivided unless
the resubdivided lots conform to the area and frontage requirements of
the "R-4" District and in addition be consistent with the lots located in the
immediate neighborhood with regard to size, frontage and arrangement so
as to provide an orderly pattern of development. No flag lot(s) shall be
created as a result of any resubdivision.
Section 405.2250. Compliance With Other Plans or Regulations
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(17.12), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(17.12),
7-11-2006]
Any development proposed within the "R-4" Zoning District shall be
reviewed for compliance with other plans and/or regulations of the City
of Clayton. Compliance with other plans and/or regulations shall include,
but not be limited to, the master plan, overlay district regulations, urban
design district regulations, any other land use plan or relevant standards
and guidelines to the specific site which have been accepted or adopted by
the Board of Aldermen.
Section 405.2260. Permitted Uses For The "R-4" Zoning District
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(17.13), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5935 §1(17.13),
7-11-2006; Ord. No. 6010 §3, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 6067 §2,
4-14-2009; Ord. No. 6191 §3, 2-28-2012]
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-4" ZONING DISTRICT "R-4"
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to
permitted uses not involving the conduct of business,
including a private garage.
P
Amateur radio, home antennas and associated equipment
(subject to Article XXVI).
P
Group homes for the physically and/or mentally handicap,
provided that 8 or fewer unrelated persons may reside
therein and further provided that no more than 2 additional
persons acting as house parents or guardians, who need not
be related to one another or any of the residents, may also
reside therein, and provided further, however, that the
maximum occupancy limitations for the structure as
established by the Property Maintenance Code and Fire
Code, if applicable, adopted by the City and as amended and
in force at the time of approval of occupancy, may not be
exceeded.
P
No group care home shall be permitted within 500 feet from
any existing group care home.
Home occupations (as regulated and defined in Article II and
III respectively).
P
Section
405.2240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2260
AO:667
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-4" ZONING DISTRICT "R-4"
Parks and playgrounds. P
Places of religious worship, but no new or enlarged place of
religious worship shall be located upon a lot or tract
containing less than 1 acre. Places of religious worship may
be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet if the building is
set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for each foot of
additional building height above the height limit otherwise
permitted in the district in which the building is built.
P
Residential — single-family dwelling unit 5,000 square feet
minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
P
Residential — Townhouse dwellings (condominium lots) 1,974
square feet minimum lot area per dwelling unit (subject to
Section 405.280). [Ord. No. 6509, 11-28-2017]
P
Residential — Townhouse dwellings (fee simple lots) 1,974
square feet minimum lot area per dwelling unit (subject to
Section 405.280). [Ord. No. 6509, 11-28-2017]
P
Residential — Two-family dwellings 2,500 square feet
minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
P
Residential — Multi-family dwellings 1,750 square feet
minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
P
Church spires, belfries, monuments, ornamental towers and
spires and chimneys exceeding the maximum height in the
zoning district may be erected to such height authorized by
the Board of Aldermen of the City by conditional use permit
or general ordinance.
C
Colleges and universities, provided that buildings shall not
occupy more than 1/3 of the area site and the height, location
and use of such buildings will not have a serious and
depreciating effect on any adjacent residential property.
Public buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools, when
permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not
exceeding 110 feet if the building is set back from each yard
line at least 1 foot for each foot of additional building height
above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district in
which the building is built.
C
Community buildings, recreation facilities, recreation fields. C
Day care, nursery, pre-kindergarten, play and special schools
and kindergarten.
C
Detached multi-unit housing/multiple structures on a single
lot (subject to Section 405.290).
C
Facilities (subject to Article XXVII) P
Lodge hall or club. C
Section
405.2260
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2260
AO:668
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-4" ZONING DISTRICT "R-4"
Offices—business or professional offices within 215 feet of
the boundary of any service district, provided that any such
building complies with the height and area requirements;
that the appearance and design of the building are in keeping
with the appearance and design of the adjoining dwellings;
and that there is no storefront or display window used.
C
Parking lots and multi-level parking structures on land not
more than 500 feet walking distance from the boundary of
any "C-1" or "C-2" Commercial District, "HDC" Commercial
District or "S-1" Service District, under such conditions as
will properly protect the character of surrounding property.
C
Public and private elementary, middle and secondary schools,
provided that the height, location and use of such buildings
will not have a serious and depreciating effect on any
adjacent residential property. Public buildings, hospitals,
institutions or schools, when permitted in a district, may be
erected to a height not exceeding 110 feet if the building is
set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for each foot of
additional building height above the height limit otherwise
permitted in the district in which the building is built.
C
Public buildings erected or used by any department of the
City, County, State or Federal Government. Public buildings,
hospitals, institutions or schools, when permitted in a
district, may be erected to a height not exceeding 110 feet if
the building is set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for
each foot of additional building height above the height limit
otherwise permitted in the district in which the building is
built.
C
Solar energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
P
Solar energy systems, ground-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
C
Wind energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
C
P = Permitted by right
C = Permitted with conditional use permit
Note: Uses not appearing in the table are prohibited.
Section 405.2270. through Section 405.2300. (Reserved)
Section
405.2260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2270
AO:669

ARTICLE XVI
"R-5" Medium-Low Density Multiple-Family Dwelling District
Section 405.2310. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §1(18.1),
4-27-2004]
The "R-5" Medium-Low Density Multiple-Family Dwelling District
(hereinafter known in this Article as the "R-5" District) is intended to allow
single-family, two-family, low and mid-level density multi-family dwellings.
This district also allows for non-residential land uses, which provide
services to the residential district on a conditional use permit basis.
Section 405.2320. Permitted Uses [Ord. No. 5814 §1(18.2),
4-27-2004]
The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in the
Table of Permitted Uses found at the end of this Article. If a "P" (permitted
by right) or a "C" (permitted by conditional use permit) is not indicated for
a use in this table or a use is not included on the table, it is prohibited.
Section 405.2330. Maximum Building Height [Ord. No. 5814
§1(18.3), 4-27-2004]
The maximum building height in the "R-5" District is three (3) stories or
forty-five (45) feet above grade, whichever is less. Partial stories under
sloping roofs shall be permitted provided the limit in feet is not exceeded.
Accessory structures may not exceed twenty (20) feet in height.
Section 405.2340. Exceptions To The Maximum Building Height
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(18.4), 4-27-2004]
Multiple-family buildings may exceed the maximum height restriction of
three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet above grade provided that the front,
rear and side yard setbacks are all increased by one (1) foot beyond the
required setbacks per each one (1) foot of additional building height to a
maximum of sixty (60) feet front yard, seventy (70) feet rear yard and fifty
(50) feet for side yard.
Section 405.2350. Minimum Lot Width [Ord. No. 5814 §1(18.5),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6509, 11-28-2017]
A. The minimum lot widths for the "R-5" District shall be as follows:
1. Single family – fifty (50) feet.
2. Two-family – fifty (50) feet.
3. Townhouse – twenty (20) feet per unit.
4. Multi-family – fifty (50) feet.
B. Modifications may be allowed subject to Section 405.2370.
Section
405.2310
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2360
AO:671
Section 405.2360. Minimum Lot Area [Ord. No. 5814 §1(18.6),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6509, 11-28-2017]
Section 405.2370. Exceptions To The Minimum Lot Width and Area
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(18.7), 4-27-2004]
Where a lot of record established prior to April 14, 1959, has less width or
area than herein required in the district in which it is located, such lot shall
be considered a conforming lot.
Section 405.2380. Impervious Coverage [Ord. No. 5814 §1(18.8),
4-27-2004]
Section 405.2390. Setback Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(18.9),
4-27-2004]
A. The minimum lot area in the "R-5" District shall be five thousand (5,000)
square feet and the following minimum lot areas shall be provided for
each dwelling unit:
1. Single-family—five thousand (5,000) square feet.
2. Two-family—two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
3. Multiple-dwelling—one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet.
4. Townhouse – one thousand nine hundred seventy-four (1,974)
square feet.
B. Modifications may be allowed subject to Section 405.2370.
A. No more than forty-five percent (45%) of the required front yard
setback may be covered by impervious material. No more than fifty-five
percent (55%) of the total lot may be covered by impervious material.
Properties located within an urban design district must comply with the
requirements for the specific urban design district.
B. In instances where an applicant can demonstrate just cause, the Plan
Commission shall have the authority to approve a modification of up to
an additional five percent (5%) over the impervious coverage
requirement; that is up to fifty percent (50%) in the front yard and up to
sixty percent (60%) overall lot coverage; unless the property is located
within an urban design district, then the requirements found therein
shall apply.
A. The following are setback requirements for a principal building located
in an "R-5" District and modifications to those requirements when
certain conditions exist.
1. Front yard setback. The required setback in an "R-5" District is
measured by calculating twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the
lot measured from the front to the rear property line. The
calculated setback must be a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the
Section
405.2360
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2390
AO:672
front building facade to the front property line. The front yard
setback is not required to exceed a maximum of sixty (60) feet,
although these regulations do not preclude a deeper than
maximum setback at the discretion of the property owner.
Modifications to the required front yard setback are permitted
under the following conditions:
a. Where fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage along any
block face is improved with buildings that have observed a
front yard line with a variation in depth of not more than ten
(10) feet, the average of such front yard lines shall be the
minimum setback observed in such a block face in lieu of the
required front yard setback requirements. For example, when
calculating the average setback for a block face with ten (10)
homes, where nine (9) homes have setbacks ranging from
twenty-five (25) feet to thirty-five (35) feet and the remaining
home has a forty (40) foot setback, the home with the forty (40)
foot setback is not included in the calculation for the average.
No front yard shall be required to exceed the maximum of one
hundred (100) feet.
b. Where lots have double frontages or are corner lots, the
required front yard setback provisions shall be provided on all
streets.
c. If at or below the first (1st) floor level of the principal
structure, an open, uncovered porch may project into the
required front yard setback a distance of up to ten (10) feet or
an open, covered porch or paved terrace may project into a
required front yard a distance of up to five (5) feet and
associated roof eaves may project up to an additional three (3)
feet.
d. Balconies may project up to five (5) feet into the required front
yard setback.
e. Front yard masonry garden walls, planting boxes, retaining
walls, plantings or ornamental or decorative fences may be
erected as part of new construction, up to four (4) feet above
the grade level in the front yard, provided such structure is an
integral part of the architectural feature of the principal
structure, is in compliance with sight distance standards and is
approved by the Architectural Review Board. Additionally, for
properties located on a corner lot, no such plantings, masonry
garden walls, planting boxes, retaining walls or ornamental or
decorative fences shall be maintained higher than three and
one-half (3½) feet above the established street grades within
twenty (20) feet of any street intersection to comply with sight
distance standards.
Section
405.2390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2390
AO:673
f. Roof eaves may project up to three (3) feet into the required
front yard setback.
g. Window sills, bay windows, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project up to two (2) feet into the required front yard
setback.
h. Any accessory building that is not a part of the principal
structure shall be located not less than sixty (60) feet from the
front lot line.
i. Lots in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet and
having one hundred (100) lineal feet of frontage or more may
install two (2) drive approaches to accommodate a turnaround
with the written approval from the Director of Public Works
and subject to Architectural Review Board approval (all other
lots shall be limited to one (1) drive approach).
j. Basements and parking facilities which are completely
underground may encroach into the front yard setback, but
may not transverse the property line.
2. Rear yard setbacks. The required setback in an "R-5" District is
measured by calculating twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the
lot measured from the front to the rear property line. The
calculated setback must be a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the
rear property line to the closest rear wall of the principal structure.
The rear yard setback is not required to exceed a maximum of fifty
(50) feet, although these regulations do not preclude a deeper than
maximum setback at the discretion of the property owner.
Modifications to the required rear yard setback are permitted
under the following conditions:
a. Open, uncovered porches, patios and above ground decks may
project not more than twelve (12) feet into a required rear
yard, provided the floor level of any such structure is at or
below the level of the first (1st) floor of the building. Balconies
may project into the required rear yard a maximum distance of
five (5) feet.
b. Where a corner lot exists and thereby two (2) front yards, the
property line opposite to the front yard line with the greater
street frontage shall be considered the side yard and the
property line opposite to the front yard line with the lesser
street frontage shall be considered the rear yard.
Section
405.2390
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2390
AO:674
c. One (1) or more accessory buildings may be located in the rear
yard. However, the combined footprint may not occupy more
than thirty-five percent (35%) of the required rear yard area
and no accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to
the principal building nor closer than five (5) feet to any rear
property line. Additionally, accessory buildings may not exceed
twenty (20) feet in height.
d. Outside stairways, deck stairs, tower balconies and fire
escapes may project up to four (4) feet into the required rear
yard setback.
e. Roof eaves may project up to three (3) feet into the required
rear yard setback.
f. Windowsills, bay windows, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project up to two (2) feet into the required rear yard
setback.
g. Basements and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the rear yard setback but may
not transverse the property line.
3. Side yard setbacks. The required setback in an "R-5" District is
measured by calculating ten percent (10%) of the width of the total
lot. The calculated setback must be a minimum of eight (8) feet up
to a maximum of twenty (20) feet, although these regulations do
not preclude a wider than maximum setback at the discretion of the
property owner. Modifications to the required side yard setback are
permitted under the following conditions: [Ord. No. 6509,
11-28-2017]
a. For the purposes of side yard regulations, a multi-family
dwelling shall be considered as one (1) building occupying one
(1) lot.
b. Townhouse dwellings may be constructed on multiple lots (fee
simple) or on one (1) lot (condominium) with a party wall
connecting the units and, in such cases, each individual lot
Section
405.2390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2390
AO:675
Section 405.2400. General Non-Conformance With The Setback
Provisions [Ord. No. 5814 §1(18.10), 4-27-2004]
Those parts of existing building that violate yard regulations may be
repaired and remodeled but not reconstructed or structurally altered.
shall meet the minimum lot width and lot area requirements
provided in this Article, but the side yard requirement at the
common wall between units shall not apply.
c. Lots created in conjunction with attached single-family
dwelling developments utilizing common walls and occupying
more than one (1) platted lot must meet the minimum lot size
requirements per Section 405.2360 "Minimum Lot Area", but
the side yard requirement at the common wall between units
shall not apply.
d. Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this
Chapter is less than the minimum required width, the required
side yard may be reduced to less than the required ten percent
(10%) of the width of the lot, provided, however, that no side
yard shall be less than five (5) feet from the structure to the
side property line.
e. On a corner lot, the side yard facing the street shall be set back
in conformance with the required front yard on that street;
provided, however, that the buildable width of such lot shall
not be reduced to less than thirty-five (35) feet.
f. No accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to the
principal building nor closer than five (5) feet to any side
property line.
g. An unenclosed porte-cochere or canopy may project into a
required side yard but may not encroach further than five (5)
feet from the side property line.
h. Outside stairways, tower balconies or fire escapes may project
up to four (4) feet into the required side yard setback.
i. Roof eaves may project up to three (3) feet into the required
side yard setback.
j. Windowsills, bay windows, balconies, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project up to two (2) feet into the required side setback.
k. Basements and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the side yard setback but may
not transverse the property line.
Section
405.2390
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2410
AO:676
Section 405.2410. Off-Street Parking [Ord. No. 5814 §1(18.11),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6333 §1, 8-26-2014]
No off-street parking facilities will be allowed within required front and
side yard areas except as provided by a conditional use permit. For other
applicable regulations regarding off-street parking, see Article XXV, Off-
Street Parking and Loading Regulations, of this Chapter.
Section 405.2420. Resubdivision of Lots [Ord. No. 5814 §1(18.12),
4-27-2004]
No existing lot of record in the "R-5" District shall be resubdivided unless
the resubdivided lots conform to the area and frontage requirements of
the "R-5" District and, in addition, be consistent with the lots located in
the immediate neighborhood with regard to size, frontage and arrangement
so as to provide an orderly pattern of development. No flag lot(s) shall be
created as a result of any resubdivision.
Section 405.2430. Compliance With Other Plans or Regulations
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(18.13), 4-27-2004]
Any development proposed within the "R-5" Zoning District shall be
reviewed for compliance with other plans and/or regulations of the City
of Clayton. Compliance with other plans and/or regulations shall include,
but not be limited to, the master plan, overlay district regulations, urban
design district regulations, any other land use plan or relevant standards
and guidelines to the specific site which have been accepted or adopted by
the Board of Aldermen.
Section 405.2440. Permitted Uses For The "R-5" Zoning District
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(18.14), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6010 §3, 1-22-2008;
Ord. No. 6067 §2, 4-14-2009; Ord. No. 6191 §3, 2-28-2012]
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-5" ZONING DISTRICT "R-5"
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to
permitted uses not involving the conduct of business,
including a private garage.
P
Amateur radio, home antennas and associated equipment
(subject to Article XXVI).
P
Section
405.2410
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2440
AO:677
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-5" ZONING DISTRICT "R-5"
Group homes for the physically and/or mentally handicap,
provided that 8 or fewer unrelated persons may reside
therein and further provided that no more than 2 additional
persons acting as house parents or guardians, who need not
be related to one another or any of the residents, may also
reside therein, and provided further, however, that the
maximum occupancy limitations for the structure as
established by the Property Maintenance Code and Fire
Code, if applicable, adopted by the City and as amended and
in force at the time of approval of occupancy, may not be
exceeded.
P
No group care home shall be permitted within 500 feet from
any existing group care home.
Home occupations (as regulated and defined in Article II and
III respectively).
P
Parks and playgrounds. P
Places of religious worship, but no new or enlarged place of
religious worship shall be located upon a lot or tract
containing less than 1 acre. Places of religious worship may
be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet if the building is
set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for each foot of
additional building height above the height limit otherwise
permitted in the district in which the building is built.
P
Residential — single-family dwelling unit 5,000 square feet
minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
P
Residential — Townhouse dwellings (condominium lots)
1,974 square feet minimum lot area per dwelling unit
(subject to Section 405.280). [Ord. No. 6509, 11-28-2017]
P
Residential — Townhouse dwellings (fee simple lots) 1,974
square feet minimum lot area per dwelling unit (subject to
Section 405.280). [Ord. No. 6509, 11-28-2017]
P
Residential — two-family dwellings 2,500 square feet
minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
P
Residential — multi-family dwellings 1,500 square feet
minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
P
Church spires, belfries, monuments, ornamental towers and
spires and chimneys exceeding the maximum height in the
zoning district may be erected to such height authorized by
the Board of Aldermen of the City by conditional use permit
or general ordinance.
C
Section
405.2440
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2440
AO:678
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-5" ZONING DISTRICT "R-5"
Colleges and universities, provided that buildings shall not
occupy more than 1/3 of the area site and the height,
location and use of such buildings will not have a serious
and depreciating effect on any adjacent residential property.
Public buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools, when
permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not
exceeding 110 feet if the building is set back from each yard
line at least 1 foot for each foot of additional building height
above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district in
which the building is built.
C
Community buildings, recreation facilities, recreation fields. C
Day care, nursery, pre-kindergarten, play and special
schools and kindergarten.
C
Detached multi-unit housing/multiple structures on a single
lot (subject to Section 405.290).
C
Facilities (subject to Article XXVII) P
Lodge hall or club. C
Parking lots and multi-level parking structures on land not
more than 500 feet walking distance from the boundary of
any "C-1" or "C-2" Commercial District, "HDC" Commercial
District or "S-1" Service District, under such conditions as
will properly protect the character of surrounding property.
C
Public and private elementary, middle and secondary
schools, provided that the height, location and use of such
buildings will not have a serious and depreciating effect on
any adjacent residential property. Public buildings, hospitals,
institutions or schools, when permitted in a district, may be
erected to a height not exceeding 110 feet if the building is
set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for each foot of
additional building height above the height limit otherwise
permitted in the district in which the building is built.
C
Public buildings erected or used by any department of the
City, County, State or Federal Government. Public buildings,
hospitals, institutions or schools, when permitted in a
district, may be erected to a height not exceeding 110 feet if
the building is set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for
each foot of additional building height above the height limit
otherwise permitted in the district in which the building is
built.
C
Solar energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
P
Solar energy systems, ground-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
C
Section
405.2440
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2440
AO:679
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-5" ZONING DISTRICT "R-5"
Wind energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
C
P = Permitted by right
C = Permitted with conditional use permit
Note: Uses not appearing in the table are prohibited.
Section 405.2450. through Section 405.2470. (Reserved)
Section
405.2440
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2450
AO:680
ARTICLE XVII
"R-6" Medium Density Multiple-Family Dwelling District
Section 405.2480. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §1(19.1),
4-27-2004]
The "R-6" Medium Density Multiple-Family Dwelling District (hereinafter
known in this Article as the "R-6" District) is intended to allow single-family,
two-family and low, mid-level and medium density multi-family dwellings.
This district also allows for non-residential land uses, which provide
services to the residential district on a conditional use permit basis.
Section 405.2490. Permitted Uses [Ord. No. 5814 §1(19.2),
4-27-2004]
The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in the
Table of Permitted Uses found at the end of this Article. If a "P" (permitted
by right) or a "C" (permitted by conditional use permit) is not indicated for
a use in this table or a use is not included on the table, it is prohibited.
Section 405.2500. Maximum Building Height [Ord. No. 5814
§1(19.3), 4-27-2004]
The maximum building height in the "R-6" District is three (3) stories or
forty-five (45) feet above grade, whichever is less. Partial stories under
sloping roofs shall be permitted provided the limit in feet is not exceeded.
Accessory structures may not exceed twenty (20) feet in height.
Section 405.2510. Exceptions To The Maximum Building Height
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(19.4), 4-27-2004]
Multiple-family buildings may exceed the maximum height restriction of
three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet above grade provided that the front,
rear and side yard setbacks are all increased by one (1) foot beyond the
required setbacks per each two (2) feet of additional building height to a
maximum of sixty (60) feet front yard, seventy (70) feet rear yard and fifty
(50) feet for side yard.
Section 405.2520. Minimum Lot Width [Ord. No. 5814 §1(19.5),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6509, 11-28-2017]
A. The minimum lot widths for the "R-6" District shall be as follows:
1. Single family – fifty (50) feet.
2. Two-family – fifty (50) feet.
3. Townhouse – twenty (20) feet per unit.
4. Multi-family – fifty (50) feet.
B. Modifications may be allowed subject to Section 405.2540.
Section
405.2480
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2530
AO:681
Section 405.2530. Minimum Lot Area [Ord. No. 5814 §1(19.6),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6509, 11-28-2017]
Section 405.2540. Exceptions To The Minimum Lot Width and Area
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(19.7), 4-27-2004]
Where a lot of record established prior to April 14, 1959, has less width or
area than herein required in the district in which it is located, such lot shall
be considered a conforming lot.
Section 405.2550. Impervious Coverage [Ord. No. 5814 §1(19.8),
4-27-2004]
Section 405.2560. Setback Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(19.9),
4-27-2004]
A. The minimum lot area in the "R-6" District shall be five thousand (5,000)
square feet and the following minimum lot areas shall be provided for
each dwelling unit:
1. Single-family—five thousand (5,000) square feet.
2. Two-family—two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
3. Multiple-dwelling—one thousand (1,000) square feet.
4. Townhouse – one thousand nine hundred seventy-four (1,974)
square feet.
B. Modifications may be allowed subject to Section 405.2540.
A. No more than forty-five percent (45%) of the required front yard
setback may be covered by impervious material. No more than fifty-five
percent (55%) of the total lot may be covered by impervious material.
Properties located within an urban design district must comply with the
requirements for the specific urban design district.
B. In instances where an applicant can demonstrate just cause, the Plan
Commission shall have the authority to approve a modification of up to
an additional five percent (5%) over the impervious coverage
requirement; that is up to fifty percent (50%) in the front yard and up to
sixty percent (60%) overall lot coverage; unless the property is located
within an urban design district, then the requirements found therein
shall apply.
A. The following are setback requirements for a principal building located
in an "R-6" District and modifications to those requirements when
certain conditions exist.
1. Front yard setbacks. The required setback in an "R-6" District is
measured by calculating twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the
lot measured from the front to the rear property line. The
calculated setback must be a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the
Section
405.2530
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2560
AO:682
front building facade to the front property line. The front yard
setback is not required to exceed a maximum of sixty (60) feet,
although these regulations do not preclude a deeper than
maximum setback at the discretion of the property owner.
Modifications to the required front yard setback are permitted
under the following conditions:
a. Where fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage along any
block face is improved with buildings that have observed a
front yard line with a variation in depth of not more than ten
(10) feet, the average of such front yard lines shall be the
minimum setback observed in such a block face in lieu of the
required front yard setback requirements. For example, when
calculating the average setback for a block face with ten (10)
homes, where nine (9) homes have setbacks ranging from
twenty-five (25) feet to thirty-five (35) feet and the remaining
home has a forty (40) foot setback, the home with the forty (40)
foot setback is not included in the calculation for the average.
No front yard shall be required to exceed the maximum of one
hundred (100) feet.
b. Where lots have double frontages or are corner lots, the
required front yard setback provisions shall be provided on all
streets.
c. If at or below the first (1st) floor level of the principal
structure, an open, uncovered porch may project into a
required front yard a distance of up to ten (10) feet, or an open,
covered porch or paved terrace may project into a required
front yard a distance of up to five (5) feet and associated roof
eaves may project up to an additional three (3) feet.
d. Balconies may project up to five (5) feet into the required front
yard setback.
e. Front yard masonry garden walls, planting boxes, retaining
walls, plantings or ornamental or decorative fences may be
erected as part of new construction, up to four (4) feet above
the grade level in the front yard, provided such structure is an
integral part of the architectural feature of the principal
structure, is in compliance with sight distance standards and is
approved by the Architectural Review Board. Additionally, for
properties located on a corner lot, no such plantings, masonry
garden walls, planting boxes, retaining walls or ornamental or
decorative fences shall be maintained higher than three and
one-half (3½) feet above the established street grades within
twenty (20) feet of any street intersection to comply with sight
distance standards.
f. Roof eaves may project up to three (3) feet into the required
front yard setback.
Section
405.2560
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2560
AO:683
g. Windowsills, bay windows, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project up to two (2) feet into the required front yard
setback.
h. Any accessory building that is not a part of the principal
structure shall be located not less than sixty (60) feet from the
front lot line.
i. Lots in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet and
having one hundred (100) lineal feet of frontage or more may
install two (2) drive approaches to accommodate a turnaround
with the written approval from the Director of Public Works
and subject to Architectural Review Board approval (all other
lots shall be limited to one (1) drive approach).
j. Basements and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the front yard setback but may
not transverse the property line.
2. Rear yard setbacks. The required setback in an "R-6" District is
measured by calculating twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the
lot measured from the front to the rear property line. The
calculated setback must be a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the
rear property line to the closest rear wall of the principal structure.
The rear yard setback is not required to exceed a maximum of fifty
(50) feet, although these regulations do not preclude a deeper than
maximum setback at the discretion of the property owner.
Modifications to the required rear yard setback are permitted
under the following conditions:
a. Open, uncovered porches, patios and above ground decks may
project no more than twelve (12) feet into a required rear yard,
provided the floor level of any such structure is at or below the
level of the first (1st) floor of the building. Balconies may
project into the required rear yard a maximum distance of five
(5) feet.
b. Where a corner lot exists and thereby two (2) front yards, the
property line opposite to the front yard line with the greater
street frontage shall be considered the side yard and the
property line opposite to the front yard line with the lesser
street frontage shall be considered the rear yard.
Section
405.2560
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2560
AO:684
c. One (1) or more accessory buildings may be located in the rear
yard. However, the combined footprint may not occupy more
than thirty-five percent (35%) of the required rear yard area
and no accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to
the principal building nor closer than five (5) feet to any rear
property line. Additionally, accessory buildings may not exceed
twenty (20) feet in height.
d. Outside stairways, deck stairs, tower balconies and fire
escapes may project up to four (4) feet into the required rear
yard setback.
e. Roof eaves may project up to three (3) feet into the required
rear yard setback.
f. Windowsills, bay windows, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project up to two (2) feet into the required rear yard
setback.
g. Basements and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the rear yard setback but may
not transverse the property line.
3. Side yard setbacks. The required setback in an "R-6" District is
measured by calculating ten percent (10%) of the width of the total
lot. The calculated setback must be a minimum of eight (8) feet up
to a maximum of twenty (20) feet, although these regulations do
not preclude a wider than maximum setback at the discretion of the
property owner. Modifications to the required side yard setback are
permitted under the following conditions: [Ord. No. 6509,
11-28-2017]
a. For the purposes of side yard regulations, a multi-family
dwelling shall be considered as one (1) building occupying one
(1) lot.
b. Townhouse dwellings may be constructed on multiple lots (fee
simple) or on one (1) lot (condominium) with a party wall
connecting the units and, in such cases, each individual lot
Section
405.2560
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2560
AO:685
Section 405.2570. General Non-Conformance With The Setback
Provisions [Ord. No. 5814 §1(19.10), 4-27-2004]
Those parts of existing building that violate yard regulations may be
repaired and remodeled but not reconstructed structurally altered.
Section 405.2580. Off-Street Parking [Ord. No. 5814 §1(19.11),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6333 §1, 8-26-2014]
No off-street parking facilities will be allowed within required front and
side yard areas except as provided by a conditional use permit. For other
applicable regulations regarding off-street parking, see Article XXV, Off-
Street Parking and Loading Regulations, of this Chapter.
shall meet the minimum lot width and lot area requirements
provided in this Article, but the side yard requirement at the
common wall between units shall not apply.
c. Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this
Chapter is less than the minimum required width, the required
side yard may be reduced to less than the required ten percent
(10%) of the width of the lot, provided, however, that no side
yard shall be less than five (5) feet from the structure to the
side property line.
d. On a corner lot, the side yard facing the street shall be set back
in conformance with the required front yard on that street;
provided, however, that the buildable width of such lot shall
not be reduced to less than thirty-five (35) feet.
e. No accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to the
principal building nor closer than five (5) feet to any side
property line.
f. An unenclosed porte-cochere or canopy may project into a
required side yard but may not encroach further than five (5)
feet from the side property line.
g. Outside stairways, tower balconies or fire escapes may project
up to four (4) feet into the required side yard setback.
h. Roof eaves may project up to three (3) feet into the required
side yard setback.
i. Windowsills, bay windows, balconies, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project up to two (2) feet into the required side yard
setback.
j. Basements and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the side yard setback but may
not transverse the property line.
Section
405.2560
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2590
AO:686
Section 405.2590. Resubdivision of Lots [Ord. No. 5814 §1(19.12),
4-27-2004]
No existing lot of record in the "R-6" District shall be resubdivided unless
the resubdivided lots conform to the area and frontage requirements of
the "R-6" District and in addition be consistent with the lots located in the
immediate neighborhood with regard to size, frontage and arrangement so
as to provide an orderly pattern of development. No flag lot(s) shall be
created as a result of any resubdivision.
Section 405.2600. Compliance With Other Plans or Regulations
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(19.13), 4-27-2004]
Any development proposed within the "R-6" Zoning District shall be
reviewed for compliance with other plans and/or regulations of the City
of Clayton. Compliance with other plans and/or regulations shall include,
but not be limited to, the master plan, overlay district regulations, urban
design district regulations, any other land use plan or relevant standards
and guidelines to the specific site which have been accepted or adopted by
the Board of Aldermen.
Section 405.2610. Permitted Uses For The "R-6" Zoning District
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(19.14), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6010 §3, 1-22-2008;
Ord. No. 6067 §2, 4-14-2009; Ord. No. 6191 §3, 2-28-2012]
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-6" ZONING DISTRICT "R-6"
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to
permitted uses not involving the conduct of business,
including a private garage.
P
Amateur radio, home antennas and associated equipment
(subject to Article XXVI).
P
Group homes for the physically and/or mentally handicap,
provided that 8 or fewer unrelated persons may reside
therein and further provided that no more than 2 additional
persons acting as house parents or guardians, who need not
be related to one another or any of the residents, may also
reside therein, and provided further, however, that the
maximum occupancy limitations for the structure as
established by the Property Maintenance Code and Fire
Code, if applicable, adopted by the City and as amended and
in force at the time of approval of occupancy, may not be
exceeded.
No group care home shall be permitted within 500 feet from
any existing group care home.
P
Home occupations (as regulated and defined in Article II and
III respectively).
P
Parks and playgrounds. P
Section
405.2590
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2610
AO:687
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-6" ZONING DISTRICT "R-6"
Places of religious worship, but no new or enlarged place of
religious worship shall be located upon a lot or tract
containing less than 1 acre. Places of religious worship may
be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet if the building is
set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for each foot of
additional building height above the height limit otherwise
permitted in the district in which the building is built.
P
Residential — single-family dwelling unit 5,000 square feet
minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
P
Residential — Townhouse dwellings (condominium lots)
1,974 square feet minimum lot area per dwelling unit
(subject to Section 405.280). [Ord. No. 6509, 11-28-2017]
P
Residential — Townhouse dwellings (fee simple lots) 1,974
square feet minimum lot area per dwelling unit (subject to
Section 405.280). [Ord. No. 6509, 11-28-2017]
P
Residential — two-family dwellings 2,500 square feet
minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
P
Residential — multi-family dwellings 1,000 square feet
minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
P
Church spires, belfries, monuments, ornamental towers and
spires and chimneys exceeding the maximum height in the
zoning district may be erected to such height authorized by
the Board of Aldermen of the City by conditional use permit
or general ordinance.
C
Colleges and universities, provided that buildings shall not
occupy more than 1/3 of the area site and the height,
location and use of such buildings will not have a serious
and depreciating effect on any adjacent residential property.
Public buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools, when
permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not
exceeding 110 feet if the building is set back from each yard
line at least 1 foot for each foot of additional building height
above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district in
which the building is built.
C
Community buildings, recreation facilities, recreation fields. C
Day care, nursery, pre-kindergarten, play and special
schools and kindergarten.
C
Detached multi-unit housing/multiple structures on a single
lot (subject to Section 405.290).
C
Facilities (subject to Article XXVII) P
Lodge hall or club. C
Section
405.2610
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2610
AO:688
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-6" ZONING DISTRICT "R-6"
Parking lots and multi-level parking structures on land not
more than 500 feet walking distance from the boundary of
any "C-1" or "C-2" Commercial District, "HDC" Commercial
District or "S-1" Service District, under such conditions as
will properly protect the character of surrounding property.
C
Public and private elementary, middle and secondary
schools, provided that the height, location and use of such
buildings will not have a serious and depreciating effect on
any adjacent residential property. Public buildings, hospitals,
institutions or schools, when permitted in a district, may be
erected to a height not exceeding 110 feet if the building is
set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for each foot of
additional building height above the height limit otherwise
permitted in the district in which the building is built.
C
Public buildings erected or used by any department of the
City, County, State or Federal Government. Public buildings,
hospitals, institutions or schools, when permitted in a
district, may be erected to a height not exceeding 110 feet if
the building is set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for
each foot of additional building height above the height limit
otherwise permitted in the district in which the building is
built.
C
Restaurants (including carry-out, self-seating and fullservice)
and prepared food dispensing.
C
Solar energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
P
Solar energy systems, ground-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
C
Wind energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
C
P = Permitted by right
C = Permitted with conditional use permit
Note: Uses not appearing in this table are prohibited.
Section 405.2620. through Section 405.2650. (Reserved)
Section
405.2610
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2620
AO:689

ARTICLE XVIII
"R-7" High Density Multiple-Family Dwelling District
Section 405.2660. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §1(20.1),
4-27-2004]
The "R-7" High Density Multiple-Family Dwelling District (hereinafter
known in this Article as the "R-7" District) is intended to allow for the most
dense level of residential land use while still maintaining the health, safety,
welfare and desirability of the City of Clayton. This district also allows for
non-residential land uses, which provide services to the residential district
on a conditional use permit basis.
Section 405.2670. Permitted Uses [Ord. No. 5814 §1(20.2),
4-27-2004]
The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in the
Table of Permitted Uses found at the end of this Article. If a "P" (permitted
by right) or a "C" (permitted by conditional use permit) is not indicated for
a use in this table or a use is not included on the table, it is prohibited.
Section 405.2680. Maximum Building Height [Ord. No. 5814
§1(20.3), 4-27-2004]
None.
Section 405.2690. Maximum Lot Coverage [Ord. No. 5814 §1(20.4),
4-27-2004]
Buildings in the "R-7" District which exceed three (3) stories in height may
only cover up to sixty percent (60%) of the buildable area of the lot on which
they are to be constructed.
Section 405.2700. Maximum Allowable Floor Area Ratio [Ord. No.
5814 §1(20.5), 4-27-2004]
The maximum allowable floor area ratio (FAR) for the "R-7" District is four
(4.0). In the "R-7" District where a portion of the buildable area is devoted
to open space, additional floor area equal to eight (8) times the open space
contained within the buildable area shall be permitted.
Section 405.2710. Minimum Lot Width [Ord. No. 5814 §1(20.6),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6509, 11-28-2017]
A. The minimum lot widths for the "R-7" District shall be as follows:
1. Single family – fifty (50) feet.
2. Two-family – fifty (50) feet.
3. Townhouse – twenty (20) feet per unit.
Section
405.2660
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2710
AO:691
Section 405.2720. Minimum Lot Area [Ord. No. 5814 §1(20.7),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6509, 11-28-2017]
Section 405.2730. Exceptions To The Minimum Lot Width and Area
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(20.8), 4-27-2004]
Where a lot of record established prior to April 14, 1959, has less width or
area than herein required in the district in which it is located, such lot shall
be considered a conforming lot.
Section 405.2740. Impervious Coverage [Ord. No. 5814 §1(20.9),
4-27-2004]
Section 405.2750. Setback Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(20.10),
4-27-2004]
4. Multi-family – fifty (50) feet.
B. Modifications may be allowed subject to Section 405.2730.
A. The minimum lot area in the "R-7" District shall be five thousand (5,000)
square feet and the following minimum lot areas shall be provided for
each dwelling unit:
1. Single-family—five thousand (5,000) square feet.
2. Two-family—two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
3. Multiple-dwelling—seven hundred fifty (750) square feet.
4. Townhouse – one thousand nine hundred seventy-four (1,974)
square feet.
B. Modifications may be allowed subject to Section 405.2730.
A. No more than forty-five percent (45%) of the required front yard
setback may be covered by impervious material. No more than fifty-five
percent (55%) of the total lot may be covered by impervious material.
Properties located within an urban design district must comply with the
requirements for the specific urban design district.
B. In instances where an applicant can demonstrate just cause, the Plan
Commission shall have the authority to approve a modification of up to
an additional five percent (5%) over the impervious coverage
requirement; that is up to fifty percent (50%) in the front yard and up to
sixty percent (60%) overall lot coverage; unless the property is located
within an urban design district, then the requirements found therein
shall apply.
A. The following are setback requirements for a principal building located
in an "R-7" District and modifications to those requirements when
certain conditions exist.
Section
405.2710
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2750
AO:692
1. Front yard setbacks. The required setback in an "R-7" District is
measured by calculating twenty-five percent (25%) of the depth of
the lot measured from the front to the rear property line. The
calculated setback must be a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the
front building facade to the front property line. The front yard
setback is not required to exceed a maximum of sixty (60) feet,
although these regulations do not preclude a deeper than
maximum setback at the discretion of the property owner.
Modifications to the required front yard setback are permitted
under the following conditions:
a. Where fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage along any
block face is improved with buildings that have observed a
front yard line with a variation in depth of not more than ten
(10) feet, the average of such front yard lines shall be the
minimum setback observed in such a block face in lieu of the
required front yard setback requirements. For example, when
calculating the average setback for a block face with ten (10)
homes, where nine (9) homes have setbacks ranging from
twenty-five (25) feet to thirty-five (35) feet and the remaining
home has a forty (40) foot setback, the home with the forty (40)
foot setback is not included in the calculation for the average.
No front yard shall be required to exceed the maximum of one
hundred (100) feet.
b. Where lots have double frontages or are corner lots, the
required front yard setback provisions shall be provided on all
streets.
c. If at or below the first (1st) floor level of the principal
structure, an open, uncovered porch may project into a
required front yard a distance of up to ten (10) feet, or an open,
covered porch or paved terrace may project into a required
front yard a distance of up to five (5) feet and associated roof
eaves may project up to an additional three (3) feet.
d. Balconies may project up to five (5) feet into the required front
yard setback.
e. Front yard masonry garden walls, planting boxes, retaining
walls, plantings or ornamental or decorative fences may be
erected as part of new construction, up to four (4) feet above
the grade level in the front yard, provided such structure is an
integral part of the architectural feature of the principal
structure, is in compliance with sight distance standards and is
approved by the Architectural Review Board. Additionally, for
properties located on a corner lot, no such plantings, masonry
garden walls, planting boxes, retaining walls or ornamental or
decorative fences shall be maintained higher than three and
one-half (3½) feet above the established street grades within
Section
405.2750
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2750
AO:693
twenty (20) feet of any street intersection to comply with sight
distance standards.
f. Roof eaves may project up to three (3) feet into the required
front yard setback.
g. Windowsills, bay windows, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project up to two (2) feet into the required front yard
setback.
h. Any accessory building that is not a part of the principal
structure shall be located not less than sixty (60) feet from the
front lot line.
i. Lots in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet and
having one hundred (100) lineal feet of frontage or more may
install two (2) drive approaches to accommodate a turnaround
with the written approval from the Director of Public Works
and subject to Architectural Review Board approval (all other
lots shall be limited to one (1) drive approach).
j. Basements and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the front yard setback but may
not transverse the property line.
2. Rear yard setbacks. The required setback in an "R-7" District is
measured by calculating twenty-five percent (25%) of the depth of
the lot measured from the front to the rear property line. The
calculated setback must be a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the
rear property line to the closest rear wall of the principal structure.
The rear yard setback is not required to exceed a maximum of fifty
(50) feet, although these regulations do not preclude a deeper than
maximum setback at the discretion of the property owner.
Modifications to the required rear yard setback are permitted
under the following conditions:
a. Open, uncovered porches, patios and above ground decks may
project no more than twelve (12) feet into a required rear yard,
provided the floor level of any such structure is at or below the
level of the first (1st) floor of the building. Balconies may
project into the required rear yard a maximum distance of five
(5) feet.
b. Where a corner lot exists and thereby two (2) front yards, the
property line opposite to the front yard line with the greater
street frontage shall be considered the side yard and the
property line opposite to the front yard line with the lesser
street frontage shall be considered the rear yard.
Section
405.2750
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2750
AO:694
c. One (1) or more accessory buildings may be located in the rear
yard. However, the combined footprint may not occupy more
than thirty-five percent (35%) of the required rear yard area
and no accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to
the principal building nor closer than five (5) feet to any rear
property line. Additionally, accessory buildings may not exceed
twenty (20) feet in height.
d. Outside stairways, deck stairs, tower balconies and fire
escapes may project up to four (4) feet into the required rear
yard setback.
e. Roof eaves may project up to three (3) feet into the required
rear yard setback.
f. Windowsills, bay windows, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project up to two (2) feet into the required rear yard
setback.
g. Basements and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the rear yard setback but may
not transverse the property line.
3. Side yard setbacks. The required setback in an "R-7" District is
measured by calculating ten percent (10%) of the width of the total
lot. The calculated setback must be a minimum of twelve (12) feet
up to a maximum of twenty (20) feet, although these regulations do
not preclude a wider than maximum setback at the discretion of the
property owner. Modifications to the required side yard setback are
permitted under the following conditions: [Ord. No. 6509,
11-28-2017]
a. For the purposes of side yard regulations, a multi-family
dwelling shall be considered as one (1) building occupying one
(1) lot.
b. Townhouse dwellings may be constructed on multiple lots (fee
simple) or on one (1) lot (condominium) with a party wall
connecting the units and, in such cases, each individual lot
Section
405.2750
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2750
AO:695
Section 405.2760. General Non-Conformance With The Setback
Provisions [Ord. No. 5814 §1(20.11), 4-27-2004]
Those parts of existing building that violate yard regulations may be
repaired and remodeled but not reconstructed or structurally altered.
Section 405.2770. Off-Street Parking [Ord. No. 5814 §1(20.12),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6333 §1, 8-26-2014]
No off-street parking facilities will be allowed within required front and
side yard areas except as provided by a conditional use permit. For other
applicable regulations regarding off-street parking, see Article XXV, Off-
Street Parking and Loading Regulations, of this Chapter.
shall meet the minimum lot width and lot area requirements
provided in this Article, but the side yard requirement at the
common wall between units shall not apply.
c. Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this
Chapter is less than the minimum required width, the required
side yard may be reduced to less than the required ten percent
(10%) of the width of the lot, provided, however, that no side
yard shall be less than five (5) feet from the structure to the
side property line.
d. On a corner lot, the side yard facing the street shall be set back
in conformance with the required front yard on that street;
provided, however, that the buildable width of such lot shall
not be reduced to less than thirty-five (35) feet.
e. No accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to the
principal building nor closer than five (5) feet to any side
property line.
f. An unenclosed porte-cochere or canopy may project into a
required side yard but may not encroach further than five (5)
feet from the side property line.
g. Outside stairways, tower balconies or fire escapes may project
up to four (4) feet into the required side yard setback.
h. Roof eaves may project up to three (3) feet into the required
side yard setback.
i. Windowsills, bay windows, balconies, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project up to two (2) feet into the required side yard
setback.
j. Basements and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the side yard setback but may
not transverse the property line.
Section
405.2750
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2780
AO:696
Section 405.2780. Resubdivision of Lots [Ord. No. 5814 §1(20.13),
4-27-2004]
No existing lot of record within the "R-7" District shall be resubdivided
unless the resubdivided lots conform to the area and frontage requirements
of the "R-7" Multiple-Family Dwelling District and in addition be consistent
with the lots located in the immediate neighborhood with regard to size,
frontage and arrangement so as to provide an orderly pattern of
development. No flag lot(s) shall be created as a result of any resubdivision.
Section 405.2790. Compliance With Other Plans or Regulations
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(20.14), 4-27-2004]
Any development proposed within the "R-7" Zoning District shall be
reviewed for compliance with other plans and/or regulations of the City
of Clayton. Compliance with other plans and/or regulations shall include,
but not be limited to, the master plan, overlay district regulations, urban
design district regulations, any other land use plan or relevant standards
and guidelines to the specific site which have been accepted or adopted by
the Board of Aldermen.
Section 405.2800. Permitted Uses For The "R-7" Zoning District
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(20.15), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6010 §3, 1-22-2008;
Ord. No. 6067 §2, 4-14-2009; Ord. No. 6191 §3, 2-28-2012]
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-7" ZONING DISTRICT "R-7"
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to
permitted uses not involving the conduct of business,
including a private garage.
P
Amateur radio, home antennas and associated equipment
(subject to Article XXVI).
P
Group homes for the physically and/or mentally handicap,
provided that 8 or fewer unrelated persons may reside
therein and further provided that no more than 2 additional
persons acting as house parents or guardians, who need not
be related to one another or any of the residents, may also
reside therein, and provided further, however, that the
maximum occupancy limitations for the structure as
established by the Property Maintenance Code and Fire
Code, if applicable, adopted by the City and as amended and
in force at the time of approval of occupancy, may not be
exceeded.
No group care home shall be permitted within 500 feet from
any existing group care home.
P
Home occupations (as regulated and defined in Article II and
III respectively).
P
Parks and playgrounds. P
Section
405.2780
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2800
AO:697
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-7" ZONING DISTRICT "R-7"
Places of religious worship, but no new or enlarged place of
religious worship shall be located upon a lot or tract
containing less than 1 acre. Places of religious worship may
be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet if the building is
set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for each foot of
additional building height above the height limit otherwise
permitted in the district in which the building is built.
P
Residential — single-family dwelling unit 5,000 square feet
minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
P
Residential — Townhouse dwellings (condominium lots)
1,974 square feet minimum lot area per dwelling unit
(subject to Section 405.280). [Ord. No. 6509, 11-28-2017]
P
Residential — Townhouse dwellings (fee simple lots) 1,974
square feet minimum lot area per dwelling unit (subject to
Section 405.280). [Ord. No. 6509, 11-28-2017]
P
Residential — Two-family dwellings 2,500 square feet
minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
P
Residential — Multi-family dwellings 750 square feet
minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
P
Church spires, belfries, monuments, ornamental towers and
spires and chimneys exceeding the maximum height in the
zoning district may be erected to such height authorized by
the Board of Aldermen of the City by conditional use permit
or general ordinance.
C
Colleges and universities, provided that buildings shall not
occupy more than 1/3 of the area site and the height,
location and use of such buildings will not have a serious
and depreciating effect on any adjacent residential property.
Public buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools, when
permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not
exceeding 110 feet if the building is set back from each yard
line at least 1 foot for each foot of additional building height
above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district in
which the building is built.
C
Community buildings, recreation facilities, recreation fields. C
Day care, nursery, pre-kindergarten, play and special
schools and kindergarten.
C
Detached multi-unit housing/multiple structures on a single
lot (subject to Section 405.290).
C
Facilities (subject to Article XXVII) P
Lodge hall or club. C
Section
405.2800
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2800
AO:698
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "R-7" ZONING DISTRICT "R-7"
Parking lots and multi-level parking structures on land not
more than 500 feet walking distance from the boundary of
any "C-1" or "C-2" Commercial District, "HDC" Commercial
District or "S-1" Service District, under such conditions as
will properly protect the character of surrounding property.
C
Public buildings erected or used by any department of the
City, County, State or Federal Government. Public buildings,
hospitals, institutions or schools, when permitted in a
district, may be erected to a height not exceeding 110 feet if
the building is set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for
each foot of additional building height above the height limit
otherwise permitted in the district in which the building is
built.
C
Restaurants (including carry-out, self-seating and fullservice)
and prepared food dispensing.
C
Solar energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
P
Solar energy systems, ground-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
C
Wind energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
C
P = Permitted by right
C = Permitted with conditional use permit
Note: Uses not appearing in this table are prohibited.
Section 405.2810. through Section 405.2830. (Reserved)
Section
405.2800
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2810
AO:699

ARTICLE XIX
"C-1" Neighborhood Commercial District
Section 405.2840. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §1(21.1),
4-27-2004]
The "C-1" Neighborhood Commercial District (hereinafter known in this
Article as the "C-1" District) is the most restrictive commercial district
intended to provide a variety of goods and services within a pedestrian
friendly commercial environment, compatible to adjacent residential areas,
thereby maintaining the quality of life in established neighborhoods.
Section 405.2850. Permitted Uses [Ord. No. 5814 §1(21.2),
4-27-2004]
Section 405.2860. Maximum Building Height [Ord. No. 5814
§1(21.3), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. B), 7-8-2008]
The maximum building height in the "C-1" District is three (3) stories, not
to exceed thirty (35) feet above grade. Partial stories under sloping roofs
shall be permitted provided the limit in feet is not exceeded. The maximum
building height may be modified subject to the provisions and requirements
of the planned unit development process outlined in Article X or the special
development district process outlined in Article IX of this Chapter; except
for those properties fronting on the north side of Maryland Avenue between
Brentwood Boulevard and Forsyth Boulevard.
Section 405.2870. Stepback Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(21.4),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. B), 7-8-2008]
For buildings permitted to exceed the maximum height through the planned
unit development or special development district procedures, a fifteen (15)
foot stepback (upper story building setback) shall be provided beginning
at the third (3rd) story level or thirty (30) feet above grade, whichever is
A. The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in
the Table of Permitted Uses found at the end of this Article. If a "P"
(permitted by right) or a "C" (permitted by conditional use permit) is
not indicated for a use in this table or a use is not included on the table,
it is prohibited.
B. For properties within the "C-1" Commercial District fronting on the
north side of Maryland Avenue between Brentwood Boulevard and
Forsyth Boulevard, all ground floor uses must be retail, personal care
services, dry cleaning facilities, food and beverage service uses,
consumer service offices (limited to financial institutions including
banks, savings and loans and credit unions, real estate offices and
travel agencies) or governmental offices. Additionally, such buildings
and uses must incorporate street front windows creating interest at the
street level. Furthermore, buildings should be sited in a manner so as to
achieve a pedestrian friendly appearance and feel.
Section
405.2840
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2870
AO:701
less. However, the Plan Commission shall have the authority to require a
different stepback(s) for buildings dependent upon building height, lot size
and other relevant factors. Stepbacks shall be proportional to the amount
of building height. The upper story stepback shall be provided along all
building elevations with street frontage, excluding alleys.
Section 405.2880. Setback Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(21.5),
4-27-2004]
A. The following are setback requirements for a principal building located
in a "C-1" District and modifications to those requirements when
certain conditions exist.
1. Front yard setbacks. The required setback in a "C-1" Commercial
District is to maintain the average of existing structures along the
street frontage. No sales, display or storage of food products or
commodities may take place in the front yard. The following uses
are permitted under the following conditions:
a. Restaurants may offer customer seating and food service only
as authorized by the City Plan Commission and upon receipt or
renewal of the annual outdoor dining permit.
b. Where lots have double frontages or are corner lots, the
required front yard setback provisions shall be provided on all
streets.
c. Pumps and pump islands for retail gasoline service stations
may project or be located in the required front yard, provided
they are at least fourteen (14) feet from any street line and at
least fifty (50) feet from the boundary of a residential district.
d. In the "C-1" Commercial District, surface parking lots and
parking structures with parking at ground level are not
permitted along the street frontage.
e. Basements/cellars and parking facilities which are completely
underground may encroach into the required front yard
setback, but may not transverse the property line.
2. Rear yard setbacks. The required rear yard setback in a "C-1"
District is twenty-five (25) feet from the rear property line to the
closest rear wall of the principal structure. However, where a rear
property line abuts an alley, one-half (½) of the width of that alley
may be considered part of the required rear yard setback.
Modifications to the required rear yard setback are permitted
under the following conditions:
a. Open, uncovered porches, patios and above ground decks may
project not more than twelve (12) feet into a required rear
yard, provided the floor level of any such structure is at or
below the level of the first (1st) floor of the building. Balconies
Section
405.2870
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2880
AO:702
may project into the required rear yard a maximum distance of
five (5) feet.
b. Where a corner lot exists and thereby two (2) front yards, the
property line opposite to the front yard line with the greater
street frontage shall be considered the side yard and the
property line opposite to the front yard line with the lesser
street frontage shall be considered the rear yard.
c. One (1) or more accessory buildings may be located in the rear
yard. However, the combined footprint may not occupy more
than thirty-five percent (35%) of the required rear yard area
and no accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to
the principal building nor closer than five (5) feet to any rear
property line. Additionally, accessory buildings may not exceed
twenty (20) feet in height.
d. Outside stairways, deck stairs, tower balconies and fire
escapes may project up to four (4) feet into the required rear
yard setback.
e. Roof eaves may project no more than three (3) feet beyond the
face of the wall.
f. Windowsills, bay windows, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project no more than two (2) feet beyond the face of the
wall.
g. Basements/cellars and parking facilities which are completely
underground may encroach into the required rear yard
setback, but may not transverse the property line.
3. Side yard setbacks.
a. There are no minimum or maximum side yard setbacks for this
district except where a side lot line abuts a residential dwelling
district, a side yard of a least five (5) feet shall be provided.
Section
405.2880
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2880
AO:703
Section 405.2890. General Non-Conformance With The Setback
Provisions [Ord. No. 5814 §1(21.6), 4-27-2004]
Those parts of existing building that violate yard regulations may be
repaired and remodeled but not reconstructed or structurally altered.
Section 405.2900. Planned Unit Development [Ord. No. 5814
§1(21.7), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6025 §1, 8-12-2008]
Section 405.2910. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(21.8), 4-27-2004]
Every principal commercial structure must provide off-street parking in
accordance with Article XXV entitled Parking and Loading Requirements.
Section 405.2920. Resubdivision of Lots [Ord. No. 5814 §1(21.9),
4-27-2004]
No existing lot of record within the "C-1" District shall be resubdivided
unless the resubdivided lots conform to the area and frontage requirements
of this zoning district and, in addition, be consistent with the lots located in
the immediate neighborhood with regard to size, frontage and arrangement
b. Basements/cellars and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the required side yard
setback, but may not transverse the property line.
A. A development proposal shall be eligible for consideration under the
planned unit development option per the provisions of Article X when
the development incorporates two (2) of the following four (4)
categories of use:
1. Office use;
2. Retail use;
3. Residential use;
4. Hotel use;
and exceeds the maximum height or maximum FAR
requirements of the "C-1" District.
NOTE: For the purposes of this Article, hotels containing a
public restaurant will be considered eligible for a planned unit
development.
B. Limitation. No change, alteration, modification or waiver authorized by
Article X shall authorize a change in the uses permitted in any district
or a modification with respect to any zoning district standard made
specifically applicable to planned unit developments, unless such
district regulations expressly authorize such a change, alteration,
modification or waiver.
Section
405.2880
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2920
AO:704
so as to provide an orderly pattern of development. No flag lot(s) shall be
created as a result of any resubdivision.
Section 405.2930. Compliance With Other Plans or Regulations
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(21.10), 4-27-2004]
Any development proposed within the "C-1" Zoning District shall be
reviewed for compliance with other plans and/or regulations of the City
of Clayton. Compliance with other plans and/or regulations shall include,
but not be limited to, the master plan, overlay district regulations, urban
design district regulations, any other land use plan or relevant standards
and guidelines to the specific site which have been accepted or adopted by
the Board of Aldermen.
Section 405.2940. Permitted Uses For The "C-1" Commercial
District [Ord. No. 5814 §1(21.11), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6010 §3,
1-22-2008; Ord. No. 6159 §2, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 6191 §4,
2-28-2012; Ord. No. 6333 §1, 8-26-2014; Ord. No. 6527, 3-13-2018]
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "C-1" ZONING DISTRICT "C-1"
Accessory uses and buildings incidental to permitted uses. P
Amateur radio, home antennas and associated equipment
(subject to Article XXVI).
P
Art gallery or studio. P
Bakeries limited to the processing of bakery goods for sale
only on the premises and consumption off the premises.
P
Banks, savings and loans, credit unions and other financial
institutions.
P
Commercial antennas (subject to Article XXVI). P
Kiosk (subject to the provisions of Article II, Section
405.310).
P
Medical or dental clinic. P
Messenger and telephone exchange building. P
Offices--Business or professional. P
Package liquor store. C
Parking lots and multi-level parking structures. P
Personal care services. P
Pharmacies. P
Places of religious worship. Places of religious worship may
be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet if the building is
set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for each foot of
additional building height above the height limit otherwise
permitted in the district in which the building is built.
P
Retail establishments. P
Section
405.2920
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.2940
AO:705
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "C-1" ZONING DISTRICT "C-1"
Academy (including dancing, painting, theater, karate and
similar disciplines).
C
Automobile agencies. C
Catering establishment. C
Church spires, belfries, monuments, ornamental towers and
spires and chimneys exceeding the maximum height in the
zoning district may be erected to such height authorized by
the Board of Aldermen of the City by conditional use permit
or general ordinance.
C
Day care, nursery, pre-kindergarten, play and special
schools and kindergarten.
C
Facilities (subject to Article XXVII). P
Grocery stores. C
Public buildings erected or used by any department of the
City, County, State or Federal Government. Public buildings,
hospitals, institutions or schools, when permitted in a
district, may be erected to a height not exceeding 110 feet if
the building is set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for
each foot of additional building height above the height limit
otherwise permitted in the district in which the building is
built.
C
Restaurants, including carry-out, self-seating, full-service,
and wine bars (subject to the cumulative numeric limitation
on wine bars found in Section 600.035 of this Code of
Ordinances), and prepared food dispensing uses.
C
Solar energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII).
P
Solar energy systems, ground-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII).
C
Utility, utility station or substation. C
Veterinary Hospital/Clinic C
Wind energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII).
C
P = Permitted by right
C = Permitted with conditional use permit
Note: Uses not appearing in this table are prohibited.
Section 405.2950. through Section 405.2980. (Reserved)
Section
405.2940
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.2950
AO:706
ARTICLE XX
"C-2" General Commercial District
Section 405.2990. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §1(22.1),
4-27-2004]
The "C-2" General Commercial District (hereinafter known in this Article
as the "C-2" District) is designed to accommodate a variety of general
commercial activities outside the Central Business District. The "C-2"
Commercial District restricts the effects of intensification thereby
maintaining the quality of life in established neighborhoods.
Section 405.3000. Permitted Uses [Ord. No. 5814 §1(22.2),
4-27-2004]
Section 405.3010. Maximum Building Height [Ord. No. 5814
§1(22.3), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. B), 7-8-2008]
A. The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in
the Table of Permitted Uses found at the end of this Article. If a "P"
(permitted by right) or a "C" (permitted by conditional use permit) is
not indicated for a use in this table or a use is not included on the table,
it is prohibited.
B. For properties within the "C-2" Commercial District fronting on the
north side of Maryland Avenue between Brentwood Boulevard and
Meramec Avenue, all ground floor uses must be retail, personal care
services, dry cleaning facilities, food and beverage service uses,
consumer service offices (limited to financial institutions including
banks, savings and loans and credit unions, real estate offices and
travel agencies) or governmental offices. Additionally, such buildings
and uses must incorporate street front windows creating interest at the
street level. Furthermore, buildings should be sited in a manner so as to
achieve a pedestrian friendly appearance and feel.
A. The maximum building height in the "C-2" District is seven (7) stories or
ninety (90) feet, whichever is less, with the exception of the following:
1. For the area fronting the north side of Maryland Avenue from
Meramec Avenue on the east to Brentwood Boulevard on the west
and for properties fronting Clayton Road from Big Bend Boulevard
to the eastern City limits, the maximum allowable height is five (5)
stories or sixty-five (65) feet, whichever is less.
2. The maximum building height within the "C-2" Commercial District
may be modified subject to the provisions and requirements of the
planned unit development process outlined in Article X or the
special development district process outlined in Article IX of this
Chapter; except for those properties fronting along Clayton Road
from Big Bend Boulevard to the eastern City limits.
Section
405.2990
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3020
AO:707
Section 405.3020. Maximum Floor Area [Ord. No. 5814 §1(22.4),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. B), 7-8-2008]
The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for this zoning district is 1.5. The
maximum floor area may be modified subject to the provisions and
requirements of the planned unit development process outlined in Article
X or the special development district process outlined in Article IX of this
Chapter.
Section 405.3030. Stepback Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(22.5),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. B), 7-8-2008]
For buildings permitted to exceed the maximum height through the planned
unit development or special development district procedures, a fifteen (15)
foot stepback (upper story building setback) shall be provided beginning
at the third (3rd) story level or thirty (30) feet above grade, whichever is
less. However, the Plan Commission shall have the authority to require a
different stepback(s) for buildings dependent upon building height, lot size
and other relevant factors. Stepbacks shall be proportional to the amount
of building height. The upper story stepback shall be provided along all
building elevations with street frontage, excluding alleys.
Section 405.3040. Setback Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(22.6),
4-27-2004]
A. The following are setback requirements for a principal building in the
"C-2" District and modifications to those requirements when certain
conditions exist.
1. Front yard setbacks. The required setback in a "C-2" Commercial
District is to maintain the average of existing structures along the
street frontage. The following uses are permitted under the
following conditions:
a. For the area fronting on the north side of Forsyth Boulevard
between the easternmost City limits and Lee Avenue, surface
parking lots and parking structures with parking at ground
level are not permitted along the street frontage.
b. Restaurants may offer customer seating and food service only
as authorized by the City Plan Commission and upon receipt or
renewal of the annual outdoor dining permit.
c. Where lots have double frontages, or are corner lots, the
required front yard setback provisions shall be provided on all
streets.
d. Pumps and pump islands for retail gasoline service stations
may project or be located in the required front yard, provided
they are at least fifteen (15) feet from any street line and at
least fifty (50) feet from the boundary of a residential district.
Section
405.3020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3040
AO:708
e. Basements/cellars and parking facilities which are completely
underground may encroach into the required front yard
setback, but may not transverse the property line.
2. Rear yard. The required setback in a "C-2" District is a minimum of
ten (10) feet from the rear property line to the closest rear wall of
the principal structure or ten percent (10%) of the lot depth
(measured from the front to the rear property line), whichever is
greater. Modifications to the required rear yard setback are
permitted under the following conditions:
a. For the area fronting Forsyth Boulevard from the eastern City
limits to Lee Avenue on the west, a minimum fifteen (15) foot
rear yard setback shall be required.
b. For the area fronting Maryland Avenue, a minimum fifteen (15)
foot rear yard setback is required.
c. Open, uncovered porches, patios and above ground decks may
project not more than twelve (12) feet into a required rear
yard, provided the floor level of any such structure is at or
below the level of the first (1st) floor of the building. Balconies
may project into the required rear yard a maximum distance of
five (5) feet.
d. Where a corner lot exists and thereby two (2) front yards, the
property line opposite to the front yard line with the greater
street frontage shall be considered the side yard and the
property line opposite to the front yard line with the lesser
street frontage shall be considered the rear yard.
e. One (1) or more accessory buildings may be located in the rear
yard. However, the combined footprint may not occupy more
than thirty-five percent (35%) of the required rear yard area
and no accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to
the principal building nor closer than five (5) feet to any rear
property line. Additionally, accessory buildings may not exceed
twenty (20) feet in height.
Section
405.3040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3040
AO:709
Section 405.3050. General Non-Conformance With The Setback
Provisions [Ord. No. 5814 §1(22.7), 4-27-2004]
Those parts of existing building that violate yard regulations may be
repaired and remodeled but not reconstructed or structurally altered.
Section 405.3060. Site Plan Review [Ord. No. 5814 §1(22.8),
4-27-2004]
f. Outside stairways, deck stairs, tower balconies and fire
escapes may project up to four (4) feet into the required rear
yard setback.
g. Roof eaves may project no more than three (3) feet beyond the
face of the wall.
h. Window sills, bay windows, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project no more than two (2) feet beyond the face of the
wall.
i. Basements/cellars and parking facilities which are completely
underground may encroach into the required rear yard
setback, but may not transverse the property line.
3. Side yard setbacks.
a. There are no minimum or maximum side yard setbacks
provisions in this district except where a lot abuts a dwelling
district, a side yard of at least five (5) feet shall be provided.
b. Basements/cellars and parking facilities which are completely
underground may encroach into the required side yard
setback, but may not transverse the property line.
A. Site plan review, pursuant to the procedures and standards outlined in
Article VIII, is required for any development or redevelopment proposal
over ten thousand (10,000) square feet in gross floor area. In addition
to the site plan review requirement for development or redevelopment
throughout the "C-2" District, there are specific factors to be
considered by the Plan Commission for certain geographic locations
within the "C-2" District. These provisions are as follows:
1. For the area fronting the north side of Forsyth Boulevard from the
east City limits to Lee Avenue on the west:
a. The architectural style of a proposed development must
incorporate a Central Business District "entryway" design
concept and greenspace provisions should reinforce that
concept.
Section
405.3040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3060
AO:710
Section 405.3070. Planned Unit Development [Ord. No. 5814
§1(22.9), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6025 §1, 8-12-2008]
b. No new surface parking shall be permitted on properties
abutting Forsyth Boulevard, unless surface parking is already
in existence at the proposed site.
2. For the area abutting Maryland Avenue on the north, Brentwood
Boulevard from Meramec Avenue on the east to Brentwood
Boulevard on the west:
a. Redevelopment should be compatible with surrounding
neighborhoods and traffic circulation and parking should
minimize adverse impact on the surrounding area.
b. Redevelopment, particularly at the corner of Brentwood
Boulevard and Maryland Avenue, should provide adequate
buffers from neighboring residences and a pedestrian way that
establishes a link between the retail shops to the west of the
retail/mixed use core area as defined in the Master Plan.
c. Any building constructed at the corner of Brentwood
Boulevard and Maryland Avenue should be placed at the front
of the site in order to produce an urban streetfront
appearance.
B. In applying these guidelines, the Plan Commission shall have the
discretion to consider alternatives and modifications if their strict
application will result in unusual practical difficulties or particular
hardship or if the Plan Commission determines that such alternatives or
modifications to these guidelines will serve the best interests of the
City.
A. A development proposal shall be eligible for consideration under the
planned unit development option per the provisions of Article X when
the development incorporates two (2) of the following four (4)
categories of use:
1. Office use;
2. Retail use;
3. Residential use;
4. Hotel use
and exceeds the maximum height or maximum FAR
requirements of the "C-2" District.
NOTE: For the purposes of this Article, hotels containing a
public restaurant will be considered eligible for a planned unit
development.
Section
405.3060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3070
AO:711
Section 405.3080. Special Planned Unit Development Areas [Ord.
No. 5814 §1(22.10), 4-27-2004]
For the area fronting both the north and south sides of Forsyth Boulevard
from Lee Avenue on the east to Hanley Road on the west and on Hanley
Road from the alley on the south to Forsyth Boulevard on the north, planned
unit development review and approval is required for all new construction
and major renovation.
Section 405.3090. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(22.11), 4-27-2004]
Every principal commercial structure must provide off-street parking in
accordance with Article XXV of this Chapter.
Section 405.3100. Resubdivision of Lots [Ord. No. 5814 §1(22.12),
4-27-2004]
No existing lot of record within the "C-2" District shall be resubdivided
unless the resubdivided lots are in conformance with all applicable
regulations and are consistent with the lots located in the immediate area
with regard to size, frontage and arrangement so as to provide an orderly
pattern of development. No flag lot(s) shall be created as a result of a
resubdivision.
Section 405.3110. Compliance With Other Plans or Regulations
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(22.13), 4-27-2004]
Any development proposed within the "C-2" Zoning District shall be
reviewed for compliance with other plans and/or regulations of the City
of Clayton. Compliance with other plans and/or regulations shall include,
but not be limited to, the master plan, overlay district regulations, urban
design district regulations, any other land use plan or relevant standards
and guidelines to the specific site which have been accepted or adopted by
the Board of Aldermen.
B. Limitation. No change, alteration, modification or waiver authorized by
Article X shall authorize a change in the uses permitted in any district
or a modification with respect to any zoning district standard made
specifically applicable to planned unit developments, unless such
district regulations expressly authorize such a change, alteration,
modification or waiver.
Section
405.3070
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3120
AO:712
Section 405.3120. Permitted Uses For The "C-2" Commercial
District [Ord. No. 5814 §1(22.14), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6010 §3,
1-22-2008; Ord. No. 6159 §2, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 6191 §4,
2-28-2012; Ord. No. 6289 §1, 9-24-2013; Ord. No. 6333 §1,
8-26-2014; Ord. No. 6527, 3-13-2018; Ord. No. 6597, 6-11-2019]
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "C-2" ZONING DISTRICT "C-2"
Accessory uses and buildings incidental to permitted uses. P
Amateur radio, home antennas and associated equipment
(subject to Article XXVI).
P
Art gallery or studio. P
Bakeries limited to the processing of bakery goods for sale
only on the premises and consumption off the premises.
P
Banks, savings and loans, credit unions and other financial
institutions.
P
Commercial antennas (subject to Article XXVI). P
Kiosk (subject to the provisions of Article II, Section
405.310).
P
Medical or dental clinic. P
Messenger and telephone exchange building. P
Offices--Business or professional. P
Package liquor store. C
Parking lots and multi-level parking structures. P
Personal care services. P
Pharmacies. P
Place of religious worship. P
Recreation building or structure or grounds. P
Retail establishments. P
Academy (including dancing, painting, theater, karate and
similar disciplines).
C
Automobile agencies. C
Banquet facilities. C
Car wash establishments. C
Catering establishment. C
Church spires, belfries, monuments, ornamental towers and
spires and chimneys exceeding the maximum height in the
zoning district may be erected to such height authorized by
the Board of Aldermen of the City by conditional use permit
or general ordinance.
C
Day care, nursery, pre-kindergarten, play and special schools
and kindergarten.
C
Section
405.3120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3120
AO:713
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "C-2" ZONING DISTRICT "C-2"
Drive-through establishments for financial institutions. C
Drive-through establishments for pharmacies, subject to the
Rules, Standards, Guidelines and Mandatory Design Criteria
for Drive-through Facilities.
C
Facilities (subject to Article XXVII) P
Funeral homes, mortuaries and undertaking establishments. C
Gasoline and oil service stations. C
Grocery stores. C
Health clubs. C
Hotel. C
Institution--Public buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools,
when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not
exceeding 110 feet if the building is set back from each yard
line at least 1 foot for each foot of additional building height
above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district in
which the building is built.
C
Lodge hall or club. C
Microbreweries. C
Medical marijuana dispensary facility (subject to the
performance standards set forth in Section 405.350).
C
Medical marijuana testing facility (subject to the
performance standards set forth in Section 405.350).
C
Mixed use buildings including the use of a portion of the
building for residential occupancy providing that each
residential unit contain a floor area no less than 750 square
feet.
C
Nursing and convalescent home. C
Public buildings erected or used by any department of the
City, County, State or Federal Government. Public buildings,
hospitals, institutions or schools, when permitted in a
district, may be erected to a height not exceeding 110 feet if
the building is set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for
each foot of additional building height above the height limit
otherwise permitted in the district in which the building is
built.
C
Public interest signs. C
Restaurants, including carry-out, self-seating, full-service,
and wine bars (subject to the cumulative numeric limitation
on wine bars found in Section 600.035 of this Code of
Ordinances), and prepared food dispensing uses.
C
Section
405.3120
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3120
AO:714
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "C-2" ZONING DISTRICT "C-2"
Schools for business, professional and technical training, but
not including outdoor areas for driving or heavy equipment
training.
C
Solar energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
P
Solar energy systems, ground-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
C
Theaters, both live performance and movies. C
Utility, utility station or substation. C
Veterinary Hospital/Clinic C
Wind energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII)
C
P = Permitted by right
C = Permitted with conditional use permit
Note: Uses not appearing in this table are prohibited.
Section 405.3130. through Section 405.3150. (Reserved)
Section
405.3120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3130
AO:715

ARTICLE XXI
"HDC" High Density Commercial District
Section 405.3160. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §1(23.1),
4-27-2004]
The High Density Commercial District (hereinafter known in this Article
as the "HDC" District) is designed to accommodate high density office and
commercial uses within the central business district. For purposes of this
Article, the "HDC" District is bounded on the north by Maryland Avenue, on
the south by Forest Park Parkway, on the west by Brentwood Boulevard and
extends towards the east to where Forsyth Boulevard intersects Forest Park
Parkway. In addition, those lots bounded by Brentwood Boulevard, Clayton
Road and I-170 are also to be considered as part of the "HDC" District.
Section 405.3170. Permitted Uses [Ord. No. 5814 §1(23.2),
4-27-2004]
The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in the
Table of Permitted Uses found at the end of this Article. If a "P" (permitted
by right) or a "C" (permitted by conditional use permit) is not indicated for
a use in this table or a use is not included on the table, it is prohibited.
Section 405.3180. Maximum Building Height [Ord. No. 5814
§1(23.3), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. B), 7-8-2008]
There is no maximum building height in this district. The maximum building
height outlined in the overlay districts within this zoning district may be
modified subject to the provisions and requirements of the planned unit
development process outlined in Article X or the special development
district process outlined in Article IX of this Chapter.
Section 405.3190. Maximum Floor Area [Ord. No. 5814 §1(23.4),
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6022 §1(Att. B), 7-8-2008]
The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for this zoning district is 3.0. The
maximum floor area may be modified subject to the provisions and
requirements of the planned unit development process outlined in Article
X or the special development district process outlined in Article IX of this
Chapter.
Section 405.3200. Setback Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(23.5),
4-27-2004]
A. The following are setback requirements for a principal building in the
"HDC" District and modifications to those requirements when certain
conditions exist.
1. Front yard setbacks. A minimum of ten (10) feet from the building
facade to the front property line. Modifications to the required
Section
405.3160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3200
AO:717
Section 405.3210. General Non-Conformance With The Setback
Provisions [Ord. No. 5814 §1(23.6), 4-27-2004]
Those parts of existing building that violate yard regulations may be
repaired and remodeled but not reconstructed or structurally altered.
Section 405.3220. Site Plan Review [Ord. No. 5814 §1(23.7),
4-27-2004]
Site plan review, pursuant to the procedures and standards outlined in
Article VIII, is required for any development or redevelopment proposal
over ten thousand (10,000) square feet in gross floor area.
Section 405.3230. Site Plan Review Design Guidelines [Ord. No.
5814 §1(23.8), 4-27-2004]
front yard setback are permitted/required under the following
conditions:
a. Restaurants may offer customer seating and food service only
as authorized by the City Plan Commission and upon receipt or
renewal of the annual outdoor dining permit.
b. Where lots have double frontages, or are corner lots, the
required front yard setback provisions shall be provided on all
streets.
c. Pumps and pump islands for retail gasoline service stations
may project or be located in the required front yard, provided
they are at least fifteen (15) feet from any street line and at
least fifty (50) feet from the boundary of a residential district.
d. Basements/cellars and parking facilities which are completely
underground may encroach into the required front yard
setback, but may not transverse the property line.
2. Rear yard. There are no minimum or maximum rear yard setback
requirements in this district.
3. Side yard. There are no side yard setback requirements for this
district.
A. The following guidelines shall be applied by the City's Plan Commission/
Architectural Review Board for development proposals located in the
"HDC" zoning district:
1. Footprint geometry should be square and true with the roadway to
the extent possible. Odd shapes and building orientation which
competes with the total urban setting should be avoided.
2. Parking should be located within the City block interior.
3. Surface parking should not abut any sidewalk.
Section
405.3200
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3230
AO:718
Section 405.3240. Architectural Review Board Guidelines [Ord. No.
5814 §1(23.9), 4-27-2004]
Section 405.3250. Planned Unit Development [Ord. No. 5814
§1(23.10), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6025 §1, 8-12-2008]
B. In applying these guidelines, the Plan Commission shall have the
discretion to consider alternatives and modifications if their strict
application will result in unusual practical difficulties or particular
hardship or if the Plan Commission determines that such alternatives or
modifications to these guidelines will service the best interests of the
City.
A. The following guidelines shall be applied by the City's Plan Commission/
Architectural Review Board for development proposals located in the
"HDC" zoning district:
1. Party wall development should be encouraged to ensure a
continuous building facade.
2. Building skylines should provide interest through introduction of
compatible shapes and roof forms. Long uninterrupted cornices
should be avoided.
3. Facade relief should be incorporated into all building elevations.
Long uninterrupted elevations should be avoided.
4. Window openings should be incorporated into all building
elevations. Blank walls, long horizontal openings, odd shapes and
glass walls should be avoided.
5. Street level (ground floor) elevation facing the street should be
storefront architecture with large show windows interrupted at
regular intervals with building piers and generous entrances. Blank
walls, long uninterrupted show windows, odd shaped and small
show windows should be avoided.
6. Parking structures abutting the street should have ground level
retail, commercial service and food establishments facing the
sidewalk. The upper story should be of design material and color
compatible with the urban setting.
A. A development proposal shall be eligible for consideration under the
planned unit development option per the provisions of Article X when
the development incorporates two (2) of the following four (4)
categories of use:
1. Office use;
2. Retail use;
3. Residential use;
Section
405.3230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3250
AO:719
Section 405.3260. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(23.11), 4-27-2004]
Off-street parking and loading facilities requirements are outlined in Article
XXV of this Chapter.
Section 405.3270. Resubdivision of Lots [Ord. No. 5814 §1(23.12),
4-27-2004]
No existing lot of record within the "HDC" District shall be resubdivided
unless the resubdivided lots are in conformance with all applicable
regulations and are consistent with the lots located in the immediate area
with regard to size, frontage and arrangement so as to provide an orderly
pattern of development. No flag lot(s) shall be created as a result of a
resubdivision.
Section 405.3280. Compliance With Other Plans or Regulations
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(23.13), 4-27-2004]
Any development proposed within the "HDC" zoning district shall be
reviewed for compliance with other plans and/or regulations of the City
of Clayton. Compliance with other plans and/or regulations shall include,
but not be limited to, the master plan, overlay district regulations, urban
design district regulations, any other land use plan or relevant standards
and guidelines to the specific site which have been accepted or adopted by
the Board of Aldermen.
4. Hotel use;
and exceeds the maximum height or maximum FAR
requirements of the "HDC" District.
NOTE: For the purposes of this Article, hotels containing a
public restaurant will be considered eligible for a planned unit
development.
B. Limitation. No change, alteration, modification or waiver authorized by
Article X shall authorize a change in the uses permitted in any district
or a modification with respect to any zoning district standard made
specifically applicable to planned unit developments, unless such
district regulations expressly authorize such a change, alteration,
modification or waiver.
Section
405.3250
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3290
AO:720
Section 405.3290. Permitted Uses For The "HDC" District [Ord. No.
5814 §1(23.14), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6010 §3, 1-22-2008; Ord. No.
6159 §2, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 6191 §4, 2-28-2012; Ord. No. 5214 §1,
7-24-2012; Ord. No. 6240 §1, 11-13-2012; Ord. No. 6333 §1,
8-26-2014; Ord. No. 6527, 3-13-2018; Ord. No. 6597, 6-11-2019]
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "HDC" ZONING DISTRICT "HDC"
Academy (including dancing, painting, theater, karate and
similar disciplines).
C
Accessory uses and buildings incidental to permitted uses. P
Amateur radio, home antennas and associated equipment
(subject to Article XXVI).
P
Art gallery or studio. P
Automobile agencies. C
Bakeries limited to the processing of bakery goods for sale
only on the premises and consumption off the premises.
P
Banks, savings and loans, credit unions and other financial
institutions.
P
Banquet facilities. C
Car wash establishments. C
Catering establishment. C
Church spires, belfries, monuments, ornamental towers and
spires and chimneys exceeding the maximum height in the
zoning district may be erected to such height authorized by
the Board of Aldermen of the City by conditional use permit
or general ordinance.
C
Commercial antennas. P
Day care, nursery, pre-kindergarten, play and special schools
and kindergarten.
C
Drive-through establishments for financial institutions. C
Facilities (subject to Article XXVII). P
Funeral homes, mortuaries and undertaking establishments. C
Gasoline and oil service stations. C
Grocery stores. C
Health clubs. C
Hospital. C
Hotel. C
Institution. C
Kiosk (subject to the provisions of Article II, Section
405.310).
P
Lodge hall or club. C
Section
405.3290
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3290
AO:721
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "HDC" ZONING DISTRICT "HDC"
Medical marijuana cultivation facility entirely within an
enclosed building (subject to performance standards set forth
in Section 405.350).
C
Medical marijuana dispensary facility (subject to the
performance standards set forth in Section 405.350).
C
Medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility
(subject to performance standards set forth in Section
405.350).
C
Medical marijuana testing facility (subject to the
performance standards set forth in Section 405.350).
C
Medical or dental clinic. P
Messenger or telegraph service station and telephone
exchange building.
P
Microbreweries. C
Mixed use buildings including the use of a portion of the
building for residential occupancy providing that each
residential unit contain a floor area no less than 750 square
feet.
C
Nursing and convalescent home. C
Package liquor store. C
Offices--Business or professional. P
Paintless dent removal (automotive). C
Personal care services. P
Parking lots and multi-level parking structures. P
Pharmacies. P
Place of religious worship. P
Public buildings erected or used by any department of the
City, County, State or Federal Government.
C
Public interest signs. C
Radio and broadcast stations. C
Recreation building or structure or grounds. P
Restaurants, including carry-out, self-seating, full-service,
and wine bars (subject to the cumulative numeric limitation
on wine bars found in Section 600.035 of this Code of
Ordinances), and prepared food dispensing uses.
C
Retail establishments. P
Schools for business, professional and technical training, but
not including outdoor areas for driving or heavy equipment
training.
C
Section
405.3290
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3290
AO:722
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "HDC" ZONING DISTRICT "HDC"
Solar energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII).
P
Solar energy systems, ground-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII).
C
Theaters, both live performance and movies. C
Utility, utility station or substation. C
Veterinary Hospital/Clinic C
Wind energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII).
C
P = Permitted by right
C = Permitted with conditional use permit
Note: Uses not appearing in this table are prohibited.
Section 405.3300. through Section 405.3330. (Reserved)
Section
405.3290
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3300
AO:723

ARTICLE XXII
"S-1" Service District
Section 405.3340. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §1(28.1),
4-27-2004]
The purpose of the "S-1" Service District is to provide a business
environment conducive for economic growth. The City of Clayton
accomplishes this goal through regulating the use of commercial property.
Section 405.3350. Permitted Uses [Ord. No. 5814 §1(28.2),
4-27-2004]
The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in the
Table of Permitted Uses found at the end of this Article. If a "P" (permitted
by right) or a "C" (permitted by conditional use permit) is not indicated for
a use in this table or a use is not included on the table, it is prohibited.
Section 405.3360. Maximum Building Height [Ord. No. 5814
§1(28.3), 4-27-2004]
Section 405.3370. Minimum Building Setback Requirements [Ord.
No. 5814 §1(28.4), 4-27-2004]
A. The maximum building height in the "S-1" Service District for all
buildings is four (4) stories, not to exceed seventy (70) feet.
B. Buildings in which the use conforms to the use of regulations of the
"HDC" District may be constructed to the height and area of regulations
of the "HDC" District.
A. The minimum setback provisions for all principal buildings in the "S-1"
Service District shall be as follows:
1. Front yard. A minimum of ten (10) feet from the front property line.
a. Where lots have double frontages or are corner lots, the
required front yard setback provision shall be provided on each
street.
b. Restaurants may offer customer seating and food service only
as authorized by the City Plan Commission and upon receipt or
renewal of the annual outdoor dining permit.
c. Basements/cellars and parking facilities that are completely
underground may encroach into the required front yard
setback, but may not transverse the property line.
2. Side yard. There are no maximum or minimum side yard setback
provisions for this district.
3. Rear yard. There are no maximum or minimum rear yard setback
provisions for the "S-1" Service District.
Section
405.3340
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3380
AO:725
Section 405.3380. Modifications For Minimum Building Setback
Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(28.5), 4-27-2004]
Section 405.3390. General Non-Conformance With The Setback
Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(28.6), 4-27-2004]
Those parts of existing building that violate yard regulations may be
repaired and remodeled but not reconstructed or structurally altered.
Section 405.3400. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(28.7), 4-27-2004]
Off-street parking and loading facilities requirements are outlined in Article
XXV of this Chapter.
Section 405.3410. Resubdivision of Lots [Ord. No. 5814 §1(28.8),
4-27-2004]
No existing lot of record within the "S-1" District shall be resubdivided
unless the resubdivided lots are in conformance with all applicable
regulations and are consistent with the lots located in the immediate area
with regard to size, frontage and arrangement so as to provide an orderly
pattern of development. No flag lot(s) shall be created as a result of a
resubdivision.
Section 405.3420. Compliance With Other Plans or Regulations
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(28.9), 4-27-2004]
Any development proposed within the "S-1" Zoning District shall be
reviewed for compliance with other plans and/or regulations of the City
of Clayton. Compliance with other plans and/or regulations shall include,
but not be limited to, the master plan, overlay district regulations, urban
design district regulations, any other land use plan or relevant standards
and guidelines to the specific site which have been accepted or adopted by
the Board of Aldermen.
A. The modifications for the setback provisions as outlined in Section
405.3370 are as follows:
1. Front yard modifications.
a. Where lots have double frontage, the required front yard
setback provision shall be provided on both streets.
b. An open, uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into a
required front yard for a distance not exceeding ten (10) feet.
Section
405.3380
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3430
AO:726
Section 405.3430. Permitted Uses For The "S-1" Service District
[Ord. No. 5814 §1(28.10), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6010 §3, 1-22-2008;
Ord. No. 6159 §2, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 6191 §4, 2-28-2012; Ord. No.
6242 §1, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 6333 §1, 8-26-2014; Ord. No. 6597,
6-11-2019]
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "S-1" ZONING DISTRICT "S-1"
Academy (including dancing, painting, theater, karate and
similar disciplines).
C
Accessory uses and buildings incidental to permitted uses. P
Adult entertainment--No adult use may be located within 200
feet of any school or church or any other existing adult use.
C
Amateur radio, home antennas and associated equipment
(subject to Article XXVI).
P
Art gallery or studio. P
Automobile agencies. C
Automotive repair shops. C
Bakeries limited to the processing of bakery goods for sale
only on the premises and consumption off the premises.
P
Banks, savings and loans, credit unions and other financial
institutions.
P
Car wash establishments. C
Catering establishment. C
Church spires, belfries, monuments, ornamental towers and
spires and chimneys exceeding the maximum height in the
zoning district may be erected to such height authorized by
the Board of Aldermen of the City by conditional use permit
or general ordinance.
C
Commercial antennas (subject to Article XXVI). P
Day care, nursery, pre-kindergarten, play and special schools
and kindergarten.
C
Drive-through establishments for financial institutions. C
Drug rehabilitation facility--Inpatient or outpatient facilities
for the treatment of alcohol and other drug abuse, to be
operated and located as stand-alone building(s) only. The
exterior appearance of the facility must be approved by the
Architectural Review Board to ascertain that it is consistent
and compatible with its surroundings.
C
Facilities (subject to Article XXVII). P
Gasoline and oil service stations. P
Grocery stores. C
Section
405.3430
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3430
AO:727
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "S-1" ZONING DISTRICT "S-1"
Hospital--Public buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools,
when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not
exceeding 110 feet if the building is set back from each yard
line at least 1 foot for each foot of additional building height
above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district in
which the building is built.
C
Hotel. C
Institution--Public buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools
when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not
exceeding 110 feet if the building is set back from each yard
line at least 1 foot for each foot of additional building height
above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district in
which the building is built.
C
Kiosk (subject to the provisions of Article II, Section
405.310).
P
Lodge hall or club. P
Medical marijuana testing facility (subject to the
performance standards set forth in Section 405.350).
C
Medical marijuana dispensary facility (subject to the
performance standards set forth in Section 405.350).
C
Medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility
(subject to performance standards set forth in Section
405.350).
C
Medical marijuana cultivation facility entirely within an
enclosed building (subject to performance standards set forth
in Section 405.350).
C
Medical or dental clinic. P
Messenger or telegraph service station and telephone
exchange building.
P
Mixed use buildings including the use of a portion of the
building for residential occupancy providing that each
residential unit contain a floor area no less than 750 square
feet.
C
Nursery or greenhouse. P
Offices--Business or professional. P
Package liquor store. C
Parking lots and multi-level parking structures. P
Personal care services. P
Pharmacies. P
Section
405.3430
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3430
AO:728
PERMITTED USES FOR THE "S-1" ZONING DISTRICT "S-1"
Places of religious worship--Places of religious worship may
be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet if the building is
set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for each foot of
additional building height above the height limit otherwise
permitted in the district in which the building is built.
P
Public buildings erected or used by any department of the
City, County, State or Federal Government. Public buildings,
hospitals, institutions or schools, when permitted in a
district, may be erected to a height not exceeding 110 feet if
the building is set back from each yard line at least 1 foot for
each foot of additional building height above the height limit
otherwise permitted in the district in which the building is
built.
C
Public interest signs. C
Recreation building or structure or grounds. P
Research or testing laboratory. P
Restaurants, including carry-out, self-seating, full-service,
and wine bars (subject to the cumulative numeric limitation
on wine bars found in Section 600.035 of this Code of
Ordinances), and prepared food dispensing uses.
C
Retail establishments. P
Schools for business, professional and technical training, but
not including outdoor areas for driving or heavy equipment
training.
C
Solar energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII).
P
Solar energy systems, ground-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII).
C
Theaters, both live performance and movies. C
Utility, utility station or substation. C
Wind energy systems, building-mounted (subject to the
provisions of Article XXVIII).
C
P = Permitted by right
C = Permitted with conditional use permit
Note: Uses not appearing in this table are prohibited.
Section 405.3440. through Section 405.3480. (Reserved)
Section
405.3430
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3440
AO:729

ARTICLE XXIII
Overlay and Urban Design Districts Rule Making Authority and
Procedures
Section 405.3490. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §1(29.1),
4-27-2004]
The purpose of this Article is to articulate the basis for use of certain
special land use tools and techniques such as overlay and design districts
to supplement and modify basic zoning regulations in parts of the City
and provide a context within which these tools are to be utilized to guide
development and redevelopment where they are applicable. This Article will
also set out the procedures for the Plan Commission, Architectural Review
Board and Board of Aldermen to adopt rules, standards and administrative
procedures to amplify on and implement the City's zoning and related
ordinances.
Section 405.3500. Overlay Districts [Ord. No. 5814 §1(29.2),
4-27-2004]
Section 405.3510. Design Districts [Ord. No. 5814 §1(29.3),
4-27-2004]
A. Overlay zoning districts are specific areas of the City for which special
regulations have been adopted to address specific subjects that require
special treatment in light of historic and/or topographic features,
existing land use circumstances within and near the district,
geographical characteristics and/or sound zoning policies.
B. Each overlay district shall be established by ordinance in accord with
the procedures provided in State law and this Code of Ordinances for
adoption of zoning ordinances. The area encompassed by each overlay
district shall be described in the adopting ordinance and shown on the
City's official Zoning Map.
C. Where an overlay district has been designated within the City, the
regulations of that overlay district shall supersede or supplement, as
applicable, the regulations of the base zoning district(s) and the
provisions of this Chapter of the Municipal Code. All property in an
overlay district shall be used and developed or improved in conformity
with the overlay district requirements as if such requirements were set
forth in this Chapter.
A. Design districts are specific areas of the City for which special
regulations have been adopted to preserve and enhance the special
character and aesthetic value of designated areas of the City by
providing criteria for quality development and protection of the
established character of such area. The districts are intended to ensure
compatibility of infill development and renovations with adjacent
structures and the surrounding area and improve the predictability and
consistency of design regulations and review procedures.
Section
405.3490
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3510
AO:731
Section 405.3520. Rule Making Authority and Procedures [Ord. No.
5814 §1(29.4), 4-27-2004]
B. Each design district shall be established by ordinance in accord with
the procedures provided in the State law and this Code of Ordinances
for adoption of zoning ordinances. The area encompassed by each
design district shall be described in the adopting ordinance and may be
shown on the City's official Zoning Map. The ordinance establishing a
district may include, or shall reference separately, the design standards
being adopted and to be required for all new structures and renovation
of existing structures within the district. Design standards may be
established to govern all aspects of the location and configuration of
improvements, architectural and aesthetic elements of all
improvements, all landscaping, all accessory structures, the height,
scale, mass and design of all structures and other features pertinent to
the objectives which the design district is intended to achieve.
C. Where a design district has been designated within the City, the
regulations of that design district shall supersede or supplement, as
applicable, zoning and building code regulations which would
otherwise govern property within the district. All new structures and
renovation of existing structures within a design district shall conform
to the applicable design standards as if such standards were set forth in
this Chapter.
A. Subject to approval by the Board of Aldermen as hereinafter set forth,
the Plan Commission and the Architectural Review Board may adopt,
promulgate, revise, implement and enforce such rules and standards
for the filing, processing and review of applications and otherwise
ordering and conducting their affairs as may be consistent with the
requirements of the ordinances of the City and consistent with
thorough and efficient consideration of matters brought before them.
When the Plan Commission or Architectural Review Board proposes to
adopt or revise such rules or standards it shall submit a copy thereof
to the Board of Aldermen. The Board of Aldermen may, by resolution,
approve, reject, revise or delete all or any portion thereof. Upon
approval by the Board of Aldermen, at least one (1) copy thereof shall
be filed with the following officials for public inspection and copying:
the City Clerk, the Director of Public Works, the Director of Planning
and Development Services and the secretary of the Plan Commission
or Architectural Review Board. Thereafter, all applications to the Plan
Commission or Architectural Review Board shall be accepted and
processed under the rules and standards so adopted.
B. The Plan Commission may adopt, promulgate and revise uniform
standards and/or guidelines for evaluation of site and landscaping plans
and exterior lighting on property before the Plan Commission for
review in association with the development or use of property in the
City. Such standards may, among other elements, specify:
Section
405.3510
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3520
AO:732
1. Standards of site design, access, internal traffic flow, configuration
of improvements on lots, grading, drainage, stormwater control
measures and similar site elements; and/or
2. Standards for site development, including the relationship of
structures to the site upon which they are located and the
relationship of the site and structures to existing or anticipated
nearby structures and properties; and/or
3. The kind, amount, location and maturity of landscaping materials
and elements; and/or
4. The amount, height, intensity, direction and appearance of exterior
lighting which have been determined to be appropriate for use in
various circumstances in the City, which shall be uniform in
application within similar areas of the City.
In developing such standards, the Plan Commission shall consider:
good site design and sound planning standards and practices;
the effect of site design elements on adjoining and nearby land
uses; the adaptability of vegetation to the climate of the area;
the effect of atmospheric conditions on landscaping; the amount
of maintenance necessary to support landscaping in a healthy
state; the longevity of landscaping elements; the suitability of
landscaping and exterior lighting elements to accomplishment of
the purpose for which the items are installed; the desirability
of limiting any negative impact upon surrounding properties
resulting from the use of a given property; and such other
considerations as may reasonably be related to promoting
harmony among different land uses and enhancement of the use,
enjoyment and value of property throughout the City.
When the Plan Commission proposes to adopt or revise such
standards, it shall submit a copy thereof to the Board of Aldermen.
The Board of Aldermen may, by resolution, approve, reject, revise
or delete all or any portion thereof. Upon approval by the Board
of Aldermen, at least one (1) copy thereof shall be filed with
the following officials for public inspection and copying: the City
Clerk, the Director of Public Works, the Director of Planning and
Development Services and the secretary of the Plan Commission.
Thereafter, all site and landscaping plans and exterior lighting
on property before the Plan Commission for review in association
with the development or use of property in the City, or any
modifications to existing site and landscaping plans or exterior
lighting, shall be reviewed and evaluated under the standards and/
or guidelines so adopted.
C. Subject to approval by the Board of Aldermen as hereinafter set forth,
the Architectural Review Board may adopt, promulgate, revise and
enforce reasonable standards and/or guidelines for review and
evaluation of architectural elements of property and buildings in the
Section
405.3520
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3520
AO:733
Section 405.3530. Appeals [Ord. No. 5814 §1(29.5), 4-27-2004]
Any person aggrieved by a determination of the Plan Commission or
Architectural Review Board as to compliance with standards adopted as
herein provided may request review and reconsideration of the matter by
the Board of Aldermen by filing a written application with the City Clerk
within fifteen (15) days after the determination in question setting forth in
detail all reasons asserted by the applicant as to wherein and why the Plan
Commission or Architectural Review Board acted improperly in reference to
the matter. Upon review the Board of Aldermen may act summarily on the
application as presented or hold such hearings or other inquiry as it may
determine and may affirm, modify or reverse the determination of the Plan
City which may come before the Architectural Review Board for review
in association with the development or use of property. Such standards
may specify standards for the design and appearance of structures
which will promote harmonious relationships between existing and
proposed structures and protect the utility and value of properties
within the City.
In developing such standards, the Architectural Review Board shall
consider, among other things, design aspects which may impact the use
and appearance of property, the prevalence and adaptability of various
materials and exterior surfaces in the area in which the property is
located; the manner in which such standards will promote the general
welfare of the community and contribute to the preservation and
enhancement of property values; balancing creativity and innovation
with the promotion of harmonious relationships among existing and
proposed structures; avoiding garish, incongruent or incompatible
buildings or structures which would have a tendency to create visual
disharmony within the area; avoiding structures which are of limited
utility and adaptability or unusual, single-purpose buildings which are
likely to become vacant or unused in a relatively short time; and
development of coherent visual and aesthetic relationships throughout
the City and in the vicinity.
When the Architectural Review Board proposes to adopt or revise such
standards it shall submit a copy thereof to the Board of Aldermen. The
Board of Aldermen may, by resolution, approve, reject, revise or delete
all or any portion thereof. Upon approval by the Board of Aldermen,
one (1) copy thereof shall be filed with the following officials for public
inspection and copying: the City Clerk, the Director of Public Works,
the Director of Planning and Development Services and the secretary
of the Architectural Review Board. Thereafter, any applications to the
Architectural Review Board shall be subject to review, evaluation and
approval by the Architectural Review Board as to conformity with the
architectural standards so adopted. No permit or other authorization
for the matter reviewed will be issued or approved unless the
Architectural Review Board shall determine that the proposed work
complies with the standards authorized by this Subsection.
Section
405.3520
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3530
AO:734
Commission or Architectural Review Board as the Board of Aldermen may
determine to be warranted by the evidence before it.
Section 405.3540. through Section 405.3570. (Reserved)
Section
405.3530
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3540
AO:735

ARTICLE XXIV
Zoning Table
Section 405.3580. Zoning Table
The following table depicts all permitted uses and conditionally permitted
uses for all zoning districts.110
Section 405.3590. through Section 405.3610. (Reserved)
110. Editor's Note–The Zoning Table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Section
405.3580
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3590
AO:737

ARTICLE XXV
Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
Section 405.3620. Off-Street Parking Requirements [Ord. No. 5814
§1(31.1), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5964 §1(Att. A §31.1), 2-27-2007; Ord.
No. 6274 §1, 6-25-2013]
A. All buildings shall provide off-street parking in accordance with the
following requirements:
1. Dwellings. Single- and two-family, one (1) parking space for each
dwelling unit; multiple dwellings, two (2) parking spaces for each
dwelling unit.
2. Rooming or boarding house. One (1) parking space for two (2)
sleeping rooms.
3. Dormitory or fraternity or sorority house. One (1) parking space for
each three (3) beds.
4. Private club or lodge. One (1) parking space for every ten (10)
members.
5. School. For a high school, five (5) spaces per classroom; for all
other schools, one (1) space per classroom.
6. Hospital. One (1) parking space for each four (4) beds.
7. Sanitarium, nursing home or institutional home. One (1) parking
space for each four (4) beds.
8. Auditoriums, sports arenas, churches or temples, main auditoriums
or other places of assembly, except theaters. One (1) parking space
for each five (5) seats.
9. Theaters.
a. Off-street parking—required. Theaters shall provide one (1)
parking space for each four (4) seats.
b. Off-street parking—exempt. Theaters not exceeding ten
thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area in downtown
Clayton with the exception of the properties facing the north
side of Maryland Avenue west of Forsyth Boulevard to the west
City limits.
10. Community center, library, museum or similar public or semi-public
building. One (1) parking space for each three hundred (300)
square feet of gross floor area.
11. Hotel or motel. Three-fourths (¾) of one (1) parking space for each
sleeping room or suite. These spaces shall be in addition to the
parking spaces that shall be provided for any portion of the hotel
Section
405.3620
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3620
AO:739
that is used for office, business or commercial purposes, including
corridor meeting rooms.
12. Medical office buildings. Buildings in which twenty percent (20%)
or more of the gross area is occupied by members of the healing
profession, one (1) parking space for each two hundred (200)
square feet of the gross area used for this purpose.
13. Commercial, business, office, service and industrial buildings
except for medical office as defined in Subsection (12).
a. Off-street parking—required. Commercial, business, office,
service and industrial buildings must provide one (1) parking
space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor
area within the building or structure. Office buildings in excess
of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet not occupying more
than forty percent (40%) of the site or office buildings erected
in multi-building developments in which not more than forty
percent (40%) of the total site is occupied with buildings and
office buildings with desired development features approved
under the site plan review procedure may provide parking at
the rate of one (1) parking space per four hundred (400)
square feet of floor area.
b. Off-street parking—exempt. Retail establishments not
exceeding three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area,
excluding permanent storage areas, in downtown Clayton with
the exception of the properties facing the north side of
Maryland Avenue west of Forsyth Boulevard to the west City
limits.
c. Medical marijuana dispensary facility shall provide one (1)
space per three hundred (300) square feet. [Ord. No. 6597,
6-11-2019]
d. Medical marijuana testing facility shall provide one (1) space
per four hundred (400) square feet. [Ord. No. 6597,
6-11-2019]
e. Medical marijuana cultivation facility shall provide one (1)
space per one thousand (1,000) square feet. [Ord. No. 6597,
6-11-2019]
f. Medical marijuana-infused products facility shall provide one
(1) space per five hundred (500) square feet. [Ord. No. 6597,
6-11-2019]
14. Restaurants.
a. Off-street parking—required. Restaurants exceeding three
thousand (3,000) gross square feet of floor area, excluding
permanent storage areas, shall provide three (3) parking
Section
405.3620
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3620
AO:740
spaces for every five (5) seats (0.6) on a pro-rated percentage
for all square footage in excess of three thousand (3,000) gross
square feet. (Example: 4,000 gross square foot restaurant,
excluding permanent storage areas, containing 100 seats:
4,000 sq. ft. - 3,000 sq. ft. = 1,000 sq. ft. or 25%. 100 [seats] x
25% = 25. 25 x 0.6 = 15 parking spaces required).
Restaurants located outside the Central Business District,
regardless of gross square footage, must provide off-street
employee parking and proof of such parking must be submitted
to the City.
b. Restaurants located in office/mixed use buildings under one
hundred fifty thousand (150,000) gross square feet with on-site
parking and other restaurants where dedicated parking is
available within five hundred (500) feet may expand their floor
area in the evenings after 6:00 P.M. and all hours on weekends
to take advantage of shared parking. Applicants for this
additional space must provide 0.6 parking spaces per seat in
the expanded area. A lease for the required parking spaces and
a provision/amendment to the conditional use permit must be
approved prior to the use of the expanded area.
c. Off-street parking—exempt. Off-street parking is not required
for the following uses:
(1) Restaurants located in the Central Business District not
exceeding three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross
floor area, excluding permanent storage areas.
(2) Cafeterias and kiosks located in office buildings designed
to primarily serve the tenants of the building.
(3) Restaurants located in office buildings or commercial
spaces which have one hundred fifty thousand (150,000)
gross square feet or more of floor area and which provide
parking for such building or space as prescribed by the
Zoning Ordinance.
(4) Restaurants in hotels or motels.
15. Mixed-use developments. With the approval of the Board of
Aldermen after an analysis by a registered professional engineer
experienced in traffic and parking studies and where the same
parking spaces would be used by different uses at different times of
the day, there may be modifications of the parking requirements for
the mixed-use development.
16. Non-conforming buildings. With respect to required parking
spaces, non-conforming buildings need not provide additional
parking spaces for reoccupancy of the building for a similar or less
restrictive use. However, any reoccupancy in which delivery
Section
405.3620
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3620
AO:741
Section 405.3630. Rules For Computing Number of Required
Spaces [Ord. No. 5814 §1(31.2), 4-27-2004]
Section 405.3640. Location [Ord. No. 5814 §1(31.3), 4-27-2004]
vehicles are utilized on a regular basis shall provide off-street
parking spaces for all or a portion of such delivery vehicles to
provide sufficient off-street parking for any peak period operation
as determined by the Director of Public Works.
17. Drive-in establishments authorized by conditional use permit with
more than one (1) drive-in window or driving lane shall provide a
minimum of five (5) stacked parking spaces per window or lane,
including the space immediately next to the window. Where only
one (1) drive-in window or driving lane is provided, a minimum of
ten (10) stacked parking spaces shall be provided.
18. The number of parking spaces required in conjunction with a
conditional use may be modified by the Board of Aldermen if
conditions for such conditional use warrant a variance from the
above requirements.
A. In computing the number of parking spaces required under Section
405.3620, the following rules shall govern:
1. Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall
be the nearest whole number.
2. In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal
the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed
separately.
3. Whenever a building or use constructed or established after April
14, 1959, is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of
employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or
otherwise, parking spaces shall be provided on the basis of the
enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use existing prior
to April 14, 1959, is reconstructed or is enlarged to the extent of
twenty percent (20%) or more in floor area, said building or use in
its entirety shall then and thereafter comply with the parking
requirements set forth herein. Any enlargement or change in use of
less than twenty percent (20%) of the gross floor area shall be
provided with parking based on the enlargement or change.
A. Required parking spaces shall be located:
1. For residential buildings on the same lot with the building or use
served.
2. For any other building or use on an area within five hundred (500)
feet walking distance of said building. Two (2) or more owners of
buildings may join together in providing the required parking
Section
405.3620
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3640
AO:742
Section 405.3650. Design of Off-Street Parking Facilities [Ord. No.
5814 §1(31.4), 4-27-2004]
Section 405.3660. Loading Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §1(31.5),
4-27-2004]
spaces. Where the required parking spaces are not located on
the same lot with the building or use served, the usage of the
lot or tract upon which said parking spaces are provided shall be
restricted by an instrument of record describing the premises for
which said parking is provided and assuring the retention of such
parking so long as required by this Chapter.
A. Each required parking space shall be provided satisfactory egress to a
street or alley by a surfaced driveway. The width of such driveways and
arrangements of parking spaces shall be approved by the Director of
Public Works. The Director of Public Works may permit a six (6) inch
reduction in the required width of each full size parking space if the
design is such that satisfactory egress is provided.
B. The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to permit a
portion of the required spaces to be designed for subcompact cars when
previous parking surveys and studies of typical buildings conducted in
the City justify the inclusion of such subcompact spaces. All parking lots
and structures shall conform to the standards of improvement and
maintenance of Chapter 500 of the Municipal Code.
A. Every building or part thereof erected or occupied for office purposes,
retail business, service, hotel or any other use similarly involving the
receipt or distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise shall
provide and maintain, on the same premises, loading space in
accordance with the following requirements:
1. In the "C-1", "C-2", "HDC" Commercial Districts and the "S-1"
Service District, except office buildings and hotels, one (1) loading
space for the first ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area or
fraction thereof and one (1) additional loading space for the next
fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of floor area or fraction
thereof and one (1) additional loading space for each forty
thousand (40,000) square feet or fraction thereof of floor area in
excess of twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet.
2. Office buildings and portions thereof hereafter erected in all
permitted zoning districts shall be provided with one (1) loading
space for the first ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area
and one (1) loading space for each additional fifty thousand
(50,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof to a maximum
of five (5) loading spaces, provided that the Director of Public
Works shall have the authority to permit a portion of the required
spaces to be reduced in size to accommodate smaller vehicles if the
Section
405.3640
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3660
AO:743
Section 405.3670. Bicycle Parking Regulations [Ord. No. 6349 §1,
12-9-2014]
proposed use of the building is such that deliveries will be made by
such vehicles.
For office buildings under thirty thousand (30,000) square feet,
the Director of Public Works may permit all the required loading
spaces to be reduced in size for smaller delivery vehicles if the
proposed occupancy warrants such reduction.
No required loading space shall be occupied by a trash container
or disposal unit and such loading space shall be used for loading
and unloading purposes only.
3. Hotels and portions thereof hereafter erected in all permitted
zoning districts shall be provided with two (2) loading spaces for
the first one hundred (100) rooms and one (1) loading space for
each additional one hundred (100) rooms or fraction thereof to a
maximum of four (4) loading spaces, provided that the Director of
Public Works shall have the authority to permit a portion of the
required spaces to be reduced in size to accommodate smaller
vehicles if the proposed use of the building is such that deliveries
will be made by such vehicles.
A. Applicability.
1. The provisions of this Article shall apply to developments which
require at least one (1) of the following City approvals:
a. Site plan review pursuant to Section 405.1000.
b. A new conditional use permit pursuant to Article VII or an
amendment to an existing conditional use permit pursuant to
Section 405.850.
c. Architectural review pursuant to Article III.
d. A building permit when associated with a change in use,
increased floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling
units, seating capacity, or site changes.
2. Exceptions:
a. Residential buildings with one (1) to three (3) dwelling units or
with private garages for each unit.
B. Bicycle Parking Requirements.
1. All developments requiring City approvals specified in Section
405.3670(A)(1) shall provide bicycle parking in accordance with
the following requirements. Unless otherwise stated, each building
and/or use must provide at least one (1) bicycle rack.
Section
405.3660
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3670
AO:744
Independently operated parking structures and parking lots (as
opposed to those providing parking dedicated to nearby nonparking
uses) must provide at least three (3) bicycle racks.
Use Bicycle Racks Required
Multifamily 1 per 20 dwelling units
General retail 1 per 5,000 square feet
Restaurant/grocery 1 per 3,000 square feet
Office 1 per 20,000 square feet
Parking structure or lot
(operating independently)
1 per 40 parking spaces
provided
Other 1 per 20 required parking
spaces
C. Rules For Computing Number Of Required Bicycle Racks.
1. In computing the number of bicycle racks required under Section
405.3670(B)(1), the following rules shall govern:
a. Where fractional numbers result, the number of required
bicycle racks shall be the nearest whole number.
b. In the case of mixed uses, the required number of bicycle racks
shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses
computed separately.
c. Whenever a building or use constructed or established prior to
December 9, 2014, which requires one (1) of the approvals
listed in Subsection A above, is changed or enlarged in floor
area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating
capacity or otherwise, bicycle parking shall be provided on the
basis of the enlargement or change.
D. Bicycle Rack Location.
1. Required bicycle racks shall be located:
a. Outside the building served in a highly visible, active, wellilluminated
area.
b. Within fifty (50) feet of a main building entrance.
c. On private property unless otherwise approved by the
Department of Public Works.
2. If bicycle racks are not visible from the abutting street or the public
building entrance signs must be posted indicating their location. All
signs must conform to the requirements of Chapter 425, Sign
Regulations.
Section
405.3670
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3670
AO:745
3. Bicycle racks located within a parking structure or parking lot shall
be clustered, clearly marked, and separated from motor vehicles by
a physical barrier.
4. Bicycle racks located within parking structures must be located on
the ground level or level closest to the primary pedestrian
entrance. Bicycle racks may also be located in a secured room or
cage.
E. Bicycle Rack Design.
1. Inverted-U-type, A-type, and post-and-loop-type bicycle racks are
permitted. Creative styles are subject to approval by the Director of
Planning or her/his designee.
Illustrations of permitted bicycle racks. From left: Inverted
U-type, A-type, Post-and-loop type
Figure 1: Illustrations of Permitted Bicycle Racks
2. Bicycle racks shall be made of solid construction, resistant to rust,
corrosion, hammers, and saws.
3. Each bicycle rack shall support a parked bicycle by the frame in
two (2) places, allowing both the frame and one (1) or both wheels
to be secured using a standard U-lock.
4. Each bicycle rack shall provide parking for two (2) bicycles.
5. Each bicycle rack shall be anchored to an approved hard surface
(i.e., asphalt, concrete, pavers, or similar material). The hard
surface surrounding each bicycle rack shall measure at least six (6)
feet by six (6) feet in size.
6. If more than ten (10) bicycle racks are provided, at least half of the
racks shall be covered by a roof or overhang.
F. Bicycle Rack Spacing.
1. Bicycle racks shall be located at least three (3) feet in all directions
from any obstruction, including but not limited to other bicycle
racks, walls, doors, posts, columns, or landscaping.
2. If provided, aisles between rows of bicycle racks must be a
minimum of four (4) feet wide, as measured from tip to tip of bike
tires across the space between racks.
Section
405.3670
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3670
AO:746
Section 405.3680. through Section 405.3690. (Reserved)
Figure 2: Bicycle Rack Spacing Diagram
G. Reduction In Required Automobile Parking.
1. The total number of required automobile parking spaces pursuant
to Section 405.3620, Off-Street Parking Requirements, shall be
reduced at the ratio of one (1) automobile off-street parking space
for one (1) bicycle rack. The total number of required automobile
off-street parking spaces shall not be reduced by more than ten
percent (10%) for any project.
H. Alternative Compliance.
1. Upon written request by the applicant, the Director of Planning or
her/his designee may approve alternative compliance from the
provisions of this Section, which may include, but need not be
limited to, a reduction or deviation in the number, type, or location
of the required bicycle racks, and may include a waiver of the
requirement. Considerations used in the determination to grant or
deny alternative compliance may include, but are not limited to,
existing site constraints, proximity to existing bicycle parking, and
the nature of the proposed building or use.
Section
405.3670
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3680
AO:747

ARTICLE XXVI
Home Antennas, Satellite Dishes, Commercial Antennas and
Antenna Support Structures
Section 405.3700. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §1(32.1),
4-27-2004]
Section 405.3710. Home Antennas and Non-Commercial Satellite
Dishes [Ord. No. 5814 §1(32.2), 4-27-2004]
A. These regulations supplement the district regulations contained
elsewhere in this Chapter. Unless otherwise stated, the regulations
hereafter established shall apply within all districts established by this
Chapter.
B. The purposes of this Article are to:
1. Provide for the appropriate location and development of antenna
facilities to serve the City's residents and businesses;
2. Minimize adverse visual impacts of antenna facilities through
design, siting and screening techniques; and
3. Maximize the use of existing and new antenna facilities so as to
minimize the need to construct new or additional facilities.
A. Permitted Uses, No Building Permit Required.
1. Home antennas shall be a permitted use in any zoning district.
2. Satellite dishes less than one (1) meter (thirty-nine and thirty-seven
hundredths (39.37) inches) in diameter shall be a permitted use in
any residential zoning district, provided they are used solely for
non-commercial purposes.
B. Building Permits Required, When—Application.
1. Building and any other necessary construction permits shall be
required for the construction or installation of any home antenna or
satellite dish, as follows:
a. Home antenna or satellite dish with roof penetration; or
b. Home antenna or satellite dish which exceeds one (1) meter
(thirty-nine and thirty-seven hundredths (39.37) inches) in
diameter.
2. An application for a building permit shall be filed with the Building
Official and shall include, among other information that may
required, the following:
a. Detailed construction and installation plans.
Section
405.3700
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3710
AO:749
b. Site plan of the parcel upon which the installation is to be made
showing the specific location of the proposed installation and
all improvements on the parcel.
C. Special Antenna Permits Required, When. In addition to building
permits, a special antenna permit as provided in Section 405.3730 shall
be required for any satellite dish that exceeds two (2) meters (seventyeight
and seventy-four hundredths (78.74) inches) in diameter.
D. Regulations For Home Antennas And Non-Commercial Satellite Dishes.
The following regulations apply to all home antennas and satellite
dishes:
1. Home antennas and satellite dishes shall be a neutral color and
shall not be bright, reflective or metallic. Black, gray and tan shall
be considered neutral colors, as shall any color that blends with the
surrounding dominant color and helps to camouflage the proposed
antenna.
2. Home antennas and satellite dishes shall be located on the site area
in such a manner as to eliminate visibility from the public streets or
shall be screened from view from the public streets. Screening
materials may consist of walls, fences, buildings, mature plant
materials or other appropriate items. Screening materials shall be
maintained and replaced as needed.
3. Ground-mounted home antennas and satellite dishes shall be
located only in the rear yard portion of any lot and shall be subject
to a setback of five (5) feet from any lot line.
4. No advertising of any form shall be permitted on any part of a home
antenna or satellite dish, except for not greater than a six (6) inch
square area displaying the manufacturer's or distributor's name.
5. In single-family and two-family residential zones, no more than one
(1) home antenna or satellite dish may be located on any one (1)
site.
6. In multiple-family residential zones, no more than one (1) home
antenna or satellite dish may be located on any site area with less
than ten (10) units and no more than two (2) home antennas or
satellite dishes may be located on any site area with ten (10) or
more units.
7. All wiring to and from a ground-mounted home antenna or satellite
dish located more than five (5) feet from the nearest building shall
be underground.
8. No home antenna or satellite dish shall be erected so as to injure
the roof covering and when removed from the roof, the roof
covering shall be repaired to maintain weather and water
tightness. The installation of a home antenna or satellite dish
Section
405.3710
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3710
AO:750
Section 405.3720. Commercial Antennas and Antenna Support
Structures [Ord. No. 5814 §1(32.3), 4-27-2004]
mounted on a building shall not be erected nearer to the lot line
than the total height of the facility above the roof, nor shall such
facility be erected near electric power lines or encroach upon any
street or other public space.
9. Home antennas and satellite dishes shall be designed, erected and
maintained in accordance with the City's Building Code and all
other applicable State or local codes.
E. Limitation On Regulations. Except as may be necessary to ensure public
health and safety, the home antenna and satellite dish regulations shall
not be applied so as to:
1. Impose unreasonable limitations on users,
2. Prevent, degrade or impair reception or transmission of signals by
any such facility, or
3. Impose costs on users that are excessive in light of the purchase
and installation cost of the equipment.
A. Permitted Uses (No Building Permit Required). Commercial antennas
and associated support structures shall be permitted in non-residential
zoning districts, governmental facilities and university campuses. No
building permit shall be required for the following type of commercial
installations:
1. Satellite dishes under two (2) meters (seventy-eight and seventyfour
hundredths (78.74) inches) in diameter.
2. Replacement of satellite dishes and commercial antennas where
the number of antennas remains the same and there are no visible
changes to the installation.
B. Building Permit And Special Antenna Permit Required,
When—Application. Building permits and special antenna permits,
pursuant to Section 405.3730, shall be required for the construction,
installation or modification of any facility which exceeds the
requirements in Subsection (A) above. An application for a special
antenna permit shall include all requirements for a building permit
application and shall be filed in lieu of such application.
C. General Regulations, Commercial Antennas And Antenna Support
Structures. The following regulations apply to all commercial antennas
and antenna support structures:
1. Commercial antennas and antenna support structures shall be
located on the site area or structure in such a manner as to
eliminate visibility from the public streets and shall be screened
from view from the public streets and adjacent properties/
Section
405.3710
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3720
AO:751
structures. Screening materials may consist of walls, fences,
buildings, mature plant materials or other appropriate items.
Screening materials shall be maintained and replaced as needed.
2. Commercial antennas and antenna support structures shall be a
neutral color and shall not be bright, reflective or metallic. Black,
gray and tan shall be considered neutral colors, as shall any color
that blends with the surrounding dominant color and helps to
camouflage the proposed equipment.
3. Ground-mounted commercial antennas shall be located only in the
rear yard portion of any lot and shall be subject to a setback of five
(5) feet from any lot line.
4. No advertising of any form shall be permitted on any part of an
antenna, except for not greater than a six (6) inch square area
displaying the manufacturer's or distributor's name.
5. All wiring to and from ground-mounted antennas located more than
five (5) feet from the nearest building shall be underground. All
wiring to and from any commercial antenna running along an
elevation shall be fully concealed or screened.
6. No commercial antenna shall be erected so as to injure the roof
covering and when removed from the roof, the roof covering shall
be repaired to maintain weather and water tightness. The
installation of any commercial antenna mounted on a building shall
not be erected nearer to the lot line than the total height of the
antenna above the roof, nor shall such antenna be erected near
electric power lines or encroach upon any street or other public
space.
7. Antennas shall be designed, erected and maintained in accordance
with the City's Building Code and all other applicable State or local
codes.
D. Specific Regulations, Commercial Antennas And Antenna Support
Structures.
1. Height. The height of commercial antennas and antenna support
structures shall not exceed the building height limits of the subject
zoning district unless a different height is authorized because of couse
pursuant to Subsection (D)(9)(c) hereof or because of a
determination of the Architectural Review Board based on a clear
showing that such height is required to provide personal wireless
services or reasonably required for public safety communications
of a governmental entity sharing the facility. Such showing shall be
supported by the opinion of a telecommunications consultant hired
by the City at the expense of the applicant. The opinion of the
consultant shall include a statement that no available alternatives
exist to exceeding the height limitations or the reasons why such
alternatives are not viable.
Section
405.3720
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3720
AO:752
2. Regulatory compliance. All commercial antennas and antenna
support structures shall meet or exceed current standards and
regulations of the FCC and any other State or Federal agency
having regulatory jurisdiction. Should such standards or
regulations be amended, then the owner shall bring antennas and
structures into compliance with the revised standards or
regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of the
revision unless an earlier date is mandated by the controlling
agency.
3. Security. All commercial antennas and antenna support structures
shall be protected from unauthorized access by appropriate
security devices. A description of proposed security measures shall
be provided as part of any special antenna permit application to
install, build or modify telecommunications antennas, towers or
support structures.
4. Lighting. Commercial antennas and antenna support structures
shall not be lighted unless required by the FAA or other State or
Federal agency having regulatory jurisdiction, in which case a
description of the required lighting scheme will be made a part of
the special antenna permit application to install, build or modify
the telecommunications antennas, towers or support structures.
5. Advertising. Unless a disguised support structure is in the form of
an otherwise lawfully placed pylon sign, the placement of
advertising on such antennas or structures is prohibited, except for
displaying the manufacturer's or distributor's name in an area not
greater than six (6) square inches.
6. Occupancy and storage. Human occupancy for office or other uses
or the storage of other materials and equipment not in direct
support of the connected disguised commercial antenna or antenna
support structure is prohibited.
7. Design. Commercial antennas shall have stealth installations so
that they are fully screened or not visible or not recognizable as
such antennas and antenna support structures other than buildings
shall be disguised support structures, so that each such facility is
consistent with the natural or built environment of the site.
a. Shelters or cabinets shall have an exterior finish compatible
with the natural or built environment of the site and may also
be brick or other masonry material as may be required.
b. Commercial antennas attached to a building or a disguised
antenna support structure shall be fully screened and not
visible or not recognizable as a commercial antenna.
8. Site requirements.
Section
405.3720
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3720
AO:753
a. All commercial antennas and antenna support structures must
be located within a non-residentially zoned district and are
prohibited from all residential districts.
b. Street level floor areas shall not be occupied principally for the
placement of cabinets or shelters or for the storage,
warehousing or operation of commercial antennas or antenna
support structures.
9. Co-use.
a. Prior to the issuance of any special antenna permit or building
permit, the applicant shall submit a notarized statement
agreeing to make the proposed antenna support structure
available for use by others, subject to reasonable technical
limitations and financial terms.
b. Prior to the issuance of any special antenna permit or building
permit, the applicant shall furnish an inventory of all known
antenna support structures sites located in or within one-half
(½) mile of the City limits that could be used for the applicant's
antenna attachment. The inventory shall identify the owner of
the facility, its type and reference name or number and the
street location, latitude and longitude, height, type and
mounting height of existing antennas and an assessment of
available space for the placement of additional antennas,
shelters and/or cabinets. The applicant shall further
demonstrate why co-use on the identified facilities is
inappropriate or was otherwise not allowed.
c. Commercial antennas and antenna support structures may be
installed, constructed or modified so as to exceed the height
limitations provided in Subsection (D)(1) hereof to
accommodate co-use. The City may also require the applicant
of new construction to exceed the applicable limitation,
regardless of whether a co-user is immediately available to
share space with the applicant.
d. Any new antenna support structure at least one hundred (100)
feet in height shall be designed and constructed to
accommodate at least one (1) co-user.
e. The willful and knowing failure of an applicant to agree to couse
or to negotiate in good faith with potential co-users may be
cause for either the denial of a pending application, the
revocation of an existing special antenna permit or the
withholding of future permits.
10. Maintenance. All commercial antennas and antenna support
structures shall be maintained and improved to remain in the
condition in which they were approved.
Section
405.3720
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3720
AO:754
Section 405.3730. Special Antenna Permit [Ord. No. 5814 §1(32.4),
4-27-2004]
11. Removal. If any commercial antenna or antenna support structure
is not used or is inactive for a period of one (1) year, it shall be
considered a nuisance and be removed at the owner's expense. The
owner shall provide the City with a copy of any notice to the FCC of
intent to cease operations and shall have ninety (90) days from the
date of ceasing operations to remove the antenna, structure and
any related facilities. If the owner fails to do so the facilities may be
deemed a public nuisance and be removed at the owner's expense.
A. Permit Required—Application.
1. The construction and installation of all proposed satellite dishes
that exceed the limitations prescribed in Section 405.3710(A)(2)
and the construction, installation and modification of all
commercial antennas and antenna support structures as provided
in Section 405.3720 shall require a special antenna permit
approved by the Architectural Review Board.
2. Applications for special antenna permits shall be made to the
Architectural Review Board as provided in Article III of Chapter
400, Section 400.170 and shall be accompanied by payment of a fee
as required by the fee schedule approved by the Board of
Aldermen. Prior to filing an application the applicant shall meet
with the Director to determine the information to be required in
support of the application.
3. Special antenna permit applications shall be accompanied by
detailed construction and installation plans and proof of
compliance with Section 405.3710(D), for satellite dishes and
Sections 405.3720(C) and 405.3720(D) for commercial antennas
and antenna support structures. In addition, the Director may
require a detailed site plan based on a closed boundary survey of
the host parcel, indicating:
a. All existing and proposed improvements, including buildings,
drives, walkway, parking areas and other structures,
b. The location of trees on such parcel,
c. The general location of the improvements on all adjoining
properties,
d. Public rights-of-way, the zoning categories of the host parcel
and adjoining properties, the location of buffer and landscape
areas, hydrologic features and the coordinates and height of
the proposed facility,
e. Any statements or information required by this Article, and
Section
405.3720
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3730
AO:755
f. Such other information as the Director deems appropriate.
4. Applications for a special antenna permit shall be made in lieu of a
building permit application and the Building Official shall
determine the issuance of a building permit based on the
application for a special antenna permit.
B. Criteria For Special Antenna Permit Approval. The Architectural
Review Board shall consider the evidence submitted with the special
antenna permit application as well as additional information presented
by the applicant or others. Before approving a special antenna permit
for a commercial antenna or antenna support structure, the Board shall
consider and determine the following, as may be applicable, based on
the evidence submitted:
1. Whether existing antenna support structures are located within the
geographic area necessary to meet the applicant's engineering
requirements.
2. Whether existing antenna support structures within the applicant's
required geographic area are of sufficient height to meet system
engineering requirements.
3. Whether existing antenna support structures have sufficient
structural strength to support the applicant's proposed commercial
antenna and required screening.
4. Whether the proposed commercial antenna would experience or
cause signal interference with other telecommunication facilities.
5. Whether the fees, costs or other contractual terms required by the
owners of existing antenna support structures within the required
geographic area of the applicant, or to retrofit the existing
structures, are reasonable.
6. Whether or not there are other limiting conditions that render
existing antenna support structures within the applicant's required
geographic area unsuitable.
7. Whether the design of the commercial antenna or antenna support
structure maximally reduces visual degradation of the building.
8. Whether the design of the commercial antenna or antenna support
structure maximally reduces visual degradation of the skyline.
9. Whether the proposed commercial antenna or antenna support
structure minimizes the number and size of similar facilities that
will be required in the geographic area surrounding the proposed
site.
C. Review, Determination And Appeal.
Section
405.3730
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3730
AO:756
Section 405.3740. through Section 405.3760. (Reserved)
1. The Architectural Review Board shall review and determine
applications as provided in Sections 400.170 through 400.190.
2. A decision to deny an application shall be based upon substantial
evidence that shall be made a part of the written record of the
meeting at which a final decision on the application is rendered.
3. Any aggrieved person may appeal a decision of the Board to the
City's Board of Aldermen as provided in Section 400.230.
Section
405.3730
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3740
AO:757

ARTICLE XXVII
Utility Facilities
Section 405.3770. Permitted Use [Ord. No. 6010 §2(33.1),
1-22-2008]
Facilities shall be permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the regulations
of this Article, which shall be exclusive, notwithstanding Article VII of this
Chapter.
Section 405.3780. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 6010 §2(33.2),
1-22-2008]
Section 405.3790. Facilities Permits [Ord. No. 6010 §2(33.3),
1-22-2008]
A. These regulations supplement the district regulations contained
elsewhere in this Chapter. Unless otherwise stated, the regulations
hereafter established shall apply within all districts established by this
Chapter.
B. The purposes of this Article are to:
1. Provide for the appropriate location and development of antenna
facilities to serve the City's residents and businesses;
2. Minimize adverse visual impacts of antenna facilities through
design, siting and screening techniques.
A. Any person desiring to place facilities on private property must first
apply for and obtain a facilities permit, in addition to any other building
permit, license, easement, franchise or authorization required by law;
provided however, that a facilities permit shall not be necessary for
facilities otherwise permitted through or regulated by this Article.
B. The Director may design and make available standard forms for such
applications, requiring such information as allowed by law and as the
Director determines in his or her discretion to be necessary and
consistent with the provisions of this Article and to accomplish the
purposes of this Article. Each application shall at minimum contain the
following information, unless otherwise waived by the Director:
1. The name of the person on whose behalf the facilities are to be
installed and the name, address and telephone number of a
representative whom the City may notify or contact at any time
(i.e., twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week)
concerning the facilities;
2. A description of the proposed work, including a site plan and such
plans or technical drawings or depictions showing the nature,
dimensions and description of the facilities, their location, and their
Section
405.3770
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3790
AO:759
proximity to other facilities that may be affected by their
installation.
C. Each such application shall be accompanied by an application fee
approved by the City to cover the cost of processing the application.
D. Application Review And Determination.
1. The Director shall promptly review each application and shall grant
or deny the application within thirty-one (31) days. Unless the
application is denied pursuant to Subparagraph (d) hereof, the
Director shall issue a facilities permit upon determining that the
applicant:
a. Has submitted all necessary information,
b. Has paid the appropriate fees, and
c. Is in full compliance with this Article and all other City
ordinances.
The Director may establish procedures for bulk
processing of applications and periodic payment of fees
to avoid excessive processing and accounting costs.
2. It is the intention of the City that proposed facilities will not impair
public safety, harm property values or significant sight lines or
degrade the aesthetics of the adjoining properties or
neighborhood, and that the placement and appearance of facilities
on private property should be minimized and limited in scope to the
extent allowed by law to achieve the purposes of this Section. To
accomplish such purposes the Director may impose conditions on
facilities permits, including alternative landscaping, designs or
locations, provided that such conditions are reasonable and
necessary, shall not result in a decline of service quality, and are
competitively neutral and non-discriminatory.
3. An applicant receiving a facilities permit shall promptly notify the
Director of any material changes in the information submitted in
the application or included in the permit. The Director may issue a
revised facilities permit or require that the applicant reapply for a
facilities permit.
4. The Director may deny an application, if denial is deemed to be in
the public interest, for the following reasons:
a. Delinquent fees, costs or expenses owed by the applicant;
b. Failure to provide required information;
c. The applicant being in violation of the provisions of this Article
or other City ordinances;
Section
405.3790
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3790
AO:760
d. For reasons of environmental, historic or cultural sensitivity as
defined by applicable Federal, State or local law;
e. For the applicant's refusal to comply with reasonable
conditions required by the Director; and
f. For any other reason to protect the public health, safety and
welfare, provided that such denial does not fall within the
exclusive authority of the Missouri Public Service Commission
and is imposed on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory
basis.
E. Permit Revocation And Ordinance Violations.
1. The Director may revoke a facilities permit without fee refund after
notice and an opportunity to cure, but only in the event of a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of the permit or this
Article. Prior to revocation the Director shall provide written notice
to the responsible person identifying any substantial breach and
allowing a reasonable period of time not longer than thirty (30)
days to cure the problem, which cure period may be immediate if
certain activities must be stopped to protect the public safety. The
cure period shall be extended by the Director on good cause shown.
A substantial breach includes, but is not limited to, the following:
a. A material violation of the facilities permit or this Article;
b. An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the
permit or this Article or the perpetration or attempt to
perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the City or its residents;
c. A material misrepresentation of fact in the permit application;
d. A failure to complete facilities installation by the date specified
in the permit, unless an extension is obtained or unless the
failure to complete the work is due to reasons beyond the
applicant's control; and
e. A failure to correct, upon reasonable notice and opportunity to
cure as specified by the Director, work that does not conform to
applicable national safety ordinances, industry construction
standards, or the City's pertinent and applicable ordinances,
including, but not limited to this Article, provided that City
standards are no more stringent than those of a national safety
ordinance.
2. Any breach of the terms and conditions of a facilities permit shall
also be deemed a violation of this Article, and in lieu of revocation
the Director may initiate prosecution of the applicant or the
facilities owner for such violation.
F. Appeals And Alternative Dispute Resolution.
Section
405.3790
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3790
AO:761
Section 405.3800. Facilities Regulations [Ord. No. 6010 §2(33.4),
1-22-2008]
1. Any person aggrieved by a final determination of the Director may
appeal in writing to the City Manager within five (5) business days
thereof. The appeal shall assert specific grounds for review, and the
City Manager shall render a decision on the appeal within fifteen
(15) business days of its receipt affirming, reversing or modifying
the determination of the Director. The City Manager may extend
this time period for the purpose of any investigation or hearing
deemed necessary. A decision affirming the Director's
determination shall be in writing and supported by findings
establishing the reasonableness of the decision. Any person
aggrieved by the final determination of the City Manager may file a
petition for review pursuant to Chapter 536, RSMo., as amended, in
the Circuit Court of the County of St. Louis. Such petition shall be
filed within thirty (30) days after the City Manager's final
determination.
2. On agreement of the parties and in addition to any other remedies,
any final decision of the City Manager may be submitted to
mediation or binding arbitration.
a. In the event of mediation, the City Manager and the applicant
shall agree to a mediator. The costs and fees of the mediator
shall be borne equally by the parties, and each party shall pay
its own costs, disbursements and attorney fees.
b. In the event of arbitration, the City Manager and the applicant
shall agree to a single arbitrator. The costs and fees of the
arbitrator shall be borne equally by the parties. If the parties
cannot agree on an arbitrator, the matter shall be resolved by a
three (3) person arbitration panel consisting of one (1)
arbitrator selected by the City Manager, one (1) arbitrator
selected by the applicant or facilities owner, and one (1) person
selected by the other two (2) arbitrators, in which case each
party shall bear the expense of its own arbitrator and shall
jointly and equally bear with the other party the expense of the
third (3rd) arbitrator and of the arbitration. Each party shall
also pay its own costs, disbursements and attorney fees.
A. The following general regulations apply to the placement and
appearance of facilities:
1. Facilities shall be placed underground, except when other similar
facilities exist above ground or when conditions are such that
underground construction is impossible, impractical or
economically unfeasible, as determined by the City, and when in the
City's judgment the above ground construction has minimal
aesthetic impact on the area where the construction is proposed.
Section
405.3790
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3800
AO:762
Facilities shall not be located so as to interfere, or be likely to
interfere, with any public facilities or use of public property.
2. Facilities shall be located in such a manner as to reduce or
eliminate their visibility. Non-residential zoning districts are
preferred to residential zoning districts. Preferred locations in
order of priority in both type districts are:
a. Thoroughfare landscape easements,
b. Rear yards, and
c. Street side yards on a corner lot behind the front yard setback.
Placements within side yards not bordered by a street
or within front yards are discouraged.
3. Facilities shall be a neutral color and shall not be bright, reflective
or metallic. Black, gray and tan shall be considered neutral colors,
as shall any color that blends with the surrounding dominant color
and helps to camouflage the facilities. Sightproof screening,
landscape or otherwise, may be required for facilities taller than
three (3) feet in height or covering in excess of four (4) square feet
in size. Such screening shall be sufficient to reasonably conceal the
facility. A landscape plan identifying the size and species of
landscaping materials shall be approved by the Director prior to
installation of any facility requiring landscape screening. The
person responsible for the facilities shall be responsible for the
installation, repair or replacement of screening materials.
Alternative concealment may be approved by the Director to the
extent it meets or exceeds the purposes of these requirements.
4. Facilities shall be constructed and maintained in a safe manner and
so as to not emit any unnecessary or intrusive noise and in
accordance with all applicable provisions of the Occupational
Safety and Health Act of 1970, the National Electrical Safety Code
and all other applicable Federal, State or local laws and
regulations.
5. No person shall place or cause to be placed any sort of signs,
advertisements or other extraneous markings on the facilities,
except such necessary minimal markings approved by the City as
necessary to identify the facilities for service, repair, maintenance
or emergency purposes or as may be otherwise required to be
affixed by applicable law or regulation.
6. If the application of this Subsection excludes locations for facilities
to the extent that the exclusion conflicts with the reasonable
requirements of the applicant, the Director shall cooperate in good
faith with the applicant to attempt to find suitable alternatives, but
the City shall not be required to incur any financial cost or to
acquire new locations for the applicant.
Section
405.3800
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3800
AO:763
Section 405.3810. through Section 405.3850. (Reserved)
B. Any person installing, repairing, maintaining, removing or operating
facilities, and the person on whose behalf the work is being done, shall
protect from damage any and all existing structures and property
belonging to the City and any other person. Any and all rights-of-way,
public property, or private property disturbed or damaged during the
work shall be repaired or replaced, and the responsible person shall
immediately notify the owner of the fact of the damaged property. Such
repair or replacement shall be completed within a reasonable time
specified by the Director and to the Director's satisfaction.
C. The applicant shall provide written notice to all property owners within
one hundred eighty-five (185) feet of the site at least forty-eight (48)
hours prior to any installation, replacement or expansion of its facilities.
Notice shall include a reasonably detailed description of work to be
done, the location of work, and the time and duration of the work.
D. At the City's direction, a person owning or controlling facilities shall
protect, support, disconnect, relocate or remove facilities, at its own
cost and expense, when necessary to accommodate the construction,
improvement, expansion, relocation or maintenance of streets or other
public works or to protect the ROW or the public health, safety or
welfare.
E. If a person installs facilities without having complied with the
requirements of this Article or abandons the facilities, said person shall
remove the facilities, and if the person fails to remove the facilities
within a reasonable period of time, the City may, to the extent permitted
by law, have the removal done at the person's expense.
F. Facilities shall be subject to all other applicable regulations and
standards as established as part of the City Code including, but not
limited to, building codes, zoning requirements and the Rights-of-Way
Usage Code in addition to the regulations provided herein.
Section
405.3800
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3810
AO:764
ARTICLE XXVIII
Renewable Energy Systems
Section 405.3855. Generally [Ord. No. 6191 §1, 2-28-2012]
Renewable energy systems are accessory uses which include solar energy
systems and wind energy systems that provide supplemental energy to
residential, non-residential, and mixed-use buildings.
Section 405.3860. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 6191 §1,
2-28-2012]
The purpose of this Section is to provide standards for the installation
and use of renewable energy systems as accessory uses within the City of
Clayton. This Section seeks to protect properties from incompatible uses
in the interest of property values, public health and the welfare of the
community while promoting the use of alternative energy sources, where
appropriate. This Section provides a process to facilitate the use of these
systems in a manner that minimizes adverse impacts and the potential for
nuisance.
Section 405.3870. Accessory Use [Ord. No. 6191 §1, 2-28-2012]
Section 405.3880. Requirements [Ord. No. 6191 §1, 2-28-2012]
A. Renewable energy systems shall be considered as an accessory use
subject to the provisions of this Section. Roof-mounted solar energy
systems are a permitted accessory use in all zoning districts. Groundmounted
solar energy systems are a conditional accessory use and shall
be considered an accessory structure in all zoning districts subject to
the approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Article VII of this
Chapter.
B. Building-mounted wind energy systems are permitted in all
commercial, service, commercial Planned Unit Development (PUD) or
commercial Special Development District (SDD) zoning districts subject
to the approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Article VII of this
Chapter; and those which use a freestanding tower shall be considered
an accessory structure and are permitted in the "HDC" High Density
Commercial or "S-1" Service zoning districts subject to the approval of
a conditional use permit pursuant to Article VII of this Chapter. Wind
energy systems are permitted conditionally in residential zoning
districts pursuant to the requirements set forth in this Section.
A. The requirements set forth in this Section shall govern the construction
and/or installation of all renewable energy systems:
1. Solar energy systems, general.
a. Solar energy collectors shall be located in the least visible
location from perspectives outside the property lines where
Section
405.3855
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3880
AO:765
panels would be reasonably, though not necessarily optimally,
functional.
b. Solar energy collectors shall be documented by the
manufacturer as being non-reflective pursuant to recognized
engineering standards showing reflectivity of less than thirty
percent (30%) or shall be placed such that concentrated
sunlight or glare shall not be directed onto nearby properties
or streets.
c. Solar energy equipment must comply with all setback and lot
coverage requirements for the zoning district in which the
property is located.
d. Building-integrated solar energy systems shall be allowed
regardless of visibility, provided the building-integrated system
meets all required setback, height and land use requirements
for the district in which the building is located and is approved
by the Architectural Review Board.
2. Solar energy systems, residential.
a. Ground-mounted solar energy systems.
(1) Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall only be
located in the side or rear yard of a property.
(2) Ground-mounted solar energy systems and supporting
structures may not exceed a total height of ten (10) feet as
measured from the average grade at the base of the
supporting structure to the highest edge of the system.
(3) Ground-mounted solar energy systems must be
substantially screened from public view (including
adjacent properties and public rights-of-way) by fencing,
walls, plantings, or other architectural feature or any
combination thereof; provided however, that the screening
shall not be required to be so dense, so tall, or so located
as to render the equipment essentially non-functional.
b. Building-mounted solar energy systems.
(1) Building-mounted solar energy collectors installed in
residential zoning districts shall be:
(a) Installed in the plane of the roof (flush mounted); or
(b) Made part of the roof design (capping or framing
compatible with the color of the roof or structure); or
(c) Building-integrated system. Mounting brackets shall
be permitted to be placed parallel on the slope of a
rear-facing roof if the applicant can demonstrate that
Section
405.3880
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3880
AO:766
the existing pitch of the roof would render the solar
energy equipment ineffective or incapable of
reasonable operation.
(2) When located on a sloped roof, solar energy collectors
shall be located on a rear- or side-facing roof, as viewed
from a fronting street. In cases of corner lots or lots with
more than one (1) street frontage, the side roof fronting a
street shall be considered a front-facing roof.
(3) Solar energy systems shall not project vertically above the
peak of a sloped roof to which it is attached.
(4) When located on a sloped roof, solar energy collectors
shall be positioned in a symmetrical fashion and centered
on the plane of the roof on which they are located.
(5) When located on a sloped roof, solar energy collectors
shall be set back at least two (2) feet from any outside
edge, ridge, or valley of the roof.
(6) Solar energy collectors installed on a flat roof must be
screened by the use of a parapet or other architectural
feature to screen the view from the street or from ground
level on adjoining properties.
(7) All exterior electrical or plumbing lines must be painted in
a color scheme that matches as closely as possible the
color of the structure and the materials adjacent to the
lines when visible from the street.
3. Solar energy systems, non-residential.
a. Ground-mounted solar energy systems.
(1) Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall only be
located in the side or rear yard of a property.
(2) Ground-mounted solar energy systems and supporting
structures may not in total exceed the accessory structure
height limitations for the zoning district in which the
property is located. In commercial districts with no such
requirement, a maximum height of twenty (20) feet is
hereby established. Height shall be measured from
average grade at the base of the supporting structure to
the highest edge of the system.
(3) Ground-mounted solar energy systems must be
substantially screened from public view (including
adjacent properties and public rights-of-way) by fencing,
walls, plantings or other architectural feature or any
combination thereof; provided however, that screening
Section
405.3880
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3880
AO:767
shall not be required to be so dense, so tall or so located
as to render the equipment essentially non-functional.
b. Building-mounted solar energy systems.
(1) Building-mounted solar energy systems installed in
commercial zoning districts shall be installed:
(a) In the plane of the roof (flush mounted); or
(b) Made part of the roof design (capping or framing
compatible with the color of the roof or structure); or
(c) A building integrated system. Mounting brackets shall
be permitted if the applicant can demonstrate that the
existing pitch of the roof would render the solar
energy equipment ineffective or incapable of
reasonable operation.
(2) When located on a sloped roof, solar energy collectors
shall be located on a rear- or side-facing roof, as viewed
from a fronting street. In cases of corner lots or lots with
more than one (1) street frontage, the side roof fronting a
street shall be considered a front-facing roof.
(3) Solar energy systems shall not project vertically above the
peak of a sloped roof to which it is attached.
(4) When located on a sloped roof, solar energy collectors
shall be set back at least two (2) feet from any outside
edge, ridge, or valley of the roof.
(5) Solar energy collectors installed on a flat roof may exceed
the height of the building up to five (5) feet, except for
buildings located in the High Density Commercial (HDC)
District or "S-1" Service District and measuring at least
seventy-five (75) feet tall or five (5) stories, whichever is
less, for which no height restriction above the roof is
required.
(6) Solar energy collectors installed on the roof-top deck of
parking facilities may exceed the height of the exterior
wall of the structure up to twenty (20) feet if a minimum
stepback of five (5) feet from the outside face of the
structure is provided.
(7) All exterior electrical or plumbing lines must be painted in
a color scheme that matches as closely as possible the
color of the structure and the materials adjacent to the
lines when visible from the street.
4. Wind energy system, general.
Section
405.3880
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3880
AO:768
a. Wind energy systems are permitted on any non-residentiallyzoned
property, except that building-integrated or roofmounted
wind energy systems are permitted for schools,
universities, parks and other institutional uses located within a
residential zoning district on a property containing at least five
(5) acres subject to the requirements of this Section.
b. Ground-mounted wind energy systems affixed to a monopole
tower are permitted only in the "HDC" High Density
Commercial or "S-1" Service zoning districts and shall be
subject to site plan review pursuant to Article VIII of this
Chapter.
c. Noise shall not exceed St. Louis County noise ordinance
standards as applicable to the building type. The applicant
shall provide noise rating information at time of application.
d. A wind energy system shall not be located in the front yard of
property in any zoning district or affixed to the side of a
structure facing the frontage.
e. No more than one (1) ground-mounted wind energy system
may be installed on any commercially-zoned property.
Building-integrated or roof-mounted wind energy systems shall
not be subject to these limitations.
f. Wind energy systems shall be painted a neutral color so as to
blend into the surroundings and shall not be bright, reflective
or metallic. Illumination of wind energy systems shall be
prohibited, except as may be required by any State or Federal
agency of competent jurisdiction. No commercial signage or
attention-getting device shall be permitted, except regulatory
signage required by any local, State or Federal agency of
competent jurisdiction.
5. Wind energy system, non-residential.
a. Height. Ground-mounted wind energy systems and their
supporting structures are limited to a combined maximum
height of one hundred (100) feet (tower-mounted). Roofmounted
wind energy systems shall not exceed a height of ten
(10) feet above the peak roof height, except as modified
through a Planned Unit Development or Special Development
District procedure.
b. Setbacks. Wind energy systems must meet the principal use
and accessory structure setback requirements of the district in
which they are located if mounted directly on a roof or other
elevated surface of a structure. If the wind energy system is
attached to a freestanding tower, the setback from all property
lines shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. The setback shall
Section
405.3880
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3880
AO:769
Section 405.3890. Procedure For Review [Ord. No. 6191 §1,
2-28-2012]
All applications for a renewable energy system shall require review and
approval by the Architectural Review Board. Ground-mounted solar energy
systems and wind energy systems shall require the issuance of a conditional
use permit pursuant to Article VII of this Chapter. Ground-mounted wind
energy systems shall be subject to site plan review pursuant to Article VIII
of this Chapter.
Section 405.3900. Building Permits Required [Ord. No. 6191 §1,
2-28-2012]
Unless otherwise exempted by the Building Official, a building permit
issued by the City of Clayton is required prior to the installation of any
renewable energy system. The owner of a renewable energy system shall
ensure that it is installed and maintained in compliance with applicable
building, fire and safety codes adopted by the City and any other State
or Federal agency of competent jurisdiction. All wiring associated with
a renewable energy system shall be underground or contained within a
raceway that complements the building materials of the principal structure.
Section 405.3910. Abandonment [Ord. No. 6191 §1, 2-28-2012]
Any renewable energy systems that are noticeably in disrepair for a period
exceeding six (6) months without repair or restoration procedures
substantially underway shall be removed from the property and the
structure and/or site restored.
Section 405.3920. Alternative Compliance [Ord. No. 6191 §1,
2-28-2012]
be measured from the furthest outward extension of all moving
parts.
A. In unusual circumstances arising from the unique location or character
of the proposed site and/or surrounding land uses or structures, if sitespecific
alternative standards would provide results that are equal to or
superior to those which would be provided by the standards in this
Section, the Plan Commission or Architectural Review Board, as
appropriate depending on the type of development and application then
pending, may approve an applicant's request for alternative standards
if in the body's judgment the purpose of these regulations will be
satisfied and the alternative standards will have no adverse impact on
any other property or unreasonably disturb the peaceful occupancy of
adjoining or nearby property.
1. Procedure. An application for alternative compliance standards
shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with the submittal
requirements as set forth by the City of Clayton. The proposed
alternative standards shall clearly identify and discuss the
Section
405.3880
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3920
AO:770
Section 405.3930. through Section 405-3950. (Reserved)
modifications and alternatives proposed and the ways in which the
plan will better accomplish the intent of these design standards
than would an approach which complies with these design
standards.
2. Review Criteria. To Approve An Alternative Approach, The Planning
Commission or Architectural Review Board Must Find That The
Proposed Alternative Approach Accomplishes The Intent of These
Standards Equally Well or Better Than Would An Approach Which
Complies With These Standards and The Alternative Standards Will
Have No Adverse Impact On Any Other Property or Unreasonably
Disturb The Peaceful Occupancy of Adjoining or Nearby Property.
Section
405.3920
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3930
AO:771

ARTICLE XXIX
Outdoor Dining
[Ord. No. 6352 §1, 1-13-2015]
Section 405.3960. Findings and Purpose
Section 405.3970. General Requirements
Section 405.3980. Location
A. The City finds that outdoor dining encourages a pedestrian-oriented
environment, helps to create a visually attractive streetscape, and
promotes overall commerce. The purpose of this Article is to permit
outdoor dining on public and private property in a manner that
advances the City's aesthetic, economic and community goals and
assures a safe and inviting pedestrian environment.
A. Outdoor dining is permitted yearlong on public and/or private property
as an accessory use to a restaurant that has indoor seating.
B. The hours for outdoor dining shall not be earlier or later than the
restaurant's hours of operation as specified in the governing conditional
use permit.
C. The location of all furniture, fixtures and facilities associated with
outdoor dining shall be such that a continuous pedestrian access route
(PAR) meeting at least the minimum requirements of the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA) and, when and if issued or revised from time
to time by the United States Access Board, Public Rights-of-Way
Accessibility Guidelines (PROWAG) shall be maintained at all times.
D. The permittee, at its own expense and cost, shall keep the outdoor
dining area in a neat and clean condition, free from nuisance and filth,
and provide for the prompt removal of snow, ice, trash and waste
therefrom.
A. If located on a public sidewalk or a private walkway used by the public,
an unobstructed pedestrian access route (PAR) must be maintained at
all times, in accordance with the following standards:
1. The PAR is recommended to be a minimum of five (5) feet wide and
in any event shall not be less than three (3) feet wide and seven (7)
feet tall. Tree grates and similar semi-open surfaces do not count
towards the required PAR width.
2. If/when more-restrictive Public Rights-of-Way Accessibility
Guidelines (PROWAG) are adopted or revised from time to time by
the United States Access Board, the more-restrictive PROWAG
requirements for PARs shall be applicable.
Section
405.3960
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.3980
AO:773
Section 405.3990. Furniture [Ord. No. 6482 § 1, 6-27-2017]
3. Outdoor dining permittees shall adapt and revise the arrangement
of their facilities from time to time as necessary to accommodate
the most recent PAR standards.
4. There shall be no "grandfathering" or non-conforming right to
continue previously permitted outdoor dining arrangements insofar
as minimum PAR standards are concerned, it being understood that
any permit is issued only on an annual basis as hereinafter
provided and is subject to mandatory modification to assure
compliance with required PAR standards as they evolve from time
to time.
5. Additional sidewalk clearance shall be required where pedestrian
traffic or other circumstances warrant.
B. If located on a public sidewalk, all outdoor dining furniture must
maintain the following separations from and access to fixtures in the
right-of-way:
1. Three (3) feet minimum separation from the edge of curb, street
trees, streetlights, fire hydrants, Fire Department connections,
mailboxes, benches, bicycle racks, and other similar fixtures at all
times, and from parking meters when they are in effect.
2. Five (5) feet minimum separation from the edge of driveways,
alleys, and accessibility ramps.
3. Outdoor dining shall not be located underneath a fire escape,
stairwell, or balcony and shall not block established public utility
points of access (i.e., manholes, handholes, traffic signal cabinets,
etc.).
C. The outdoor dining area may be located in front of an adjacent property
with the written permission of the owner of the adjacent property.
A. Only tables, chairs, umbrellas, approved heaters, and pedestrian
barriers shall be permitted in the public right-of-way.
B. Permitted materials for outdoor dining furniture (tables, chairs,
umbrellas, pedestrian barriers, trash receptacles, service stations, etc.)
are limited to iron (cast or wrought), steel (expanded or wire),
aluminum (cast or extruded), metal alloy, wood, or resin. White resin is
prohibited. Outdoor dining furniture must be maintained in a good state
of repair and cleanliness.
C. Outdoor dining may be separated from the right-of-way by a minimum
thirty-inch-tall pedestrian barrier (railing, fence or planters).
Pedestrian barriers must be sturdy and stable, and must have sufficient
weight so that they cannot tip or be blown over. Pedestrian barriers
Section
405.3980
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.3990
AO:774
Section 405.4000. Outdoor Dining Permit
shall not be anchored to the public sidewalk and shall be maintained so
as not to stain/discolor the sidewalk.
D. Advertising on umbrellas is permitted, provided the product being
advertised is sold by the restaurant. Umbrellas shall not contain logos.
E. Restaurants without outdoor table service must provide a sufficient
number of refuse containers readily accessible to patrons. Refuse
containers must be placed no more than 6 inches from the face of the
building.
F. Outdoor heaters must be reviewed and approved by the Fire
Department.
G. Outdoor service stations are prohibited on public property.
H. Outdoor dining furniture must be stored inside the building when not in
use.
I. Advertising devices shall not be attached to fixtures in the public rightof-
way, including but not limited to street trees, streetlights, sign poles,
traffic signals, and parking meters.
A. All restaurants having outdoor dining on private and/or public property
must apply for and receive an outdoor dining permit prior to starting
outdoor dining. The permit is subject to reapplication and renewal on
an annual basis.
B. Applications shall be filed along with the required fees with the
Department of Planning. Upon review for compliance with the
governing conditional use permit and these standards by the
Department of Planning, a permit shall be issued or denied by the
Director of the Department of Planning. The Director may defer ruling
and refer the application to the Architectural Review Board if the
Director believes it would be appropriate to do so. The Director's final
action to grant or deny an outdoor dining permit may be appealed to the
Architectural Review Board by an aggrieved party by filing a written
notice of appeal to the Board with the Department of Planning within
fifteen (15) days of the Director's decision. The Board shall review the
application independently as if the application was originally filed with
the Board.
C. If any part of outdoor dining is located on public property, the permittee
shall provide and maintain, at his/her sole cost, liability insurance
satisfying the requirements set out in Section 510.090 of this Code of
Ordinances, covering any injury or damage said to be occasioned by or
in any way arising from or associated with outdoor dining. The
insurance shall name the City of Clayton as an additional insured and
must be maintained in full force and effect so long as the permit is
outstanding.
Section
405.3990
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.4000
AO:775
Section 405.4010. through Section 405.4020. (Reserved)
D. Restaurants with outdoor dining permits shall be subject to periodic
inspections for compliance with the standards of this Article. Three or
more violations of this Article may result in a revocation, suspension
and/or non-renewal of an outdoor dining permit.
Section
405.4000
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.4010
AO:776
ARTICLE XXX
Trees and Landscaping Regulations
Section 405.4030. Purpose and Objectives. [Ord. No. 6430 §1,
6-14-2016]
Section 405.4040. Applicability. [Ord. No. 6430 §1, 6-14-2016]
A. The purpose of this Article is to ensure the preservation of existing
healthy trees and landscaping and to provide appropriate new
landscaping and trees on development sites. Landscape plantings and
trees are an important community asset as they provide environmental
benefits, enhance community character, and add to property values.
The objectives set forth in this Article include the following:
1. Preserve and enhance the longevity of landscape plantings and
trees in areas throughout the City;
2. Reduce soil erosion and stormwater runoff and protect water
quality;
3. Enhance the appearance and preserve the character of
surrounding properties;
4. Visually integrate developments into the existing landscape;
5. Improve the quality of plant and tree selection through the
implementation of landscape standards and specifications;
6. Maintain adequate tree canopy coverage citywide and promote a
multi-aged urban forest;
7. Provide standards for the protection, preservation and replacement
of trees;
8. Promote tree species diversity and the planting of Missouri native
trees and plant material; and,
9. Enhance, protect and promote the natural environment of the City
of Clayton to ensure public health, the safety and welfare and the
comfort and enjoyment of its citizens.
A. All Sections of this Article shall apply to any project located on private
property which is subject to Article VIII: Site Plan Review, Article IX:
Special Development District, or Article X: Planned Unit Development.
B. The following Sections of this Article shall apply to projects located on
private property which request a demolition permit for the purposes of
preparing a lot for a development project subject to Article VIII: Site
Plan Review, Article IX: Special Development District, or Article X:
Planned Unit Development. The Planning Director may modify the
applicability provisions if an applicant can demonstrate that existing
trees on site will not be impacted.
Section
405.4030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.4040
AO:777
Section 405.4050. Definitions. [Ord. No. 6430 §1, 6-14-2016]
For purposes of applying this Article, the following words, terms and
phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ARBORIST, CERTIFIED — An individual trained in the art and science of
planting, caring for and maintaining individual trees and certified by the
International Society of Arboriculture (ISA).
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk measured at six (6) inches above
the ground for trees up to four (4) inch caliper or twelve (12) inches
above the ground for trees four (4) inch caliper to twelve (12) inch caliper.
Typically used to describe the size of nursery stock or recently planted
trees. For trees with multiple stems, the caliper of each stem shall be
measured and the average of all measurements shall constitute the caliper
of the tree. (See definition of "Diameter at Breast Height (DBH)" for
measurement of larger trees over twelve (12) inch caliper).
CONDITION, EXISTING TREES —
1. Section 405.4050: Definitions.
2. Section 405.4060: Plan Review and Inspections.
3. Section 405.4080: Tree Protection Plan Requirements.
4. Section 405.4100: Tree Removal.
5. Section 405.4120: Tree Protection Measures.
C. The following Sections shall apply to pre-development tree removal on
private property for the purposes of preparing a lot for a development
project subject to Article VIII: Site Plan Review, Article IX: Special
Development District, or Article X: Planned Unit Development.
1. Section 405.4050: Definitions.
2. Section 405.4110: Tree Removal.
GOOD CONDITION — The tree shape and form is average to excellent.
The tree has a good main trunk. The branches may be crowded with
minor branch dieback. There are few or minor pests, good leaf color
and size, no obvious root or structural problems.
A.
FAIR CONDITION — The tree needs pruning of live or dead branches
due to habit, decline or lack of maintenance. The tree may have pest
problems or minor trunk damage, poor branch angle and multi-trunks.
There are no obvious structural or hazardous conditions.
B.
POOR CONDITION — The tree has many dead branches, splitting trunk
and hazardous branches with more than half of the crown dead. The
tree may be leaning, have structural problems and extensive damage
from insects or disease.
C.
Section
405.4040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.4050
AO:778
CONTRIBUTING TREE — Any tree measuring three (3) caliper inches to
nineteen (19) inches DBH that is in fair to good condition and is not an
invasive species as defined by the Missouri Department of Conservation.
(See definition of "Condition").
CONSTRUCTION DAMAGE — Injury to a tree caused as a result of
construction activities including but not limited to root damage caused by
trenching, pulling of roots, changes in soil grade (relocation, removal or
filling of soil), paving over roots or compaction of soil, and damage to tree
trunks or branches. (See definition of "Impacted Tree").
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE (CRZ) — A given distance from the trunk of a
tree that includes the soil area below ground that contains the tree's root
structure and the space above ground within the tree's canopy drip line
or beyond. The CRZ is protected for the viability and stability of a tree
to be retained on site in a healthy condition. (See definition of "Structural
Root Zone (SRZ)"). The Critical Root Zone radius equals one and twentyfive
hundredths (1.25) feet for every one (1) inch of tree diameter except in
circumstances where the observed CRZ is significantly larger or smaller, in
which case on-site conditions will take precedence.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The diameter of a tree trunk
at four and five tenths (4.5) feet above ground for trees over twelve (12)
caliper inches. For species of trees whose normal growth pattern is
characterized by multiple stems the diameter at breast height of each stem
shall be measured and the average of all measurements shall constitute the
diameter of the tree.
IMPACTED TREE — A tree and its critical root zone (CRZ) that is in or
adjacent to the development footprint and/or construction activities and
whose growing conditions are or will be directly or indirectly changed as
a result. (See definition of "Critical Root Zone (CRZ)" and "Tree Protection
Zone (TPZ)").
LANDMARK TREE — Any tree exceeding nineteen (19) inches DBH that is
in fair to good condition and is not an invasive species as defined by the
Missouri Department of Conservation. (See definition of "Condition").
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — An individual trained in design and
construction of sites and landscapes and licensed as a professional
landscape architect by the Missouri Division of Professional Registration.
LANDSCAPE PLAN — The graphic depiction and written specifications
indicating the planned arrangement of natural and constructed elements
on the land (plantings, ground and water forms, circulation, walkways,
irrigation, landscape lighting, etc.). All plants and trees are labeled on
the landscape plan and keyed to complete tree and plant lists. Required
elements of the Tree Protection Plan (TPP) can be included on the landscape
plan or submitted as a separate plan. (See definition of "Tree Protection
Plan.")
DEAD/DYING CONDITION — The tree has extensive branch dieback or
trunk decay, storm damaged branches, heavy pest problems, or already
dead and needing to be removed.
D.
Section
405.4050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.4050
AO:779
MAINTENANCE — Any measure considered vital in accordance with
standard horticultural practices to promote the general health of plant
material.
NATIVE TREE — Any tree species identified by Grow Native as a Missouri
native plant.
PLANT LIST — Tabulation of all proposed plants by group (trees, shrubs,
perennials, groundcovers and bulbs) and listed by common name, genus
and species, installed size, spacing, and root stock type (bare root, pot or
balled and burlapped).
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area, the air space above the area, the
area below and the area adjacent to any public street, highway, lane, path,
alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, parkway, waterway, public
easement or sidewalk in which the City, County or State now or hereafter
holds any property interest.
STREET TREES — Any tree located within a public right-of-way along a
street.
STRUCTURAL ROOT ZONE (SRZ) — The circular zone radiating from the
trunk of a tree that is required for the tree's stability in the ground. This
zone contains the woody root growth and soil cohesion that is necessary to
hold the tree upright but not the critical root zone (CRZ) required for the
tree's long-term health and viability. (See definition of "Critical Root Zone
(CRZ)" and "Tree Protection Zone (TPZ)"). The structural root zone will be
determined by the tree's caliper or DBH. For reference and site planning
purposes, the SRZ radius by tree size is indicated below:
Caliper or DBH
(inches)
SRZ Radius
(feet)
1 1
2-3 2
4-5 3
6-7 4
8-9 5
10-11 6
12-14 7
15-18 8
19-22 9
24-36 10
37-45 11
50-55 12
60-65 13
70+ 14
Section
405.4050
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.4050
AO:780
TREE — A woody deciduous or evergreen plant typically growing as a single
stem or multi-stem in an upright or weeping form that will attain a mature
height of at least fifteen (15) feet and at least three (3) caliper inches.
TREE CANOPY — The layer of leaves, branches and stems of a tree that
cover the ground when viewed from above.
TREE PROTECTION PLAN (TPP) — Drawings that graphically illustrate the
existing trees on the project site, adjacent to the site and in the right-ofway.
The TPP will include graphic depictions of the Tree Protection Zones
(TPZ)/tree protection fence, Critical Root Zone (CRZ) and Structural Root
Zones (SRZ), and specific measures to protect trees during construction
or other site disruptions. Required elements of the TPP can be included
on the landscape plan or submitted as a separate plan. (See definition of
"Landscape Plan.")
TREE PROTECTION ZONE (TPZ) — The zone around the tree that will
be maintained as natural and original conditions over the course of the
development. This zone must be no less than a five-foot radius from the
trunk per caliper inch or DBH. The TPZ is to be illustrated on the landscape
plan or the Tree Protection Plan (TPP).
Section 405.4060. Plan Review and Inspections. [Ord. No. 6430 §1,
6-14-2016]
Section 405.4070. Landscape Plan Requirements. [Ord. No. 6430
§1, 6-14-2016]
A. The City may engage professional expertise to assist in the review of
landscape/tree preservation plans and the property owner shall be
responsible for any costs incurred to engage professional consultation.
The following inspections shall be performed by the City's contracted
landscape architect:
1. After submission of the landscape/tree preservation plan, to ensure
the landscape plan provides sufficient information and detail to
clearly demonstrate that all applicable requirements and standards
of this Article are or will be fully satisfied.
2. Prior to site work, demolition or the commencement of
construction to ensure tree protection measures meet the
requirements and standards of this Article.
3. Ongoing inspections during or after construction as deemed
necessary by the City to ensure compliance with this Article.
A. Projects subject to the requirements of this Article shall submit a
landscape plan for review concurrent with the submittal of other
required applications and plans. The drawings shall conform to the
specifications of this Article and any other requirements or conditions
imposed by the City or the City's contracted landscape architect.
Section
405.4050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.4070
AO:781
Section 405.4080. Tree Protection Plan Requirements. [Ord. No.
6430 §1, 6-14-2016]
B. The landscape plan is subject to approval by the Plan Commission or
Board of Aldermen, as appropriate depending on which body is
authorized to render a final decision for the type of development
approval for which the landscape plan is submitted.
C. Amendments or modifications to approved landscape plans are subject
to the applicable requirements of Article VIII: Site Plan Review, Article
IX: Special Development District, or Article X: Planned Unit
Development, as appropriate depending on the type of development.
D. The following items shall be provided on the landscape plan. Additional
information may be requested by the City or the City's contracted
landscape architect.
1. Project title listing project name, owner name and name of firm or
individual preparing the plan.
2. North arrow, graphic and written scale.
3. Scaled base plan using current information from the site
development plan depicting existing and proposed grades, location
of all improvements, existing and proposed utilities and sewers.
4. Graphic legend depicting existing vegetation and proposed
conditions.
5. Graphic depiction and listing of all proposed trees, shrubs and
plants for the project area.
6. A Tree Protection Plan (TPP) pursuant to Section 405.4080: Tree
Protection Plan Requirements. Required elements of the TPP can
be included on the landscape plan or submitted as a separate plan.
7. A completed digital tree chart shall be submitted with the
landscape plan based on a digital spreadsheet provided by the City
which automatically calculates the required and proposed tree
canopy lot coverage or caliper replacement based on inputs
provided by the project's landscape architect or arborist. The tree
chart shall list the size, species and condition of all existing and
proposed trees. Each tree schedule from the digital tree chart shall
also be shown on the landscape plan.
8. Certification (signed and sealed) by a Missouri licensed landscape
architect or ISA certified arborist.
A. Projects subject to the requirements of this Article shall submit a Tree
Protection Plan (TPP) for review concurrent with the submittal of other
required applications and plans. The drawings shall conform to the
specifications of this Article and any other requirements or conditions
imposed by the City or the City's contracted landscape architect.
Section
405.4070
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.4080
AO:782
Section 405.4090. Design Standards. [Ord. No. 6430 §1, 6-14-2016]
B. The TPP is subject to approval by the Director of Planning and
Development Services or his/her designee, Plan Commission or Board
of Aldermen, as appropriate depending on which officer or body is
authorized to render a final decision for the type of development
approval for which the TPP is submitted.
C. Amendments or modifications to an approved TPP are subject to the
applicable requirements of Article VIII: Site Plan Review, Article IX:
Special Development District, Article X: Planned Unit Development, or
Demolition Permits, as appropriate depending on the type of
development.
D. The following items shall be provided on the TPP. Additional information
may be requested by the City or the City's contracted landscape
architect:
1. Project title listing project name, owner name and name of firm or
individual preparing the plan.
2. North arrow, graphic and written scale.
3. Scaled base plan using current information from the site
development plan depicting existing and proposed grades, location
of all improvements, existing and proposed utilities and sewers.
4. Graphic depiction of all existing trees to remain and to be removed
including location, types and size.
5. Graphic depiction of the accurate drip line canopy showing the
extent of the Critical Root Zones (CRZ) and Structural Root Zones
(SRZ).
6. Graphic depiction of the proposed Tree Protection Zones (TPZ) and
location of tree protection fencing.
7. Tree protection and planting notes and details applicable to the
project, pursuant to Section 405.4120: Tree Protection Measures.
8. A completed digital tree chart shall be submitted with the TPP
based on a digital spreadsheet provided by the City which
automatically calculates the required and proposed tree canopy lot
coverage or caliper replacement based on inputs provided by the
project's landscape architect or arborist. The tree chart shall list
the size, species and condition of all existing and proposed trees.
Each tree schedule from the digital tree chart shall also be shown
on the TPP.
9. Certification (signed and sealed) by a Missouri licensed landscape
architect or ISA certified arborist.
A. The following standards shall apply to new trees and landscaping:
Section
405.4080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.4090
AO:783
1. Tree standards.
a. Trees preserved or planted to meet the requirements of this
Article shall be preserved onsite in perpetuity and if lost over
time, shall be replaced in conformance with Section 405.4110:
Tree Preservation and Replacement during the first planting
season after the loss occurs.
b. New trees must be selected from Section 405.4140: Approved
Tree List. Appropriate substitutions may be approved at the
professional discretion of the City's contracted landscape
architect. All trees shall meet American Standard for Nursery
Stock, ANSI Z60/1-2004.
c. New trees shall be planted in locations appropriate to the
species' growth habit and horticultural requirements, and shall
be located in such a manner to minimize damage to trees or
structures on the project site and on adjacent properties.
d. No more than thirty-three percent (33%) of the total number of
new trees shall be from the same genus, and at least thirtythree
percent (33%) of the total number of new trees shall be
Missouri native trees.
(1) The Plan Commission or Board of Aldermen, as
appropriate depending on which body is authorized to
render a final decision for the type of development
approval under consideration, shall have the authority to
approve a reduction or waiver of these requirements in
instances where an applicant can demonstrate that there
are unique circumstances affecting the site and that a
good faith effort has been made to meet the requirements.
e. New trees should not be located within any utility easement.
Trees which can reach a mature height over twenty-five (25)
feet should not be planted within twenty (20) feet of overhead
utility lines. Any plantings installed in or near utility easements
must be so installed and maintained as to not pose a
reasonably foreseeable risk of interference with or interruption
of utility service.
f. The removal and/or planting of street trees, including species
selection, are at the sole discretion of the Director of Public
Works. If approved by the Director, the removal of street trees
regardless of their size or condition requires prior approval,
replacement and/or payment into the City's Forestry Fund in
the amount specified by the City.
2. Landscaping standards.
a. The landscape design shall address functional requirements
and enhance the context of the neighborhood and the
Section
405.4090
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.4090
AO:784
Section 405.4100. Tree Removal. [Ord. No. 6430 §1, 6-14-2016]
Section 405.4110. Tree Preservation and Replacement. [Ord. No.
6430 §1, 6-14-2016]
architecture of the building or site through the provision of
appropriate foundation and perimeter landscaping.
b. Plants shall comply with recommendations and requirements
of ANSI Z60/1-2004, American Standard for Nursery Stock. All
plants shall be healthy and vigorous stock suitable for the
climate zone within the City of Clayton, grown in a recognized
nursery in accordance with good horticultural practice and
free of disease, insects, eggs, larvae and defects such as knots,
sunscald, injuries, abrasions, or disfigurement.
c. The use of appropriate Missouri native plants identified by the
Missouri Department of Conservation is strongly encouraged.
d. HVAC and other mechanical units are to be screened from
public view and adjacent properties with evergreen plantings
or a fence. The plantings shall be of a type, size and height so
that at least fifty percent (50%) of screening opacity is reached
within one (1) year of planting and one hundred percent
(100%) of screening opacity is reached within two (2) years of
planting.
A. The removal of any hazardous, dead or diseased trees on private
property, as determined by a letter from a qualified arborist, and as
necessary to remedy an immediate threat to person or property is not
subject to the requirements of this Article.
B. Trees removed within one (1) year preceding the submittal of a
development application to the City must be documented by a dated
conditions report prepared by a certified arborist or forester, dated
conditions photographs and a copy of the work order with date of
service. Any tree removed within one (1) year prior to the submittal of a
development application that is not documented and approved by the
City will be considered in good condition by default.
C. With the exception of any property for which a landscape/tree
preservation plan has been approved in accordance with this Article
and a building permit has been issued, it shall be prohibited for any
person to remove nineteen (19) or more caliper inches of contributing
trees or any landmark tree located outside a lot's buildable area (as
defined in Article III: Definitions) for the purposes of preparing a lot for
a development project subject to Article VIII: Site Plan Review, Article
IX: Special Development District, or Article X: Planned Unit
Development.
Section
405.4090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.4110
AO:785
A. Residential developments located in residential zoning districts shall
provide for the preservation and/or planting of trees on the lot to the
extent that the minimum tree canopy lot coverage complies with the
values in the following table.
Zoning District Minimum Tree Canopy Lot
Coverage1
R-1 62%
R-2 46%
R-3 31%
R-4 26%
R-5 20%
R-6 24%
R-7 5%
Planned Unit Development
(PUD)
Refer to base zoning district prior to
rezoning to PUD.
1 2013 St. Louis County Urban Tree Canopy Assessment, Forest
Releaf
1. The tree canopy lot coverage shall be the sum total of the tree
canopy area for each individual tree to be preserved or proposed,
calculated in accordance with this Article and shown as a
percentage of the total lot area.
2. The tree canopy area for preserved trees located on site shall be
the sum total of the surface area of the Critical Root Zone (CRZ) for
each contributing or landmark tree. The CRZ radius equals one and
twenty-five hundredths (1.25) feet for every one (1) inch of tree
diameter except in circumstances where the observed CRZ is
significantly larger or smaller, in which case the on-site conditions
will take precedence.
3. To encourage the preservation of existing trees, landmark trees
preserved on site shall be calculated at one hundred twenty-five
percent (125%) of their calculated tree canopy area.
4. Lots that do not meet the minimum tree canopy lot coverage
requirements through the preservation of existing trees shall plant
new trees on site selected from Section 405.4140: Approved Tree
List, and in accordance with the following requirements:
a. The tree canopy cover for new trees shall be the sum total of
the tree canopy cover potential for each individual tree, as
listed in the following table and Section 405.4140: Approved
Tree List.
Section
405.4110
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.4110
AO:786
Tree Group
Tree canopy cover
potential
Deciduous-Large 750 square feet
Deciduous-Medium 500 square feet
Deciduous-Columnar/Small/
Ornamental
250 square feet
Evergreen-Large 500 square feet
Evergreen-Medium 250 square feet
b. At least one (1) new large or medium deciduous tree shall be
planted on site.
(1) The Plan Commission shall have the authority to waive this
requirement in instances where an applicant can
demonstrate that there are unique circumstances on-site
which would make compliance with this requirement
impractical such as smaller than average lot size, the
presence of utility easements, or the presence of existing
large or medium deciduous trees.
B. Non-residential developments located in residential zoning districts are
subject to the following requirements:
1. Contributing and landmark trees that are proposed to be removed
or that were removed within one (1) year preceding the submittal
of an application to the City shall be replaced on site with new trees
selected from Section 405.4140: Approved Tree List so that the
combined caliper inches of new trees is at least equal to the
number of inches being removed.
C. Modifications.
1. The Plan Commission shall have the authority to approve a
reduction of up to twenty percent (20%) of the minimum required
tree canopy square footage and the total caliper-inch replacement
requirements in instances where an applicant can demonstrate that
the following criteria have been met:
a. There are mitigating circumstances affecting the site which do
not generally apply to sites developed for the same use and in
the same district.
b. A good faith effort has been made to retain and/or replant as
many trees as feasibly possible.
c. Additional understory plantings and groundcover is provided
to mitigate the tree deficiency.
2. The City shall be compensated for any tree canopy lot coverage or
caliper-inch replacement deficiency through payment to the City's
Section
405.4110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.4110
AO:787
Section 405.4120. Tree Protection Measures. [Ord. No. 6430 §1,
6-14-2016]
Forestry Fund based on the following rates, to be made prior to the
removal of trees on site and the issuance of a building permit:
a. Residential Developments: $0.60 per square foot of canopy
cover deficiency.
b. Non-Residential Developments: $250 per inch deficiency.
A. Any construction, demolition, site work or similar activity which may
injure existing trees shall require the installation of tree protection
measures as set forth in this Section or as determined by the City's
contracted landscape architect. The following tree protection measures
are to be followed and must be noted on the landscape/tree
preservation plan:
1. All tree protection measures shall be installed prior to the
commencement of demolition, excavation, construction or site
work.
2. A pre-construction meeting shall be held on-site to review the
installed protection measures with operators, construction
supervisors, contractor's representatives, and the City
representative (if required by the City).
3. Development impact shall not enter the Structural Root Zone (SRZ)
of trees to be preserved. If this is not avoidable, the tree may have
to be removed and tree replacement requirements will be applied.
4. Tree protection fencing shall be installed along the edge of the Tree
Protection Zone (TPZ) of each preserved and impacted tree within
the disturbed areas. Trees that share a TPZ can be fenced together
in a cluster. Tree protection fencing shall be installed along
hardscape edges that will remain intact. No more than twenty-five
percent (25%) of the TPZ can be impacted.
5. The contractor on the site shall stake clearing limits in order to
facilitate location for trenching and fencing installation for tree
protection.
6. The sequence of tree preservation measures, if required, shall be
as follows: tree protection fencing installation to establish the TPZ;
root pruning trenching; tree pruning and chemical treatment; and
aeration systems.
7. Tree protection fencing shall be maintained and repaired by the
contractor for the duration of construction and approved by the
City. No alteration shall occur without prior approval by the City.
8. Access to the TPZ by construction equipment, materials, or
individuals that may cause harm to protected trees will not be
Section
405.4110
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.4120
AO:788
Section 405.4130. Certificate of Occupancy. [Ord. No. 6430 §1,
6-14-2016]
allowed. Only limited access, if necessary, shall be permitted with
the prior approval of the City.
9. All designated aeration zones shall be protected with temporary
fencing until final grading.
10. Removal of trees, shrubs, or undergrowth from protected areas
shall only be performed when necessary and must be done with
hand tools only.
11. Utility locations should be planned for areas outside of the Tree
Protection Zone (TPZ). Utilities that must cross through the TPZ of
trees due to site constraints and utility design requirements must
be approved by the City and will be directional bored. No open
trenches are allowed. Tree protection fencing must be maintained
on both sides of the boring alignment.
12. Attachment of any construction signs, fencing, etc. to any tree to be
saved is strictly prohibited. Construction fence footings or support
locations are required to be shown on the plan. Position post
locations to span the TPZ. Upon completion of construction, all
temporary barriers, fencing, and debris shall be removed from the
site by the contractor.
A. No certificate of occupancy or final approval shall be issued until the
planting of trees and landscaping as shown on the approved landscape
plan is complete and the final inspection has been approved and
accepted by the City.
1. Should the Director of Planning and Development Services or his/
her designee determine that the season is inappropriate for
planting, a maximum six-month temporary certificate of occupancy
may be issued upon written request by the property owner, noting
the reasons for the delay in planting and payment of a performance
bond named for the benefit of the City of Clayton, in an amount
equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the value of the new trees,
landscape material and installation.
2. The bond or portion thereof will only be released if upon inspection
by the City, the trees and/or landscaping as shown on the approved
landscape plan have been installed and are observed to be in a
healthy growing condition.
3. If after the six-month extension period all trees and landscaping are
not installed or the applicant has not notified the City that
installation is complete, the entire performance bond or portion
thereof shall be forfeited and the performance bond shall be
deposited into the City's Forestry Fund.
Section
405.4120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.4140
AO:789
Section 405.4140. Approved Tree List. [Ord. No. 6430 §1,
6-14-2016]
The following list includes approved trees to be used in conformance with
the requirements of this Article. Appropriate substitutions may be approved
at the professional discretion of the City's contracted landscape architect.
All trees will meet American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60/1-2004.
Tree Group: Deciduous-Large
Characteristics: Trees 50 feet or more in height at maturity with a
spread approximately equal to or more than their height and trees over 75
feet in height at maturity with a spread less than their height. Size is
measured by DBH.
Minimum size at planting: 3 caliper inch
Tree Canopy Coverage: 750 square feet
Botanical Name Common Name
Acer platanoides Norway Maple
Acer rubrum Red Maple (Missouri native)
Acer saccharum Sugar Maple (Missouri native)
Aesculus spp Horsechestnut
Alnus spp Alder
Carya spp Hickory
Carya ovata Shagbark Hickory (Missouri native)
Castanea spp Chestnut
Celtis spp Hackberry (Missouri native)
Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis Thornless Honey locust
Gymnocladus dioica Kentucky Coffeetree (Missouri
native)
Liriodendron tulipifera Tulip poplar (Missouri native)
Magnolia acuminata Cucumbertree Magnolia
Metasequoia glyptostroboides Dawn Redwood
Platanus x acerfolia London Planetree
Platanus occidentalis American Sycamore (Missouri
native)
Quercus alba White Oak (Missouri native)
Quercus bicolor Swamp White Oak (Missouri native)
Quercus borealis Red Oak (Missouri native)
Quercus coccinea Scarlet Oak
Quercus imbricaria Shingle Oak (Missouri native)
Quercus macrocarpa Bur Oak (Missouri native)
Section
405.4140
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.4140
AO:790
Botanical Name Common Name
Quercus muehlenbergii Chinkapin Oak (Missouri native)
Quercus palustris Pin Oak (Missouri native)
Quercus phellos Willow Oak (Missouri native)
Quercus robur English Oak
Quercus shumardii Shumard Oak (Missouri native)
Quercus stellata Post Oak (Missouri native)
Quercus velutina Black Oak
Taxodium distichum Bald Cypress (Missouri native)
Ulmus 'Homestead' Homestead Elm
Ulmus parvifolia Chinese Elm
Zelkova serrata Japanese Zelkova
Tree Group: Deciduous-Medium
Characteristics: Trees 25 to 50 feet in height at maturity with a spread
equal to or greater than their height and trees over 50 feet in height at
maturity with a spread less than their height. Size is measured by caliper
or DBH.
Minimum size at planting: 3 caliper inch
Tree Canopy coverage: 500 square feet
Botanical Name Common Name
Acer campestre Hedge Maple
Acer griseum Paperbark maple
Acer truncatum Shantung Maple
Aesculus x carnea Red Horsechestnut
Betula nigra River Birch (Missouri native)
Carpinus betulus European Hornbeam
Carpinus caroliniana American Hornbeam (Missouri
native)
Cercidiphyllum japonicum Katsuratree
Cladrastis kentukea (C. lutea) American Yellowwood (Missouri
native)
Fagus spp Beech
Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo (male only)
Magnolia macrophylla Bigleaf Magnolia
Nyssa sylvatica Black Gum (Missouri native)
Ostrya virginiana American Hophornbeam
Sophora japonica Japanese Pagoda Tree
Section
405.4140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.4140
AO:791
Botanical Name Common Name
Tilia americana American Linden (Missouri native)
Tree Group: Deciduous-Small and Columnar
Characteristics: Trees 50 feet or less in height at maturity with a spread
less than one-half of their height. Size is measured by caliper or DBH.
Minimum size at planting: 2.5 caliper inch
Tree Canopy Coverage: 250 square feet
Botanical Name Common Name
Acer buergerianum Trident Maple
Acer japonicum Full Moon Maple
Acer palmatum Japanese Maple
Acer pensylvanicum Striped Maple
Asminia triloba Pawpaw (Missouri native)
Carpinus betulus 'Fastigiata' Fastigiate European Hornbeam
Carpinus betulus 'Columaris' Columnar European Hornbeam
Carpinus caroliniana American Hornbeam/Ironwood
Sassafras albidum Common Sassafras (Missouri native)
Tree Group: Deciduous-Ornamental
Characteristics: Trees that can be maintained at a height of 20 feet or
less and have a spread approximately equal to their height. Size is
measured by caliper or height. Multi-stem tree size is determined by
measuring caliper of the largest stem and adding half the size of each of
the other stems together for the total.
Minimum size at planting: 2 caliper inch (single stem), 1.5 caliper inch
(multi-stem), 8 feet tall (clump).
Tree Canopy Coverage: 250 square feet
Botanical Name Common Name
Amelanchier spp Serviceberry (Missouri native)
Cercis canadensis Eastern redbud (Missouri native)
Cercis spp Redbud
Chionanthus virginicus White Fringetree (Missouri native)
Cornus florida Flowering dogwood (Missouri
native)
Cornus spp Dogwood
Cotinus obovatus American Smoketree (Missouri
native)
Section
405.4140
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.4140
AO:792
Botanical Name Common Name
Crataegus crusgalli var. inermis Thornless Hawthorn (Missouri
native)
Crataegus mollis Downy Hawthorn (Missouri native)
Crataegus phaenopyrum Washington Hawthorn (Missouri
native)
Crataegus spp (species with thorns) English Hawthorn (only in nonpedestrian
areas due to thorns)
Crataegus viridis Green Hawthorn (Missouri native)
Magnolia stellate Star magnolia
Magnolia virginiana Sweet Bay Magnolia
Magnolia x loebneri Loebner Magnolia
Magnolia x soulangiana Saucer magnolia
Malus spp Flowering Crabapples
Prunus spp Flowering Cherry
Syringa reticulata Japanese Tree Lilac
Viburnum prunifolium Blackhaw Viburnum (Missouri
Native)
Tree Group: Evergreen - Large
Characteristics: Trees with needled boughs or evergreen/semievergreen
leaves and foliage, with a mature height of 40 to 80 feet
depending upon genus and species. Size is measured by caliper or height.
Minimum size at planting: 8 feet tall
Tree Canopy Coverage: 500 square feet
Botanical Name Common Name
Abies spp Fir
Chamaecyparis spp Falsecypress
Larix spp Larch
Metasequoia glyptostroboides Dawn Redwood
Picea spp Spruce
Pseudotsuga menziesii Douglas Fir
Tree Group: Evergreen — Medium
Characteristics: Trees with needled boughs or evergreen/semievergreen
leaves and foliage, with a mature height of 30 to 60 feet
depending upon genus and species. Size is measured by caliper or height.
Minimum size at planting: 8 feet tall
Tree Canopy Coverage: 250 square feet
Section
405.4140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.4140
AO:793
Botanical Name Common Name
Ilex opaca American Holly (Missouri native)
Juniperus virginiana Eastern Red Cedar (Missouri
Native)
Juniperus virginiana 'Canaertii' Canaerti Juniper
Magnolia grandiflora Southern Magnolia
Thuja occidentalis American Arborvitae
Thuja orientalis Oriental Arborvitae
Tsuga Canadensis Canada hemlock
Tree Group: Evergreen — Small
Characteristics: Trees with needled boughs or evergreen/semievergreen
leaves and foliage, with a mature height of 15 to 25 feet
depending upon genus and species. Size is measured by caliper or height.
Minimum size at planting: 6 feet tall
Tree Canopy Coverage: not contributing — no canopy coverage
Botanical Name Common Name
Arborvitae spp Arborvitae
Ilex x attenuate 'Fosters #2' Foster's Holly
Juniperus chinensis varieties Upright Juniper
Juniperus scopulorum varieties Upright Juniper
Section
405.4140
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
405.4140
AO:794
Chapter 410
OVERLAY AND URBAN DESIGN ZONING DISTRICTS
Section
405.4140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.4140
AO:795

ARTICLE I
Overlay Zoning Districts
Section 410.005. Introduction [Ord. No. 5814 §1(1a.1), 4-27-2004]
These regulations shall be known, cited and referred to as the Clayton
Overlay Districts or Overlay Zoning Regulations. All references to the
various provisions of these regulations shall be considered as references
to correspondingly numbered Articles and Sections of Chapter 410 of the
City of Clayton Municipal Code. These Overlay Zoning Regulations apply to
the areas within the boundaries of the various overlay districts as depicted
by the Overlay Zoning Districts Boundary Map found in these regulations.
By providing flexible zoning provisions such as those included for site plan
review and planned unit developments, it is the intent of the City of Clayton
to foster an environment of cooperation between the City and property
owners, which encourages quality development and redevelopment
consistent with the character of the community.
Section 410.010. Zoning Districts [Ord. No. 5814 §1(1a.2),
4-27-2004]
A. The zoning districts established for the areas within each designated
overlay district consist of base zoning districts and overlay zoning
districts.
1. Base zoning districts. Base zoning districts are the zoning districts
that reflect the three (3) basic geographically-based land use
categories in the City:
a. Residential areas;
b. Commercial areas; and
c. Service areas
with appropriate regulations and development
standards to govern the uses in these districts. The
land use regulations for each base zoning district
specify land uses permitted by right, with specific
limitations or performance criteria, or allowed after
obtaining a conditional use permit.
2. Overlay zoning districts. Overlay zoning districts consist of
regulations that address specific subjects that require special
treatment in light of geographical characteristics and/or zoning
policies. Where an overlay district has been designated within the
City of Clayton, the regulations of that overlay district shall
supersede or supplement, as applicable, the regulations of the base
zoning district(s) and the provisions of Chapter 405 of the
Municipal Code.
Section
410.005
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.015
AO:797
Section 410.015. Overlay Zoning Districts Boundary Map [Ord. No.
5814 §1(1a.3), 4-27-2004]
The City of Clayton overlay zoning districts are defined by the Overlay
Zoning Districts Boundary Maps found in these regulations and by the
official Zoning Map, as hereby amended. The maps are intended to define
the limits of the overlay districts.
Section 410.020. Districts [Ord. No. 5814 §1(1a.4), 4-27-2004; Ord.
No. 6277 §1, 6-25-2013]
Section 410.025. Amendment of Zoning Map [Ord. No. 5814
§1(1a.5), 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5906 §2, 10-25-2005]
The boundaries of these overlay zoning districts as defined respectively in
this Chapter 410 are hereby established and shall, to the extent of these
boundaries, supersede and amend the official Zoning Map established by
Chapter 405 of the Municipal Code. The official Zoning Map as hereby
amended and all the notations, references and other information shown
A. The following zoning districts are established within the Central
Business District in order to implement the recommendations of the
Master Plan:
1. Base zoning districts.
a. "HDC" High Density Commercial.
b. "R-3" and "R-4" (One- and Two-Family and Low Density
Multiple-Family).
c. "R-7" High Density Multiple-Family.
d. "C-1" (Neighborhood Commercial) and "C-2" (General
Commercial).
e. PUD Planned Unit Development.
f. SDD Special Development District.
g. "S-1" Service District.
2. Overlay zoning districts.
a. CBD Core Overlay District.
b. Downtown Overlay District.
c. Clayton Plaza Overlay District.
d. Central Station Transit Oriented Development (TOD).
e. Forsyth Station Transit Oriented Development (TOD).
f. Maryland Gateway Overlay District.
Section
410.015
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.025
AO:798
thereon are a part of this Chapter 410 and shall have the same force and
effect as if the official Zoning Map and all the notations, references and
other information shown thereon were all fully set forth or described herein.
Section 410.030. Definitions [Ord. No. 5814 §1(1a.6), 4-27-2004]
The definitions set forth in Chapter 405, Article III of the Municipal Code
are hereby incorporated by reference in these regulations, except as
otherwise defined in this Chapter. Additional terms and words as used in
these regulations are defined in Article II of these regulations.
Section 410.035. Maximum Height and Floor Area [Ord. No. 5814
§1(1a.7), 4-27-2004]
The maximum heights and the maximum floor areas for uses allowed within
the overlay zoning districts are established in the base zoning districts,
except as modified by overlay districts made applicable to certain areas
within the overlay zoning districts.
Section 410.040. Minimum Yard Requirements [Ord. No. 5814
§1(1a.8), 4-27-2004]
The minimum yard requirements for uses allowed within the overlay zoning
districts are set forth in Chapter 405 of the Municipal Code, except as
modified by the standards of the districts established by these regulations.
Section 410.045. Off-Street Parking and Loading [Ord. No. 5814
§1(1a.9), 4-27-2004]
The off-street parking and loading requirements for uses allowed within the
overlay zoning districts are set forth in Chapter 405 of the Municipal Code,
except as modified by the standards of the districts established by these
regulations.
Section 410.050. Sign Regulations [Ord. No. 5814 §1(1a.10),
4-27-2004]
The sign regulations for uses allowed within the Central Business District
are set forth in Section 425.040 of the Municipal Code.
Section 410.055. Architectural Review [Ord. No. 5814 §1(1a.11),
4-27-2004]
The architectural review standards and procedures set forth in Chapter 405
of the Municipal Code apply to all development proposals within the overlay
zoning districts established by these regulations.
Section
410.025
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.060
AO:799
Section 410.060. Site Plan Review [Ord. No. 5814 §1(1a.12),
4-27-2004]
Allowable uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit in the
overlay zoning districts have the potential for interfering with the use and
enjoyment of adjacent property and uses if located and laid out on zoning
lots without careful planning. Site plan review is under the authority of the
Plan Commission and addresses the site details of a development. It does
not address off-site conditions except to the extent that an on-site condition
(e.g., ingress/egress) affects off-site conditions (e.g., traffic). The site plan
review regulations and procedures set forth in Chapter 405 of the Municipal
Code apply to all development proposals within the overlay zoning districts
established by these regulations.
Section 410.065. Planned Unit Development [Ord. No. 5814
§1(1a.13), 4-27-2004]
A. Planned unit developments are a distinct zoning district. Commercial
planned unit developments are intended to encourage the efficient use
of land and resources, promoting greater efficiency in public and utility
services encouraging innovation in the planning and building of all
types of development. The planned unit development district is
intended to provide a means for the redevelopment of an area in a
unified land development that will improve the quality of the subject
properties and have a beneficial effect on adjacent residential areas.
B. Rezoning to a commercial planned unit development district is allowed
in all overlay districts.
Section
410.060
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.065
AO:800
ARTICLE II
Definitions
Section 410.070. Definitions [Ord. No. 5814 Art. 2a, 4-27-2004]
A. General. Unless a contrary intention clearly applies, the following
words and phrases shall have the meanings given in the following
definitions for the purposes of these regulations. Words and phrases
which are not defined shall be given their usual meaning except where
the context clearly indicates a different or specific meaning
B. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular
number shall include the plural and the plural of the singular; the word
"premises" shall include the word "structure" and "building"; the word
"shall" is mandatory and not directory; the words "used" or "occupied"
include the words "intended", "designed" or "arranged to be occupied";
the word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel"; and the word
"person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
company or corporation as well as an individual. Any word not herein
defined shall be as defined in any recognized standard English
dictionary.
C. Definitions.
ACCENT MATERIAL — Material covering twenty-five percent (25%) or
less of the wall elevation.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure detached from a principal
building and customarily used with, and clearly incidental and
subordinate to, the principal building or use. Ordinarily located on the
same lot site or with such principal building.
ARTICULATION — The manner in which various features are arranged
on a building elevation. 111
AVERAGE SETBACK/ESTABLISHED BUILDING LINE — Where fifty
percent (50%) or more of the frontage along any block face is improved
with buildings that have observed a front yard line with a variation in
depth of not more than ten (10) feet, the average of such front yard
lines shall be the minimum setback observed in such block face in lieu
of the required front yard setback. For example, when calculating the
average setback for a block face with ten (10) homes, where nine (9)
homes have a twenty-five (25) foot to thirty-five (35) foot setback and
the remaining home has a forty (40) foot setback, the home with the
forty (40) foot setback is not included in the calculation for the average.
BALCONY — An exterior floor projecting from the wall of an upper
story, enclosed by a railing or balustrade, with an entrance from the
building and supported by the structure without additional independent
supports.
111. Editor's Note: The former definition of Attached Single-Family Developments, which
immediately followed, was repealed 11-28-2017 by Ord. No. 6509.
Section
410.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.070
AO:801
BERM — An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen
undesirable views, decrease noise or control or manage surface
drainage.
BLOCK — The properties abutting both sides of a street and lying
between the two (2) nearest intersecting or intercepting streets or
nearest intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way,
unsubdivided land, watercourse or City boundary.
BLOCK FACE — The properties abutting one (1) side of a street and
lying between the two (2) nearest intersecting or intercepting streets
or nearest intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way,
unsubdivided land, watercourse or City boundary.
BUFFER — Open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms or any
combination thereof used to physically separate or screen one (1) use
or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights,
buildings, other nuisances or provide privacy.
BUILDING FORM — The shape and structure of a building as
distinguished from its substance or material.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance from the average
existing grade of the site to the highest point of the coping of a flat
roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the mean height level
between eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. In the case
of new construction and building additions, building height shall be
measured from average existing grade prior to the commencement of
any construction.
BUILDING MASS — The three-dimensional bulk of a building height,
width and depth.
BUILDING SCALE — The size and proportion of a building relative to
surrounding buildings and environs, adjacent streets and pedestrians.
CHARACTER — Those attributes, qualities and features that make up
and distinguish a development project and give such project a sense of
purpose, function, definition and uniqueness.
CONSUMER SERVICE OFFICES — Including collection services;
commodity or security broker/dealer; consumer protection; currency
exchange; employment agencies; employment services; financial
institutions including banks, savings and loans, credit unions (with
or without drive-in facilities); financial counseling; income tax
preparation; insurance agencies/brokers/service offices; loan
companies; labor unions; real estate offices; travel agencies.
DORMER — A window set upright in a sloping roof. Also used to refer
to the roofed projection in which this window is set.
DRY CLEANING FACILITIES — With or without attendant services and/
or a pickup station for outside dry cleaning service.
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof which is designed and
used exclusively for residential purposes.
Section
410.070
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.070
AO:802
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY — A building or portion thereof designed
and used for occupancy by three (3) or more families each in a separate
dwelling unit. A tri-plex, four-plex, town house (connected by a vertical
party or common wall) or apartment.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A building designed and used for
occupancy by one (1) family.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A type of multi-family dwelling in which
individual dwelling units are attached by one (1) or more vertical party
walls, with the habitable spaces of different dwelling units arranged
on a side-by-side rather than a stacked configuration. Each individual
dwelling unit has its own front and rear access to the outside.[Ord. No.
6509, 11-28-2017]
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing two (2) separate
dwelling units, either stacked or side-by-side (Duplex), connected by
a common wall, designed and used for occupancy by two (2)
families.[Ord. No. 6509, 11-28-2017]
ELEVATION — The external faces of a building; also a mechanically
accurate "head-on" drawing of any one (1) face (or elevation) of a
building or object, without any allowance for the effect of the laws of
perspective.
FACADE — Any side of a building that faces a street or other open
space. The "front facade" is the front or principal face of a building.
FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE — Including fast-food restaurants,
family restaurants and eating and drinking establishments.
GABLE ROOF — A pitched roof with ridge and vertical ends.
GARAGE —
GENERAL RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Including generally the sale
of items such as antiques; appliance repair; art; art supplies; bakeries
and confectioneries (non-manufacturing); bicycles; books; camera and
An accessory building or portion of a main building primarily used
for storage of motor vehicles. A garage is distinguished from a
carport in that a garage is enclosed on three (3) sides, versus a
carport which is open.
a.
For the purposes of determining impervious coverage, a front entry
garage is deemed to include any garage having its vehicular access
in the front third of the structure. A side entry garage is deemed
to include any garage having its vehicular access in the middle
third of the structure. A rear entry garage is deemed to include any
garage having its vehicular access in the rear third of the structure.
In situations where more than one (1) garage or garage entrances
(vehicular access) are proposed, the impervious coverage
limitation shall be determined on the basis of whichever garage
vehicular access orientation allows the least amount of impervious
coverage.
b.
Section
410.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.070
AO:803
photographic supplies; china and glassware; clothing; coin and stamp;
crafts/needlework; direct selling; discount/mass merchandising;
drapery/curtain/window coverings; fabrics and sewing accessories;
film/video rentals; floor coverings; furniture; furriers and fur apparel;
garden supply, greenhouses, nurseries, truck gardens and orchards;
gifts/novelty/souvenirs jewelry; hardware; household appliances; key
and lock; laundry/dry cleaning (pickup station only); leather/luggage/
suitcases; lighting and electrical supplies; linens/sheets/towels; lumber,
building supplies and sales display and show rooms for any building
product (including millwork, cabinets, plumbing, glass and mirror,
fencing, swimming pools/spas/hot tubs, etc.); mail order; merchandise
vending; musical instruments; optical shops; newspapers and
magazines; retail florist; paint and wall coverings; pet shops; pharmacy/
drug; printing/copy; photographic studios; pool and patio furniture;
records/audio/stereo/TV; school and office supplies; secondhand and
resale; shoes; shoe repair; small electrical appliance; specialty;
stationery; tailoring and dressmaking; tobacco; tool and appliance
rentals; toys; upholstery and/or drapery services; wholesale florists.
GOVERNMENTAL — Including Federal, State, County, township and
municipal buildings of all types and facilities used by public or quasipublic
agencies that serve or assist the public or provide an accepted
public purpose.
GUIDELINES — Advisory regulations. Guidelines are indicated by use
of the terms "may" and "should".
HIP ROOF — A roof with sloped ends instead of vertical ends.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — That area within a lot that is covered by
impervious materials.
IMPERVIOUS MATERIAL — A surface that has been compacted or
covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to
infiltration by water. It includes, but is not limited to, surfaces such
as compacted sand, limerock or clay, asphalt concrete, driveways,
retaining walls, stairwells, stairways, walkways, decks and patios at
grade level, pools and other water features and other similar
structures. For the purposes of calculating impervious coverage, pools
shall only count at fifty percent (50%) of the actual pool size.
INFILL — Development on a vacant or substantially vacant tract of land
surrounded by existing development.
MAXIMUM EXTENT FEASIBLE — No feasible and prudent alternative
exists and all possible efforts to comply with the regulation or minimize
potential harm or adverse impacts have been undertaken. Economic
considerations shall not be the overriding factor in determining
"maximum extent feasible".
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — Under the circumstances,
reasonable efforts have been undertaken to comply with the regulation
or requirement, that the cost of additional compliance measures clearly
outweigh the potential benefits to the public or would unreasonably
Section
410.070
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.070
AO:804
burden the proposed project and reasonable steps have been
undertaken to minimize any potential harm or adverse impacts
resulting from the non-compliance.
MULLION — The large vertical division of a window opening. In
grouped windows, it is the member that separates the sash of each unit.
An upright strip between the panes of glass of a tall window.
MUNTIN — The small members that divide the glass in a window
frame. A vertical dividing bar in a divided window, a strip separating
panes of glass in a sash.
ORIENT — To bring in relation to or adjust to the surroundings,
situation or environment; to place with the most important parts (e.g.,
the primary building entrance and the designated "front" of a building)
facing in certain directions; or to set or arrange in a determinate
position, as in "to orient a building".
OVERLAY ZONE — A district in which additional requirements act to
supersede or supplement, as applicable, the regulations of the base
zoning district.
PORCH — Any gallery, veranda, terrace, piazza, portico or similar
projection from the main wall of a building (other than a carport)
covered by a roof and having no side enclosures with the exception of
screens or handrails not more than thirty-six (36) inches in height.
PRIMARY MATERIAL — Material covering seventy-five percent (75%)
or more of the wall elevation.
PUBLIC PARKING (AS USED IN TRIGGERING PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS) — Parking provided in excess of what is
required. Additionally, in order to qualify as public parking, this excess
parking must be readily accessible to the general public. The amount of
excess parking spaces provided in order to be deemed public parking
must be substantially greater than the parking spaces required for the
use(s) as required by the Plan Commission.
REDEVELOPMENT — Development on a tract of land with existing
structures where all or most of the existing structures would be razed
and a new structure or structures built.
SETBACK — The required minimum horizontal distance between the
building line and the related front, side and rear property lines.
STANDARDS — Mandatory regulations. Standards are indicated by use
of the terms "shall" and "must".
STEEP SLOPES — Any portion of a development site where the natural
grade of the land has a slope of thirty percent (30%) or greater. 112
112. Editor's Note: The former definition of Town Home Dwelling, which immediately followed,
was repealed 11-28-2017 by Ord. No. 6509. See now the definition of Dwelling, Townhouse.
Section
410.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.070
AO:805
TRANSOM — A horizontal cross bar in a window, over a door or
between the door and window above it. Also refers to a window above
a door or other window built and often hinged to a transom.
TREE LAWN — The landscaped area between the street and the
sidewalk.
Section
410.070
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.070
AO:806
ARTICLE III
CBD Core Overlay Zoning District
Section 410.075. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §3a.1,
4-27-2004]
Section 410.080. Location of Overlay Zone [Ord. No. 5814 §3a.2,
4-27-2004]
The Central Business District Core Overlay District applies to selected
blocks in the High Density Commercial District which have been targeted to
remain a pedestrian friendly retail center. The CBD Core Overlay includes
those lots bounded by Maryland Avenue on the north, Bemiston Avenue on
the east, Forsyth Boulevard on the south and Meramec Avenue on the west
and those parcels on the south side of Forsyth between Central and the alley
just west of Hanley.
A. The Central Business District Core Overlay District (hereinafter known
in this Article as the CBD Core Overlay District) applies to selected
blocks in the High Density Commercial District which have been
targeted to remain pedestrian friendly retail centers. The area
encompassed in the CBD Overlay District is the historic and current
heart of commercial and service activities in the City of Clayton. The
main reason for the continued vitality and integrity of the area is that
the buildings in this area are "pedestrian friendly" structures and
human in scale. The CBD Core Overlay District will preserve the
ambience of this section of the Central Business District
B. The purpose of these regulations, and the context within which they
should be construed and applied, is to foster appropriate use of existing
structures and enable compatible redevelopment where reuse is not
feasible, through application of the following goals:
1. Promote structures that have sidewalk frontage suitable for
smaller retail and service activities;
2. Stimulate designs that minimize scale and mass as perceived from
the sidewalk;
3. Avoid regimentation and visual uniformity along the sidewalk
frontage;
4. Encourage harmonious architecture which preserves the essential
character of the district via variations in entrance size, setback,
height, etc.; creation of varied sidewalk windows and display areas
through the use of facade materials and design, which lend both
visual and textural distinction.
5. Design buildings to encourage pedestrian activity by use of ground
level retail shops and store fronts.
Section
410.075
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.080
AO:807
Section 410.085. Significance of Designation [Ord. No. 5814 §3a.3,
4-27-2004]
The regulations of this overlay district shall supersede or supplement, as
applicable, the regulations of the base zoning district. Where conflict results
between the regulations of the overlay district and the provisions of the
base zoning district, the provisions of the overlay district shall control.
Section 410.090. Uses Permitted [Ord. No. 5814 §3a.4, 4-27-2004]
The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in the
Table of Permitted Uses found in the base zoning district. If a "P" (permitted
by right) or a "C" (permitted by conditional use permit) is not indicated
for a use in the base zoning district or a use is not included in the base
zoning district, it is prohibited. All ground floor uses must be retail in
nature, but may include personal care services, dry cleaning facilities, food
and beverage service uses, consumer service offices (limited to financial
institutions including banks, savings and loans and credit unions, real estate
offices and travel agencies) or governmental offices within the CBD Core
Overlay District.
Section 410.095. Planned Unit Development [Ord. No. 5814 §3a.5,
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6025 §1, 8-12-2008]
A. A development proposal shall be eligible for consideration under the
planned unit development option per the provisions of Chapter 405
when the development incorporates two (2) of the following five (5)
categories of use:
1. Office use;
2. Retail use;
3. Residential use;
4. Public parking (as defined in these regulations);
5. Hotel use
Section
410.080
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.095
AO:808
Section 410.100. Rezoning Amendment [Ord. No. 5814 §3a.6,
4-27-2004]
The "PUD" application process includes a request for rezoning pursuant to
the provisions of Chapter 405. Rezoning must be completed concurrently
with the approval process for the development plan.
Section 410.105. Maximum Building Height [Ord. No. 5814 §3a.7,
4-27-2004]
Section 410.110. Maximum Floor Area [Ord. No. 5814 §3a.8,
4-27-2004]
The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) is 1.5. The maximum floor areas may
be modified subject to the provisions and requirements of the planned unit
development process outlined in Chapter 405.
Section 410.115. Setback/Stepback Requirements [Ord. No. 5814
§3a.9, 4-27-2004]
and exceeds the maximum FAR requirements of the CBD Core
Overlay District.
NOTE: For the purposes of this Article, hotels containing a
public restaurant will be considered eligible for a planned unit
development.
B. Limitation. No change, alteration, modification or waiver authorized by
a "PUD" shall authorize a change in the uses permitted in any district or
a modification with respect to any zoning district standard made
specifically applicable to planned unit developments, unless such
district regulations expressly authorize such a change, alteration,
modification or waiver.
A. The maximum allowable building height is four (4) stories, not to
exceed forty-five (45) feet. The maximum building height may be
modified subject to the provisions and requirements of the planned unit
development process outlined in Chapter 405.
B. For buildings permitted to exceed the maximum height through the
planned unit development process, a fifteen (15) foot stepback (upper
story building setback) shall be provided beginning at the third (3rd)
story level or thirty (30) feet above grade, whichever is less.
C. However, the Plan Commission shall have the authority to require a
different stepback(s) for buildings dependent upon building height, lot
size and other relevant factors. Stepbacks shall be proportional to the
amount of building height. The upper story stepback shall be provided
along all building elevations with street frontage, excluding alleys.
A. The following are setback/stepback requirements in the CBD Core
Overlay Zoning district:
Section
410.095
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.115
AO:809
1. Front yard. There is no minimum front yard setback requirement in
the CBD Core Overlay District. The following modifications are
permitted/required under the following conditions:
a. For buildings in excess of two and one-half (2½) stories but not
exceeding four (4) stories in height, an additional ten (10) foot
stepback (upper story building setback) shall be provided
beginning at the third (3rd) story level or thirty (30) feet above
grade, whichever is less. The upper story stepback shall be
provided along all building elevations with street frontage,
excluding alleys. Except as provided for in Section 410.105
above.
b. Restaurants may offer customer seating and food service only
as authorized by the City Plan Commission and upon receipt or
renewal of the annual outdoor dining permit.
2. Rear yard. The required setback in Core Overlay District is a
minimum of fifteen (15) feet. Modifications to the required rear
yard setback are permitted/required under the following
conditions:
a. Where a corner lot exists and thereby two (2) front yards, the
property line opposite to the front yard line with the greater
street frontage shall be considered the side yard and the
property line opposite to the front yard line with the lesser
street frontage shall be considered the rear yard.
b. For buildings in excess of two and one-half (2½) stories but not
exceeding four (4) stories in height, an additional ten (10) foot
stepback (upper story building setback) shall be provided
beginning at the third (3rd) story level or thirty (30) feet above
grade, whichever is less. The upper story stepback shall be
provided along all building elevations with street frontage,
excluding alleys. Except as provided for in Section 410.105
above.
c. An accessory building not exceeding twenty (20) feet in height
may occupy up to thirty percent (30%) of the area of a required
rear yard but no accessory building shall be closer than ten
(10) feet to the main building nor closer than five (5) feet to any
rear property line.
Section
410.115
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.115
AO:810
Section 410.120. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
[Ord. No. 5814 §3a.10, 4-27-2004]
Every principal commercial structure must provide off-street parking in
accordance with Chapter 405.
Section 410.125. Site Plan Review and Design Guidelines [Ord. No.
5814 §3a.11, 4-27-2004]
d. Outside stairways, tower balconies or fire escapes may project
no more than four (4) feet beyond the face of the wall.
e. Roof eaves may project no more than three (3) feet beyond the
face of the wall.
f. Windowsills, bay windows, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project no more than two (2) feet beyond the face of the
wall.
3. Side yard setbacks.
a. There are no minimum or maximum side yard setback
provisions in this district except where a lot abuts a dwelling
district, a side yard of at least five (5) feet shall be provided.
b. For buildings in excess of two and one-half (2½) stories but not
exceeding four (4) stories in height, an additional ten (10) foot
stepback (upper story building setback) shall be provided
beginning at the third (3rd) story level or thirty (30) feet above
grade, whichever is less. The upper story stepback shall be
provided along all building elevations with street frontage,
excluding alleys. Except as provided for in Section 410.105
above.
A. Site Plan Review. Site plan review, pursuant to the procedures and
standards outlined in Chapter 405, is required for any development or
redevelopment proposal over ten thousand (10,000) square feet in
gross floor area.
B. Site Plan Review Design Guidelines.
1. The following guidelines shall be applied by the City's Plan
Commission/Architectural Review Board for development
proposals located in the CBD Core Overlay Zoning District:
a. Footprint geometry should be square and true with the
roadway to the extent possible. Odd shapes and building
orientation which compete with the total urban setting should
be avoided.
b. Parking should be located within the City block interior.
Section
410.115
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.125
AO:811
Section 410.130. Architectural Review Board Guidelines [Ord. No.
5814 §3a.12, 4-27-2004]
c. Surface parking should not abut any sidewalk or street.
d. For properties within the CBD Core Overlay District, all ground
floor uses must be retail in nature but may include personal
care services, dry cleaning facilities, food and beverage service
uses, consumer service offices (limited to financial institutions
including banks, savings and loans and credit unions, real
estate offices and travel agencies) or governmental offices.
2. In applying these guidelines, the Plan Commission shall have the
discretion to consider alternatives and modifications if their strict
application will result in unusual practical difficulties or particular
hardship or if the Plan Commission determines that such
alternatives or modifications to these guidelines will service the
best interests of the City.
A. The guidelines of the Architectural Review Board are as follows:
1. Party wall development should be encouraged to ensure a
continuous building facade.
2. Building skylines should provide interest through introduction of
compatible shapes and roof forms. Long uninterrupted cornices
should be avoided.
3. Facade relief should be incorporated into all building elevations.
Long uninterrupted elevations should be avoided.
4. Window openings should be incorporated into all building
elevations. Blank walls, long horizontal openings, odd shapes and
glass walls should be avoided.
5. Street level (ground floor) elevation facing the street should be
storefront architecture with large show windows interrupted at
regular intervals with building piers and generous entrances. Blank
walls, long uninterrupted show windows, odd shaped and small
show windows should be avoided.
6. Parking structures abutting the street should have ground level
retail, personal care services, dry cleaning facilities, food and
beverage service uses, consumer service offices (limited to
financial institutions including banks, savings and loans and credit
unions, real estate offices and travel agencies) or governmental
offices facing the sidewalk. The upper story should be of design,
material and color compatible with the urban setting.
B. In applying these guidelines, the Architectural Review Board shall have
the discretion to consider alternatives and modifications if their strict
application will result in unusual practical difficulties or particular
Section
410.125
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.130
AO:812
hardship or if the Architectural Review Board determines that such
alternatives or modifications to these guidelines will service the best
interests of the City.
Section
410.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.130
AO:813

ARTICLE IV
Downtown Overlay Zoning District
Section 410.135. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §4a.1,
4-27-2004]
Section 410.140. Location of Overlay Zone [Ord. No. 5814 §4a.2,
4-27-2004]
The DT Overlay Zoning District includes those parcels bounded by Meramec
Avenue on the east and by Maryland Avenue on the north and by Forsyth
Boulevard on the south and by Brentwood Boulevard on the west.
A. The Downtown Overlay Zoning District (hereinafter known in this
Article as the DT Overlay District) applies to selected blocks in the High
Density Commercial District which have been targeted to remain retail
centers. The area encompassed in the Downtown Overlay Zoning
District is adjacent to the heart of commercial and service activities in
the City of Clayton. Similar to the CBD Core Overlay Zoning District,
the Downtown Overlay Zoning District is intended to maintain a
"pedestrian friendly" setting, but allows for additional height with
stepback provisions. In order to maintain this area as "pedestrian
friendly", structures must be human in scale. Building mass, density
and frontage variations should create a visually attractive and inviting
streetscape within the urban context.
B. The purpose of these regulations is to foster appropriate use of existing
structures and enable compatible redevelopment where reuse is not
feasible, which serves the following goals:
1. Promote structures that have sidewalk frontage suitable for
smaller retail and service activities;
2. Stimulate designs that minimize scale and mass as perceived from
the sidewalk;
3. Avoid regimentation and visual uniformity along the sidewalk
frontage;
4. Encourage harmonious architecture, which preserves the essential
character of the district by variations in entrance size, setback,
height and the use of creative and varied sidewalk window and
display; and
5. Design buildings which use facade materials that are distinctive.
Section
410.135
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.140
AO:815
Section 410.145. Significance of Designation [Ord. No. 5814 §4a.3,
4-27-2004]
The regulations of the overlay district shall supersede or supplement, as
applicable, the regulations of the base zoning district. Where conflict results
between the regulations of the overlay districts and the provisions of the
base zoning district, the provisions of the overlay districts shall control.
Section 410.150. Uses Permitted [Ord. No. 5814 §4a.4, 4-27-2004]
The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in the
Table of Permitted Uses found in the base zoning district. If a "P" (permitted
by right) or a "C" (permitted by conditional use permit) is not indicated
for a use in the base zoning district or a use is not included in the base
zoning district, it is prohibited. All ground floor uses must be retail in
nature but may include, personal care services, dry cleaning facilities, food
and beverage service uses, consumer service offices (limited to financial
institutions including banks, savings and loans and credit unions, real estate
offices and travel agencies) or governmental offices within the Downtown
Overlay District.
Section 410.155. Planned Unit Development [Ord. No. 5814 §4a.5,
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6025 §1, 8-12-2008]
A. A development proposal shall be eligible for consideration under the
planned unit development option per the provisions of Chapter 405
when the development incorporates two (2) of the following five (5)
categories of use:
1. Office use;
2. Retail use;
3. Residential use;
4. Public parking (as defined in these regulations);
5. Hotel use
Section
410.140
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.155
AO:816
Section 410.160. Rezoning Amendment [Ord. No. 5814 §4a.6,
4-27-2004]
The "PUD" application process includes a request for rezoning pursuant to
the provisions of Chapter 405. Rezoning must be completed concurrently
with the approval process for the development plan.
Section 410.165. Maximum Building Height [Ord. No. 5814 §4a.7,
4-27-2004]
Section 410.170. Maximum Floor Area [Ord. No. 5814 §4a.8,
4-27-2004]
The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) is 3.0. The maximum floor areas may
be modified subject to the provisions and requirements of the planned unit
development process outlined in Chapter 405.
Section 410.175. Setback/Stepback Requirements [Ord. No. 5814
§4a.9, 4-27-2004]
and exceeds the maximum height or maximum FAR
requirements of the Downtown Overlay District.
NOTE: For the purposes of this Article, hotels containing a
public restaurant will be considered eligible for a planned unit
development.
B. Limitation. No change, alteration, modification or waiver authorized by
a "PUD" shall authorize a change in the uses permitted in any district or
a modification with respect to any zoning district standard made
specifically applicable to planned unit developments, unless such
district regulations expressly authorize such a change, alteration,
modification or waiver.
A. The maximum building height in the DT Overlay District is seven (7)
stories, not to exceed ninety (90) feet. The maximum building height
may be modified subject to the provisions and requirements of the
planned unit development process outlined in Chapter 405.
B. For buildings permitted to exceed the maximum height through the
planned unit development process, a fifteen (15) foot stepback (upper
story building setback) shall be provided beginning at the third (3rd)
story level or thirty (30) feet above grade, whichever is less. However,
the Plan Commission shall have the authority to require a different
stepback(s) for buildings dependent upon building height, lot size and
other relevant factors. Stepbacks shall be proportional to the amount of
building height. The upper story stepback shall be provided along all
building elevations with street frontage, excluding alleys.
A. The following are setback/stepback requirements in the Downtown
Overlay Zoning District:
Section
410.155
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.175
AO:817
1. Front yard. There is no minimum front yard setback requirement in
the Downtown Overlay District. The following modifications are
permitted/required under the following conditions:
a. For buildings in excess of two and one-half (2½) stories but not
exceeding seven (7) stories in height, an additional ten (10)
foot stepback (upper story building setback) shall be provided
beginning at the third (3rd) story level or thirty (30) feet above
grade, whichever is less. The upper story stepback shall be
provided along all building elevations with street frontage,
excluding alleys.
b. Restaurants may offer customer seating and food service only
as authorized by the City Plan Commission and upon receipt or
renewal of the annual outdoor dining permit.
2. Rear yard. The required setback in Downtown Overlay Districts is a
minimum of fifteen (15) feet. Modifications to the required rear
yard setback are permitted/required under the following
conditions:
a. Where a corner lot exists and thereby two (2) front yards, the
property line opposite to the front yard line with the greater
street frontage shall be considered the side yard and the
property line opposite to the front yard line with the lesser
street frontage shall be considered the rear yard.
b. For buildings in excess of two and one-half (2½) stories but not
exceeding seven (7) stories in height, an additional ten (10)
foot stepback (upper story building setback) shall be provided
beginning at the third (3rd) story level or thirty (30) feet above
grade, whichever is less. The upper story stepback shall be
provided along all building elevations with street frontage,
excluding alleys.
c. An accessory building not exceeding twenty (20) feet in height
may occupy up to thirty percent (30%) of the area of a required
rear yard but no accessory building shall be closer than ten
(10) feet to the main building nor closer than five (5) feet to any
rear property line.
Section
410.175
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.175
AO:818
Section 410.180. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
[Ord. No. 5814 §4a.10, 4-27-2004]
Every principal commercial structure must provide off-street parking in
accordance with Chapter 405.
Section 410.185. Site Plan Review and Design Guidelines [Ord. No.
5814 §4a.11, 4-27-2004]
d. Outside stairways, tower balconies or fire escapes may project
no more than four (4) feet beyond the face of the wall.
e. Roof eaves may project no more than three (3) feet beyond the
face of the wall.
f. Window sills, bay windows, belt courses and similar
architectural features, as well as rain leaders and chimneys,
may project no more than two (2) feet beyond the face of the
wall.
3. Side yard setbacks.
a. There are no minimum or maximum side yard setbacks
provisions in this district except where a lot abuts a dwelling
district, a side yard of at least five (5) feet shall be provided.
b. For buildings in excess of two and one-half (2½) stories but not
exceeding seven (7) stories in height, an additional ten (10)
foot stepback (upper story building setback) shall be provided
beginning at the third (3rd) story level or thirty (30) feet above
grade, whichever is less. The upper story stepback shall be
provided along all building elevations with street frontage,
excluding alleys.
A. Site Plan Review. Site plan review, pursuant to the procedures and
standards outlined in Chapter 405, is required for any development or
redevelopment proposal over ten thousand (10,000) square feet in
gross floor area.
B. Site Plan Review Design Guidelines.
1. The following guidelines shall be applied by the City's Plan
Commission/Architectural Review Board for development
proposals located in the Downtown Overlay Zoning District:
a. Footprint geometry should be square and true with the
roadway to the extent possible. Odd shapes and building
orientation which competes with the total urban setting should
be avoided.
b. Parking should be located within the City block interior.
c. Surface parking should not abut any sidewalk.
Section
410.175
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.185
AO:819
Section 410.190. Architectural Review Board Guidelines [Ord. No.
5814 §4a.12, 4-27-2004]
d. All ground floor uses must be retail in nature but may include,
personal care services, dry cleaning facilities, food and
beverage service uses, consumer service offices (limited to
financial institutions including banks, savings and loans and
credit unions, real estate offices and travel agencies) or
governmental offices within the Downtown Overlay District.
e. Additionally, such buildings and uses must incorporate street
front windows creating interest at the street level.
Furthermore, buildings should be sited in a manner so as to
achieve a pedestrian friendly appearance and feel.
2. In applying these guidelines, the Plan Commission shall have the
discretion to consider alternatives and modifications if their strict
application will result in unusual practical difficulties or particular
hardship or if the Plan Commission determines that such
alternatives or modifications to these guidelines will service the
best interests of the City.
A. The guidelines of the Architectural Review Board are as follows:
1. Party wall development should be encouraged to ensure a
continuous building facade.
2. Building skylines should provide interest through introduction of
compatible shapes and roof forms. Long uninterrupted cornices
should be avoided.
3. Facade relief should be incorporated into all building elevations.
Long uninterrupted elevations should be avoided.
4. Window openings should be incorporated into all building
elevations. Blank walls, long horizontal openings, odd shapes and
glass walls should be avoided.
5. Street level (ground floor) elevation facing the street should be
storefront architecture with large show windows interrupted at
regular intervals with building piers and generous entrances. Blank
walls, long uninterrupted show windows, odd shaped and small
show windows should be avoided.
6. Parking structures abutting the street should have ground level
retail, commercial service and food establishments facing the
sidewalk. The upper story should be of design material and color
compatible with the urban setting.
Section
410.185
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.190
AO:820
ARTICLE V
Clayton Plaza Overlay Zoning District
Section 410.195. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §5a.1,
4-27-2004]
The Clayton Plaza Overlay Zoning District (hereinafter referred to in this
Article as the CP-Overlay District) is intended to apply to redevelopment
areas where there is an opportunity for mixed-use development under the
separate standards of a planned unit development. This process allows for
the planning and review of a development project on one (1) parcel or one
(1) or more contiguous parcels, as a single entity or "unit" using flexible
standards to enable creative land use layout and site design consistent with
the basic standards of public health, safety and welfare and the economic
development and urban design objectives of the City for the High Density
Commercial District. Planned unit development is required for all
developments located within the Clayton Plaza Overlay Zoning District.
Section 410.200. Location of Overlay Zone [Ord. No. 5814 §5a.2,
4-27-2004]
The CP-Overlay Zoning District applies to the area bounded by the City's
corporate boundary on the east, Hanley Road on the west, Forsyth
Boulevard on the north and by Forest Park Parkway on the south. The
Clayton Plaza Overlay Zoning District is an overlay to the base zoning
district contained within its boundaries and is indicated by the designation
Clayton Plaza Overlay Zoning District on the District Map.
Section 410.205. Significance of Designation [Ord. No. 5814 §5a.3,
4-27-2004]
The regulations of this overlay district shall supersede or supplement, as
applicable, the regulations of the base zoning district(s). Where conflict
results between the regulations of this overlay district and other provisions
of the Municipal Code, including the regulations of the base zoning
district(s), the provisions of this overlay district shall control.
Section
410.195
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.210
AO:821
Section 410.210. Uses Permitted [Ord. No. 5814 §5a.4, 4-27-2004]
The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in the
Table of Permitted Uses found in the base zoning district. If a "P" (permitted
by right) or a "C" (permitted by conditional use permit) is not indicated for
a use in the base zoning district or a use is not included in the base zoning
district, it is prohibited.
Section 410.215. Planned Unit Development Required [Ord. No.
5814 §5a.5, 4-27-2004]
Any person requesting a building permit involving construction of a new
building or structure shall submit an application for a rezoning to a planned
unit development district in accordance with Chapter 405.
Section 410.220. Rezoning Amendment [Ord. No. 5814 §5a.6,
4-27-2004]
The application process includes a request for rezoning pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 405. Rezoning must be completed concurrently with
the approval process for the development plan.
Section 410.225. Maximum Building Height [Ord. No. 5814 §5a.7,
4-27-2004]
There is no maximum building height in this district. Height to be
determined by the use and compatibility with the surrounding area.
Section 410.230. Maximum Floor Area [Ord. No. 5814 §5a.8,
4-27-2004]
The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for this zoning district is 3.0. The
maximum floor area may be modified subject to the provisions and
requirements of the planned unit development process outlined in Chapter
405.
Section 410.235. Setback Requirements [Ord. No. 5814 §5a.9,
4-27-2004]
The setback requirements are the same as in the base zoning district.
Section 410.240. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
[Ord. No. 5814 §5a.10, 4-27-2004]
Every principal commercial structure must provide off-street parking in
accordance with Chapter 405.
Section
410.210
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.245
AO:822
Section 410.245. Site Plan Review [Ord. No. 5814 §5a.11,
4-27-2004]
Site plan review pursuant to the procedures and standards found in Chapter
405 is required for any development or redevelopment proposal over ten
thousand (10,000) square feet in gross floor area within the Clayton Plaza
Overlay Zoning District.
Section 410.250. Consideration of Relevant Plans [Ord. No. 5814
§5a.12, 4-27-2004]
The Board of Aldermen shall, in arriving at its decision on a proposed
"PUD", consider these regulations, Chapter 405, the Master Plan and any
other land use or urban design policies relevant to the specific site which
have been accepted or adopted by the Board of Aldermen. The Plan
Commission shall, at the time of forwarding its recommendations to Board
of Aldermen, forward any recommendation(s) pertaining to the specific
site that is contained in the Master Plan. If the Plan Commission's
recommendations vary from such specific recommendation(s) in the Master
Plan for the site, such variations shall be noted and explained in the Plan
Commission's report to the Board of Aldermen.
Section
410.245
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.250
AO:823

ARTICLE VI
General Provisions For The Urban Design Zoning Districts
Section 410.255. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §6a.1,
4-27-2004]
The intent of these regulations and standards is to provide criteria for
quality development and to protect the established character of Clayton's
residential neighborhoods. This shall be accomplished by ensuring the
compatibility of infill development and renovations with adjacent homes
and the surrounding neighborhood and by improving the predictability and
consistency of design regulations and the review process.
Section 410.260. Zoning Districts [Ord. No. 5814 §6a.2, 4-27-2004]
Section 410.265. Urban Design Zoning Districts Boundary Map
[Ord. No. 5814 §6a.3, 4-27-2004]
The City of Clayton urban design zoning districts are defined by the urban
design zoning district boundary maps found in these regulations and the
official Zoning Map, as hereby amended. The maps are intended to define
the limits of the urban design zoning districts.
Section 410.270. Urban Design Zoning Districts [Ord. No. 5814
§6a.4, 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 5906 §6a.4, 10-25-2005]
A. The zoning districts established for the areas within each designated
urban design zoning district consist of base zoning districts and urban
design zoning districts.
1. Base zoning districts. Base zoning districts are the zoning districts
that reflect the three (3) basic geographically-based land use
categories in the City: (1) residential areas; (2) commercial areas;
(3) and service areas; with appropriate regulations and
development standards to govern the uses in these districts. The
land use regulations for each base zoning district specify land uses
permitted by right, with specific limitations or performance criteria
or allowed after obtaining a conditional use permit.
2. Urban design zoning districts. Urban design zoning districts
consist of regulations and standards that encourage quality
development whose size, scale, mass and architectural design
respects the variables and existing character of each of the unique
residential districts. Where an urban design zoning district has
been designated within the City of Clayton, the regulations of that
urban design zoning district shall supersede or supplement, as
applicable, the regulations of the base zoning district(s) and the
provisions of Chapter 405 of the Municipal Code.
Section
410.255
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.270
AO:825
Section 410.275. Amendment of Zoning Map [Ord. No. 5814 §6a.5,
4-27-2004]
The boundaries of these urban design zoning districts, as defined
respectively in this Chapter 410, are hereby established and shall, to the
extent of these boundaries, supersede and amend the official Zoning Map
established by Chapter 405 of the Municipal Code. The official Zoning Map
as hereby amended and all the notations, references and other information
shown thereon are a part of this Chapter 410 and shall have the same force
and effect as if the official Zoning Map and all the notations, references and
other information shown thereon were all fully set forth or described herein.
Section 410.280. Applicability [Ord. No. 5814 §6a.6, 4-27-2004]
A. The following zoning districts are established within the City of Clayton
in order to implement the recommendations of the Urban Design
Zoning Districts' Master Plan:
1. Urban design zoning districts.
a. Clayton Gardens Urban Design Zoning District.
b. Clayshire Subdivision Urban Design Zoning District.
c. Topton Brighton Urban Design Zoning District.
d. Westwood Corridor Urban Design Zoning District.
e. Christian Brothers Campus Urban Design Zoning District.
f. Clayton Road Urban Design Zoning District.
A. These design standards shall apply to all uses within a defined urban
design zoning district, as identified in Articles VII through XI of this
Chapter and the official Zoning Map, as hereby amended, that meet the
following criteria:
1. Infill projects proposed for vacant or substantially vacant lots
within a designated urban design zoning district.
2. Redevelopment projects proposed for developed lots within a
designated urban design zoning district where all or most of the
existing structure would be razed and a new structure or structures
built.
3. Any amendment to an approved site plan within a designated urban
design zoning district.
4. Any addition or renovation project proposed within a designated
urban design zoning district, where the total square footage of the
proposed addition is greater than fifty percent (50%) of the total
square footage of the existing principal structure or is subject to
site plan review, at the City's discretion.
Section
410.270
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.285
AO:826
Section 410.285. Alternative Compliance [Ord. No. 5814 §6a.7,
4-27-2004]
Section 410.290. Definitions [Ord. No. 5814 §6a.8, 4-27-2004]
The definitions set forth in Chapter 405, Article III of the Municipal Code
are hereby incorporated by reference in these regulations. Additional terms
and words as used in these regulations are defined in Article II of these
regulations.
Section 410.295. Maximum Height and Floor Area [Ord. No. 5814
§6a.9, 4-27-2004]
The maximum heights and the maximum floor areas for uses allowed within
the urban design zoning districts are established in the base zoning
districts, except as modified by urban design zoning districts made
applicable to certain areas within the urban design zoning districts.
Section 410.300. Minimum Yard Requirements [Ord. No. 5814
§6a.10, 4-27-2004]
The minimum yard requirements for uses allowed within the urban design
zoning districts are set forth in Chapter 405 of the Municipal Code, except
as modified by the standards of the urban design zoning districts
established by these regulations.
A. Upon request of an applicant, the Planning Commission or
Architectural Review Board, as appropriate depending on the type of
development and application, may approve an alternative approach that
may be substituted in whole or in part for a plan meeting these design
standards. This approach is intended to apply in unusual circumstances
that might arise where an alternative approach would provide a result
that is equal to or superior to that which would be provided by the
approach outlined by the standards in this Chapter. Economic
consideration shall not be a basis for alternative compliance.
1. Procedure. An alternative compliance approach shall be prepared
and submitted in accordance with the submittal requirements as
set forth by the City of Clayton. The approach shall clearly identify
and discuss the modifications and alternatives proposed and the
ways in which the plan will better accomplish the intent of these
design standards than would an approach which complies with
these design standards.
2. Review criteria. To approve an alternative approach, the Planning
Commission or Architectural Review Board must find that the
proposed alternative approach accomplishes the intent of these
design standards equally well or better than would an approach
which complies with these design standard.
Section
410.285
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.305
AO:827
Section 410.305. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
[Ord. No. 5814 §6a.11, 4-27-2004]
The off-street parking and loading requirements for uses allowed within the
urban design zoning districts are set forth in Chapter 405 of the Municipal
Code, except as modified by the standards of the urban design zoning
districts established by these regulations.
Section 410.310. Sign Regulations [Ord. No. 5814 §6a.12,
4-27-2004]
The sign regulations for uses allowed within the urban design zoning
districts are set forth in Section 425.040 of the Municipal Code.
Section 410.315. Architectural Review [Ord. No. 5814 §6a.13,
4-27-2004]
The architectural review standards and procedures set forth in Chapter 405
of the Municipal Code apply to all development proposals within the urban
design zoning districts established by these regulations.
Section 410.320. Site Plan Review [Ord. No. 5814 §6a.14,
4-27-2004]
Allowable uses, permitted by right and by conditional use permit in the
urban design zoning districts have the potential for interfering with the
use and enjoyment of adjacent property and uses if located and laid out on
zoning lots without careful planning. Site plan review is under the authority
of the Plan Commission and addresses the site details of a development.
It does not address off-site conditions except to the extent that an on-site
condition (e.g., ingress/egress) affects off-site conditions (e.g., traffic). The
site plan review regulations and procedures set forth in Chapter 405 of the
Municipal Code apply to all development proposals within the urban design
zoning districts established by these regulations.
Section
410.305
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.320
AO:828
ARTICLE VII
Clayton Gardens and Clayshire Subdivision ("R-2") and Clayton
Gardens ("R-4") Urban Design Zoning Districts
Section 410.325. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §7a.1,
4-27-2004]
The general intent of these standards is to ensure that infill, redevelopment
and renovation within Clayton Gardens and the Clayshire Subdivision is
compatible with the established character and variations within each
neighborhood by utilizing complementary design characteristics, setbacks,
massing and building heights.
Section 410.330. Location of Urban Design Zoning District [Ord.
No. 5814 §7a.2, 4-27-2004]
A. The Clayton Gardens Urban Design Zoning District is bounded by the
northern City limits on the north, the western City limits on the west,
Brentwood Boulevard on the east and the southernmost property lines
of residentially zoned properties north of Maryland Avenue, as depicted
below:
B. The Clayshire Subdivision Urban Design Zoning District is bounded by
I-170 on the east and north, by the western City limits on the west and
by Clayton Road on the south, limited to those properties zoned "R-2" as
depicted below:
Section
410.325
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.335
AO:829
Section 410.335. Significance of Designation [Ord. No. 5814 §7a.3,
4-27-2004]
The regulations of these urban design zoning districts shall supersede
or supplement, as applicable, the regulations of the base zoning district.
Where conflict results between the regulations of the urban design zoning
district and the provisions of the base zoning district, the provisions of the
urban design zoning district shall control.
Section 410.340. Uses Permitted [Ord. No. 5814 §7a.4, 4-27-2004]
The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in the
Table of Permitted Uses found in the base zoning district. If a "P" (permitted
by right) or a "C" (permitted by conditional use permit) is not indicated for
a use in the base zoning district or a use is not included in the base zoning
district, it is prohibited.
Section 410.345. Front Lot Coverage [Ord. No. 5814 §7a.5,
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6068 §1, 4-14-2009]
A. The open, park-like appearance of the front setback is a significant
character-defining element. It provides a soft, landscaped buffer
between the homes and the street creating an inviting, unified
appearance. Paving and other hard materials, in excess, can detract
from this appearance and should be limited to the narrow driveways
and walkways as traditionally found.
The open character of the front setback should be maintained as
redevelopment occurs.
1. Lots zoned "R-2" shall have no more than thirty percent (30%) of
the required front yard setback covered by impervious material;
except that for properties fronting on Haddington Court within the
Clayshire subdivision, no more than forty-five percent (45%) of the
required front yard setback shall be covered by impervious
material.
2. Lots zoned "R-4" in Clayton Gardens shall have no more than forty
percent (40%) of the required front yard setback covered by
impervious material.
3. Driveways shall narrow to a maximum of ten (10) feet in width at
the street edge or per the City of Clayton standards.
Section
410.335
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.345
AO:830
Section 410.350. Total Lot Coverage [Ord. No. 5814 §7a.6,
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6068 §1, 4-14-2009]
Section 410.355. Orientation of Primary Structure [Ord. No. 5814
§7a.7, 4-27-2004]
Section 410.360. Tree Preservation (Lots Zoned "R-2" and Lots
Zoned "R-4" in Clayton Gardens) [Ord. No. 5814 §7a.8, 4-27-2004;
Ord. No. 6430 §1, 6-14-2016]
The shady canopy provided by mature trees is an important characterdefining
feature in many of Clayton's older residential neighborhoods. This
is particularly true in the Clayton Gardens and Clayshire where large,
evenly spaced trees line the street, buffering homes from traffic and giving
the neighborhood a more intimate feeling for pedestrians and residents.
Also contributing to this character are the many additional large caliper
trees scattered among the homes. As larger homes are introduced, they
should be sensitive to this character, preserving trees and vegetation.
4. Turnarounds or circular drives shall not be permitted within front
setback.
A. The presence of open lawn and landscaped areas throughout Clayton
Gardens and Clayshire is a strong character-defining feature of the
neighborhoods. New development should utilize similar lot coverage as
traditionally found along a block to maintain the open character of the
street and ensure compatibility with adjacent homes.
1. No more than forty percent (40%) of the total lot may be covered by
impervious material. Incentives for additional lot coverage may be
earned in Section 410.375, Garage Width and Location; provided
however, that lots fronting on Haddington Court within the
Clayshire subdivision may have no more than fifty-five percent
(55%) of the total lot covered by impervious material and that no
additional incentives may be earned with respect to those lots.
2. Lots zoned "R-4" in Clayton Gardens shall have no more than fiftyfive
percent (55%) of the total lot covered by impervious material.
No additional bonuses may be earned.
A. Building entrances have typically been oriented towards the front yard
and the street, accenting the primary facade of the building and
creating a uniform line along the street. New structures should be
designed to be consistent with the typical organization of the
neighborhood.
B. For buildings located on lots zoned "R-2" and lots zoned "R-4" in Clayton
Gardens, the front entrance to a building shall be located on the front
facade of the building oriented towards the front yard and street as
found typically in Clayton's residential neighborhoods.
Section
410.345
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.360
AO:831
Specific requirements are set forth in Article XXX: Trees and Landscaping
Regulations.
Large canopy trees are an important character-defining feature and
should be preserved.
Section 410.365. Grading and Drainage (Lots Zoned "R-2" and Lots
Zoned "R-4" in Clayton Gardens) [Ord. No. 5814 §7a.9, 4-27-2004;
Ord. No. 6430 §1, 6-14-2016]
The wooded, gently rolling topography typical of the St. Louis area
contributes to the visual interest and variety of Clayton's residential
neighborhoods. Disturbing existing site topography to accommodate larger
homes with walk-out basements or below-grade garages can lead to
significant drainage problems, particularly for adjacent properties. New
homes should minimize site disturbances and should mitigate runoff.
Specific requirements are set forth in Article XXX: Trees and Landscaping
Regulations.
Alterations to existing site topography should be minimized to prevent
drainage problems.
Section 410.370. Front Yard Setbacks (Lots Zoned "R-2" and Lots
Zoned "R-4" in Clayton Gardens) [Ord. No. 5814 §7a.10, 4-27-2004]
A. The consistent appearance of a broad, landscaped front setback and
uniform building edge creates a sense of visual continuity along the
street and creates an open appearance characteristic of the
neighborhood. As redevelopment occurs, the open character of the
front setback should be preserved.
Section
410.360
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.370
AO:832
Section 410.375. Garage Width and Location (Lots Zoned "R-2")
[Ord. No. 5814 §7a.11, 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6068 §1, 4-14-2009]
New homes should respond to the existing character of the
neighborhood by utilizing similar front setbacks.
1. The front yard setback shall not be less than the average of those
found along the block.
2. Open, covered porches or terraces shall not project into the
required front yard setback more than five (5) feet.
A. General. The garage has not typically been a dominant feature in
Clayton Gardens and Clayshire. Locating the garage to the rear or side
of the home, as is typical in these neighborhoods, allows the
architectural details of the home and front yard to define the character
of the street. Below-grade front garages have been introduced in
several areas of Clayton Gardens. In many cases, the garage and
associated driveway replace the yard and dominate the street,
completely changing its character. To protect the established character
of these neighborhoods, garage placement and scale need to be
carefully considered to minimize visual impacts upon the street and
surrounding development.
B. East Of Forsyth.
1. At-grade, side-loading garages or detached garages or rear-loading
garages are preferred in all cases and shall be utilized where fiftyone
percent (51%) or more of the homes on the block have them.
The following incentives shall apply:
a. A side-loading, at-grade garage condition shall warrant up to
an additional ten percent (10%) lot area coverage.
Section
410.370
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.375
AO:833
b. An at-grade detached or rear-loading garage shall warrant up
to an additional fifteen percent (15%) lot area coverage.
East of Forsyth, detached rear garages are typical
and are the preferred configuration for new
homes.
2. Front-loading, below-grade garages are strongly discouraged in all
cases and shall be prohibited unless they are featured on fifty-one
percent (51%) or more of the homes on the block. The following
incentives and standards shall apply:
a. A side-loading, below-grade garage condition shall warrant up
to an additional five percent (5%) lot area coverage.
b. A rear-loading, below-grade garage condition shall warrant up
to an additional ten percent (10%) lot area coverage.
3. Front-loading garages, at or below-grade, shall not exceed twentyfour
(24) feet in width or fifty percent (50%) of the total length of
the home's front facade, whichever is less.
No
Front-loading, below-grade garages are not compatible
with the existing character of the neighborhoods and are
strongly discouraged in all cases.
4. Third (3rd) garage doors on front facade shall be prohibited. Third
(3rd) or fourth (4th) garage stalls shall be provided in the form of a
separate two-car, detached garage located at the rear of the lot or
as a side entry condition.
C. West Of Forsyth (Not Including Clayton Gardens "R-4").
1. At-grade, side-loading garages or detached garage or rear-loading
garages are preferred in all cases and shall be utilized where fiftyone
percent (51%) or more of the homes on the block have them.
Section
410.375
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.375
AO:834
West of Forsyth, at grade,
side-loaded garages, like
the one on this infill
home, are preferred.
Rear-entry garages
preserve the character of
the street and are also
encouraged for infill
development.
The following incentives shall apply:
a. An at-grade, side-loading garage condition shall warrant up to
an additional ten percent (10%) lot area coverage.
b. An at-grade detached or rear-loading garage condition shall
warrant up to an additional fifteen percent (15%) lot area
coverage. A one and one-half (1½) story structure shall
warrant an additional five percent (5%) of lot area coverage
when combined with a detached or rear garage condition.
2. Below-grade, front-loading garages are strongly discouraged in all
cases and shall be prohibited unless they are featured on fifty-one
percent (51%) or more of the homes on the block.
Front-loading garages are permitted where they are
featured on 51% or more of the homes on the block.
The following incentives and standards shall apply:
a. A side-loading, below-grade garage condition shall warrant up
to an additional five percent (5%) lot area coverage.
b. A rear-loading, below-grade garage condition shall warrant
and up to an additional ten percent (10%) lot area coverage.
3. Front-loading garages shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet in
width or fifty percent (50%) of the total length of the home's front
facade, whichever is less.
4. Third (3rd) garage doors on front facade shall be prohibited. Third
(3rd) or fourth (4th) garage stalls shall be provided in the form of a
Section
410.375
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.375
AO:835
separate two-car, detached garage located at the rear of the lot or
as a side entry condition.
D. Clayshire.
1. At-grade, side-loading garages or detached garages or rear-loading
garages are preferred in all cases and shall be utilized where fiftyone
percent (51%) or more of the homes on the block have them;
except that, due to unique topographical characteristics, front
entry garages shall be allowed for those properties fronting on
Haddington Court.
This Clayshire home illustrates a preferred detached, rear
garage configuration.
The following incentives shall apply:
a. An at-grade, side-loading garage condition shall warrant up to
an additional ten percent (10%) lot area coverage.
b. An at-grade detached or rear-loading garage condition shall
warrant up to an additional fifteen percent (15%) lot area
coverage. A one and one-half (1½) story structure shall
warrant an additional five percent (5%) of lot area coverage
when combined with a detached, rear garage condition.
c. At-grade, front-loading garages shall be prohibited unless they
are featured on fifty-one percent or more of the homes on the
block.
2. Below-grade, the following incentives and standards shall apply:
a. A side-loading, below-grade garage condition shall warrant up
to an additional five percent (5%) lot area coverage.
b. A rear-loading, below-grade garage condition shall warrant
and up to an additional ten percent (10%) lot area coverage.
c. Below-grade, front-loading garages are not characteristic of
the neighborhood and shall be prohibited.
3. Front-loading garages shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet in
width or fifty percent (50%) of the total length of the home's front
facade, whichever is less.
4. Third (3rd) garage doors on front facade shall be prohibited. Third
(3rd) or fourth (4th) garage stalls shall be provided in the form of a
Section
410.375
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.375
AO:836
Section 410.380. Building Materials/Colors (Lots Zoned "R-2" and
Lots Zoned "R-4" in Clayton Gardens) [Ord. No. 5814 §7a.12,
4-27-2004]
separate two-car, detached garage located at the rear of the lot or
as a side entry condition.
A. Clayton Gardens and Clayshire Subdivision have traditionally been
dominated by the use of masonry building materials. Standard size
brick in a variety of red tones is the primary material found, although
the original brick has been painted in some instances. Accent materials
vary and include: wood lap siding, stone and stucco. Materials and
colors utilized for significant renovations or for new homes should be
compatible with those found in the neighborhood.
1. The number of different materials used on a wall surface shall be
limited to brick and one (1) accent material. The accent material
shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of any wall elevation.
Primary building materials are limited to brick, with one
accent material not to exceed 25% of the total wall
coverage.
2. Brick color shall be compatible with that found on other homes
along the block. Brick may be painted when compatible with the
existing neighborhood.
3. The following materials shall be permitted as accent materials not
to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of any wall elevation:
a. Stucco;
b. Wood lap siding; or
c. Stone or similar product.
4. The use of the following materials shall be prohibited:
a. EIFS,
b. "Jumbo" brick, or
c. Split-faced block.
5. A brick ledge or stepped foundation shall be provided to allow no
more than twelve (12) inches of exposed concrete.
Section
410.375
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.380
AO:837
Section 410.385. Building Height/ Scale/ Massing/ Form
(Relationship To Surrounding Development) (Lots Zoned "R-2")
[Ord. No. 5814 §7a.13, 4-27-2004]
6. Retaining walls shall be constructed of materials similar in color,
texture and scale as those used on the primary structure. The
following materials shall not be used for any retaining walls visible
from the street or from the ground level of any adjoining residence:
a. Wood ties,
b. Versa-lok,
c. Keystone,
d. Windsor, or
e. Similar modular block wall systems.
7. Asphalt shall not be used for driveways or driveway aprons. These
features shall be constructed of one (1) of the following materials:
a. Exposed aggregate;
b. Brick pavers; or
c. Stamped concrete.
8. Metal shall not be used as a primary roof material.
These infill homes demonstrate how the effective use of
materials can help integrate new development into an
existing neighborhood context.
A. As described in the character analysis, the established character of
development varies on either side of Forsyth. West of Forsyth, homes
have traditionally been one-story ranch designs with a strong horizontal
orientation. Homes and accessory structures built with increased
heights and densities in this area tend to be highly visible in contrast to
the established neighborhood, often dramatically reducing lawn areas
and the traditionally open character of the lots. In contrast, homes
along Gay Avenue and east of Forsyth are more typically two-story in
height, making the integration of new development somewhat easier.
Designs in each area should be responsive to surrounding development,
ensuring that they are compatible in terms of mass, scale and height
Section
410.380
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.385
AO:838
with existing homes along a block. Within the limited area of "R-4"
zoning along Gay Avenue in Clayton Gardens, height will be evaluated
for compatibility by the Architectural Review Board at the time of
submittal, unless otherwise noted.
1. The maximum building height shall be limited to two (2) stories or
thirty (30) feet above the average existing grade of the site,
whichever is less. Partial stories above the second (2nd) story shall
be prohibited to minimize the potential mass of homes.
The maximum building height shall be limited to 2 stories
or 30 feet above the average existing grade of the site,
whichever is less.
2. To avoid tall, blocky building forms, new structures and additions
shall incorporate a transition in height and scale through one (1) of
the following techniques:
a. "Stepping-down" to meet the approximate height of the
adjacent structure.
Partial stories under sloping roofs are preferred.
Tall, blocky building forms should be avoided.
b. Utilizing dormers and sloping roofs to accommodate upper
stories for major renovations and new construction.
c. Concentrating significant mass or square footage being added
to an existing home towards the rear of the lot.
d. Increasing the side yard setback one (1) foot for every five (5)
feet the height of the structure exceeds the height of the
adjacent structure at the side yard.
e. Utilizing a roof pitch and overhang similar to that of the
adjacent structures.
Section
410.385
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.385
AO:839
Section 410.390. Architectural Detail (Roof Form, Facade, Doors,
Windows) (Lots Zoned "R-2" and Lots Zoned "R-4" in Clayton
Gardens) [Ord. No. 5814 §7a.14, 4-27-2004]
Single-family structures should "step-down" to
meet the approximate height of the adjacent
structure.
f. Installing canopy trees twenty (20) feet on center within the
side yard to help break up the appearance of the taller
structure. Trees must be installed per recommendation by the
City's landscape architect.
3. The height of accessory structures shall be limited to one and onehalf
(1½) stories or sixteen (16) feet above the average existing
grade of the site, whichever is less.
A. Architectural detailing on homes in Clayton Gardens and Clayshire is
typically fairly modest. Homes generally have gently sloped roofs,
regardless of their height, and often incorporate dormers as part of a
partial story. Simple facades are punctuated by a variety of window
styles, most accented with contrasting shutters. The design of infill
development should incorporate elements that complement the
character of existing development along a block.
1. Flat, mansard and other exotic roof forms not compatible with
established neighborhood character shall not be permitted.
Flat, mansard and other exotic roof forms shall not be
permitted.
Section
410.385
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.390
AO:840
2. New structures shall utilize a solid-to-void (wall-to-window) ratio
similar to that found on the block.
New structures shall utilize a solid-to-void (wall-towindow)
ratio similar to that found on the block.
3. Windows and doors shall be of a similar size, shape and orientation
as those found on the block.
4. Blank walls shall not be visible from the street.
5. Exposed concrete foundation shall not be visible from the street.
6. Columns shall be compatible with the predominant architectural
style of the neighborhood. Size, materials and proportions of the
columns to the structure shall be provided on submitted plans.
Section
410.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.390
AO:841

ARTICLE VIII
Clayshire Subdivision ("R-4") Urban Design Zoning District
Section 410.395. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §8a.1,
4-27-2004]
The general intent of these standards is to ensure that future
redevelopment and infill development within Clayshire's multi-family zone
is sensitive to and compatible with adjacent single-family uses and the
established character of the neighborhood.
Section 410.400. Location of Urban Design Zoning District [Ord.
No. 5814 §8a.2, 4-27-2004]
The Clayshire Subdivision ("R-4") Urban Design Zoning District is bounded
by I-170 on the east, the alley between Roxburgh and Halifax on the
north, the westernmost properties of Sudbury on the west and by the
southernmost property lines of residentially zoned properties north of
Clayton Road, limited to those properties zoned "R-4", as depicted below.
Section 410.405. Significance of Designation [Ord. No. 5814 §8a.3,
4-27-2004]
The regulations of this urban design zoning district shall supersede or
supplement, as applicable, the regulations of the base zoning district.
Where conflict results between the regulations of the urban design zoning
district and the provisions of the base zoning district, the provisions of the
urban design zoning district shall control.
Section 410.410. Uses Permitted [Ord. No. 5814 §8a.4, 4-27-2004]
The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in the
Table of Permitted Uses found in the base zoning district. If a "P" (permitted
by right) or a "C" (permitted by conditional use permit) is not indicated for
a use in the base zoning district or a use is not included in the base zoning
district, it is prohibited.
Section 410.415. Front Lot Coverage [Ord. No. 5814 §8a.5,
4-27-2004]
Section
410.395
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.415
AO:843
Section 410.420. Total Lot Coverage [Ord. No. 5814 §8a.6,
4-27-2004]
Section 410.425. Orientation of Primary Structure [Ord. No. 5814
§8a.7, 4-27-2004]
A. The high visibility of the front setback from the street creates a
significant impact on a neighborhood's character. In the Clayshire
("R-4"), the setback provides a soft, landscaped buffer between the
building and the street, creating an inviting, unified appearance. Paving
and other hard materials, in excess, can detract from this appearance
and should be limited to driveway approaches and narrow walkways as
traditionally found in the neighborhood.
The open character of the front yard should be maintained.
1. No more than forty percent (40%) of the required front yard
setback shall be covered by impervious material.
2. Turnarounds or circular drives shall be prohibited within the front
setback.
3. Shared access points to garages located within the same building,
on the same lot shall be utilized to the maximum extent feasible.
A. The presence of open areas between and among the multi-family homes
in Clayshire ("R-4") is a strong character-defining feature of the
neighborhood. New development should utilize similar lot coverage as
traditionally found along a block to maintain the open character of the
street and ensure compatibility with adjacent homes.
B. No more than forty percent (40%) of the total lot may be covered by
impervious material. Additional lot coverage may be earned through
the incentives provided in Section 410.445, Garage Width and Location.
A. Building entrances have typically been oriented towards the front yard
and the street, accenting the primary facade of the building and
creating a uniform line along the street. New structures should be
designed to be consistent with the typical organization of the
neighborhood.
B. The front entrance to a building shall be located on the front facade of
the building oriented towards the front yard and street, as found
typically in Clayton's residential neighborhoods.
Section
410.415
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.430
AO:844
Section 410.430. Tree Preservation [Ord. No. 5814 §8a.8,
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6430 §1, 6-14-2016]
Section 410.435. Grading and Drainage [Ord. No. 5814 §8a.9,
4-27-2004]
Section 410.440. Front Yard Setbacks [Ord. No. 5814 §8a.10,
4-27-2004]
A. The shady canopy provided by mature trees is an important characterdefining
feature in many of Clayton's older residential neighborhoods.
This is particularly true in the Clayton Gardens and Clayshire where
large, evenly spaced trees line the street, buffering homes from traffic
and giving the neighborhood a more intimate feeling for pedestrians
and residents. Also contributing to this character are the many
additional large caliper trees scattered among the homes. As larger
homes are introduced, they should be sensitive to this character,
preserving trees and vegetation. Specific requirements are set forth in
Article XXX, Trees and Landscaping Regulations.
Large canopy trees should be protected during development.
A. The wooded, gently rolling topography typical of the St. Louis area
contributes to the visual interest and variety of Clayton's residential
neighborhoods. Disturbing existing site topography to accommodate
larger homes with walk-out basements or below-grade garages can lead
to significant drainage problems, particularly for adjacent properties.
New homes should minimize site disturbances and should mitigate
runoff.
1. To the maximum extent feasible, development shall follow and
respect the existing topography of the site.
2. Extensive grading or unusual site improvements (e.g., retaining
walls greater than four (4) foot in height) shall not be permitted,
unless deemed compatible with the neighborhood and approved by
the Plan Commission.
3. Site drainage patterns shall be designed to prevent concentrated
surface drainage from collecting on and flowing across adjacent
lots, pedestrian paths, walks and sidewalks. Stormwater drainage
shall be connected to a storm sewer where available as determined
by the City.
A. The following regulation(s) and standard(s) shall govern:
Section
410.430
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.440
AO:845
Section 410.445. Garage Width and Location [Ord. No. 5814 §8a.11,
4-27-2004]
1. The front yard setback shall not exceed the average of those found
along the block face.
2. Designated outdoor parking spaces shall not be provided within the
front setback.
3. Open, covered porches or terraces shall not project into the
required front setback more than five (5) feet.
The front yard setback shall not exceed the average of
those found along the block face.
A. Due in part to the relatively low density of existing multi-family housing,
little off-street parking is currently provided in Clayshire ("R-4"). Where
it is provided, garage entrances are located to the side or rear of the
structure, creating little visual impact from the street. In other Clayton
neighborhoods, redevelopment has brought with it the introduction of
below-grade front garages. In many cases, the below-grade garage and
associated driveway replace the yard and dominate the street,
completely changing the character of the neighborhood. Garage
placement and scale need to be carefully considered on each
redevelopment project to minimize their visibility and impact upon the
street and surrounding development.
1. At-grade, side-loading garages or detached garages or rear-loading
garages are preferred in all cases and shall be utilized where fiftyone
percent (51%) or more of the homes on the block have them.
Garage entrances shall be located to the rear or side of
the structure.
The following incentives shall apply:
Section
410.440
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.445
AO:846
Section 410.450. Building Materials/Colors [Ord. No. 5814 §8a.12,
4-27-2004]
a. An at-grade, side-loading garage condition shall warrant up to
an additional ten percent (10%) lot area coverage.
b. An at-grade or detached or rear-loading garage condition shall
warrant up to an additional fifteen percent (15%) lot area
coverage.
2. Below-grade, front-loading garages shall not be permitted. The
following incentives and standards shall apply for other belowgrade
or front-loading garages:
a. A side-loading, below-grade garage condition shall warrant up
to an additional five percent (5%) lot area coverage.
b. A rear-loading, below-grade garage condition shall warrant
and up to an additional ten percent (10%) lot area coverage.
3. Front-loading, at-grade garages shall not exceed twenty-four (24)
feet in width or fifty percent (50%) of the total length of the home's
front facade, whichever is less.
4. Third (3rd) garage doors on front facade shall be prohibited. Third
(3rd) or fourth (4th) garage stalls shall be provided in the form of a
separate two-car, detached garage located at the rear of the lot or
as a side entry condition.
5. For larger, multi-unit structures, shared driveway access to a
parking garage serving a single building is strongly encouraged.
The following incentives shall apply:
a. A parking garage serving multiple units in a single building
with a shared driveway access shall warrant up to an
additional ten percent (10%) lot area coverage.
A. As with many Clayton neighborhoods, Clayshire ("R-4") has been
dominated by the use of masonry building materials. Standard size
brick in shades of red and buff are the primary materials found, while
accent materials are limited to contrasting brick, stone or lap siding.
Infill development should utilize appropriate materials with similar
characteristics to help maintain the original character of the
neighborhood and ensure that new development is compatible with the
surrounding single-family neighborhood.
1. Appropriate primary materials shall be limited to earth-toned brick
as traditionally found within the neighborhood. The use of stucco
and EIFS as primary materials shall be prohibited. Brick may be
painted when compatible with the existing neighborhood.
Section
410.445
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.450
AO:847
Appropriate primary materials shall be limited to earthtoned
brick as traditionally found within the
neighborhood.
2. The number of different materials used on a wall surface shall be
limited to brick and one (1) accent material. The following
materials shall be permitted as accent materials not to exceed
twenty-five percent (25%) of any wall elevation:
a. Stucco;
b. Wood lap siding; or
c. Stone or similar product.
3. The use of the following materials shall be prohibited:
a. EIFS,
b. "Jumbo" brick, or
c. Split-faced block.
4. A brick ledge or stepped foundation shall be provided to allow no
more than twelve (12) inches of exposed concrete.
5. Retaining walls shall be constructed of materials similar in color,
texture and scale as those used on the primary structure. The
following materials shall not be used for any retaining walls visible
from the street or from the ground level of any adjoining residence:
a. Wood ties,
b. Versa-lok,
c. Keystone,
d. Windsor, or
e. Similar modular block wall systems.
6. Asphalt shall not be used for driveways or driveway aprons. These
features shall be constructed of one (1) of the following materials:
a. Exposed aggregate;
b. Brick pavers; or
Section
410.450
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.450
AO:848
Section 410.455. Building Height/ Scale/ Massing/ Form
(Relationship To Surrounding Development) [Ord. No. 5814 §8a.13,
4-27-2004]
c. Stamped concrete.
7. Metal shall not be used as a primary roof material.
A. Existing multi-family development in Clayshire is visually compatible
with surrounding single-family homes due to its modest scale-two (2)
stories in height with relatively low lot coverage. The mass and height
of infill development needs to be carefully considered where singlestory
homes are adjoining to ensure compatibility.
1. Multi-family structures taller than two (2) stories shall provide a
gradual height transition by "stepping-down" to meet the
approximate height of adjacent single-family homes or other
structures of a lesser height.
Multi-family structures should "step-down" in height to
provide a more gradual transition to adjacent singlefamily
uses.
2. The maximum building height shall be three (3) stories or forty-five
(45) feet above the average existing grade of the site, whichever is
less. To reduce overall building mass, partial stories above the third
(3rd) story shall not be permitted.
To reduce overall building mass, partial stories above the
3rd story shall not be permitted.
Section
410.450
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.455
AO:849
Section 410.460. Architectural Detail (Roof Form/ Windows/ Doors/
Balconies) [Ord. No. 5814 §8a.14, 4-27-2004]
3. Large wall expanses shall be articulated through the use of bays,
insets or stoops related to entrances and windows.
4. Replication of the design of more than four (4) attached town home
units in any single row shall be prohibited.
5. The facades of townhouses shall be punctuated by a change in
texture or material, offset or other architectural feature to
differentiate individual units. [Ord. No. 6509, 11-28-2017]
6. Building facades (with street frontage) fifty (50) feet or greater in
length shall incorporate wall offsets, a minimum of three (3) feet in
depth, a minimum of every thirty-five (35) feet. To the maximum
extent feasible, significant mass or square footage being added to
an existing home shall be concentrated towards the rear of the lot
to help maintain the character of the street.
Buildings 50 feet or greater in length shall incorporate
wall offsets, a minimum of 3 feet in depth, a minimum of
every 35 feet.
A. The simple architectural designs currently found within Clayshire
("R-4") provide a variety of basic design elements that have and should
continue to be incorporated into new development. These elements
include gently pitched roof lines, simple architectural detailing such as
stone or lap siding, dormer windows in upper stories and well-defined
front entries.
1. Flat, mansard or exotic roof forms not characteristic of the
neighborhood shall be prohibited.
2. Exposed concrete foundation shall not be permitted where visible
from the street.
3. Columns shall be compatible with the predominant architectural
style of the neighborhood. Size, materials and proportions of the
columns to the structure shall be provided on submitted plans.
Section
410.455
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.460
AO:850
ARTICLE IX
Topton-Brighton ("R-4") Urban Design Zoning District
Section 410.465. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §9a.1,
4-27-2004]
The general intent of these standards is to ensure that further
redevelopment within the Topton/Brighton neighborhood responds to and
is compatible with the established architectural character and scale of the
neighborhood, recognizing substantive change in the last ten (10) years.
Section 410.470. Location of Urban Design Zoning District [Ord.
No. 5814 §9a.2, 4-27-2004]
The Topton-Brighton ("R-4") Urban Design Zoning District is bounded by
Maryland Avenue on the north, Topton Way on the west, Forsyth Boulevard
on the east and Parkside on the south, limited to those properties zoned
"R-4", as depicted below:
Section 410.475. Significance of Designation [Ord. No. 5814 §9a.3,
4-27-2004]
The regulations of this Urban Design Zoning District shall supersede or
supplement, as applicable, the regulations of the base zoning district.
Where conflict results between the regulations of the urban design zoning
district and the provisions of the base zoning district, the provisions of the
urban design zoning district shall control.
Section 410.480. Uses Permitted [Ord. No. 5814 §9a.4, 4-27-2004]
The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in the
Table of Permitted Uses found in the base zoning district. If a "P" (permitted
by right) or a "C" (permitted by conditional use permit) is not indicated for
a use in the base zoning district or a use is not included in the base zoning
district, it is prohibited.
Section 410.485. Front Lot Coverage [Ord. No. 5814 §9a.5,
4-27-2004]
Section
410.465
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.485
AO:851
Section 410.490. Total Lot Coverage [Ord. No. 5814 §9a.6,
4-27-2004]
Section 410.495. Orientation of Primary Structure [Ord. No. 5814
§9a.7, 4-27-2004]
A. The high visibility of the front setback from the street creates a
significant impact on a neighborhood's character. The setback and the
soft, landscaped buffer it provides between the building and the street
is particularly important in Topton-Brighton, where new development is
significantly more intense than that traditionally found. Larger
buildings have a much stronger presence at the sidewalk edge, creating
the perception of a reduced setback with less open space. Paving and
other hard materials, in excess, can also detract from this appearance
and should be limited to driveway approaches and walkways as
traditionally found in the neighborhood. New development should be
sensitive to the established neighborhood character and open space
provided by front yards and front yard landscaping.
1. No more than forty percent (40%) of the front yard setback shall be
covered by impervious material.
2. Turnarounds or circular drives shall be prohibited within the front
setback.
3. Shared drives for garage access are encouraged to minimize the
width of driveways.
Shared drives for garage access are encouraged, to
minimize the width of driveways.
4. Individual driveway approaches shall taper or "neck down" to ten
(10) feet at the street edge to the maximum extent feasible.
A. The presence of open areas between and among the multi-family homes
in Topton-Brighton is a strong character-defining feature of the
neighborhood. New development should utilize similar lot coverage as
traditionally found along a block to maintain the open character of the
street and ensure compatibility with adjacent homes.
B. No more than forty percent (40%) of the total lot may be covered by
impervious material. Additional lot coverage may be earned through
the incentives provided in Section 410.515, Garage Width and Location.
Section
410.485
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.495
AO:852
Section 410.500. Tree Preservation [Ord. No. 5814 §9a.8,
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6430 §1, 6-14-2016]
The shady canopy provided by mature trees is an important characterdefining
feature in many of Clayton's older residential neighborhoods. This
is particularly true in the Clayton Gardens and Clayshire where large,
evenly spaced trees line the street, buffering homes from traffic and giving
the neighborhood a more intimate feeling for pedestrians and residents.
Also contributing to this character are the many additional large caliper
trees scattered among the homes. As larger homes are introduced, they
should be sensitive to this character, preserving trees and vegetation.
Specific requirements are set forth in Article XXX: Trees and Landscaping
Regulations.
New street trees shall be installed by the developer at a similar spacing as
those already established along the street.
Section 410.505. Grading and Drainage [Ord. No. 5814 §9a.9,
4-27-2004]
A. Building entrances have typically been oriented towards the front yard
and the street, accenting the primary facade of the building and
creating a uniform line along the street. New structures should be
designed to be consistent with the typical organization of the
neighborhood.
B. The front entrance to a building shall be located on the front facade of
the building oriented towards the front yard and street, as found
typically in Clayton's residential neighborhoods.
A. The wooded, gently rolling topography typical of the St. Louis area
contributes to the visual interest and variety of Clayton's residential
neighborhoods. Disturbing existing site topography to accommodate
larger homes with walk-out basements or below-grade garages can lead
to significant drainage problems, particularly for adjacent properties.
New homes should minimize site disturbances and should mitigate
runoff.
1. To the maximum extent feasible, development shall follow and
respect the existing topography of the site.
2. Extensive grading or unusual site improvements (e.g., retaining
walls greater than four (4) foot in height) shall not be permitted,
Section
410.495
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.505
AO:853
Section 410.510. Front Yard Setbacks [Ord. No. 5814 §9a.10,
4-27-2004]
Section 410.515. Garage Width and Location [Ord. No. 5814 §9a.11,
4-27-2004]
unless deemed compatible with the neighborhood and approved by
the Plan Commission.
3. Site drainage patterns shall be designed to prevent concentrated
surface drainage from collecting on and flowing across adjacent
lots, pedestrian paths, walks and sidewalks. Stormwater drainage
shall be connected to a storm sewer where available as determined
by the City.
A. The consistent appearance of a broad, landscaped front setback and
uniform building edge creates a sense of visual continuity along the
street and creates an open appearance characteristic of the
neighborhood. As redevelopment occurs, the open character of the
front setback should be preserved.
1. Front setbacks shall not be less than the average of those found
along the block face.
Front setbacks shall not be less than the average of those
found along the block face.
2. Prohibit designated outdoor parking spaces within the front or side
setback.
3. Porches, terraces and balconies shall not be permitted on the front
facade.
A. The garage has not traditionally been a dominant feature in Topton-
Brighton, as parking or garages were typically located to the rear of the
structure. This configuration allowed the architectural details of the
homes and front yard to define the character of the street. Below-grade
front garages have been introduced in Topton-Brighton as the size of
homes has increased and lot configurations become more complex. The
appearance of these garages and their associated driveways have
virtually replaced the yard in some cases and dominate the street,
completely changing its character. This garage condition should be
strongly discouraged and future garage placement and scale should be
Section
410.505
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.515
AO:854
carefully considered to minimize additional visual impacts upon the
street and surrounding neighborhood.
1. At-grade, side or rear accessed garages are the preferred condition
and are strongly encouraged. The following incentives shall apply:
a. An at-grade, side-loading garage condition shall warrant up to
an additional ten percent (10%) lot area coverage.
b. An at-grade, rear-loading garage condition shall warrant up to
an additional fifteen percent (15%) lot area coverage.
2. Front-loading below-grade garages are strongly discouraged.
Front-loading below-grade garages are strongly discouraged.
The following incentives shall apply:
a. A side-loading below-grade garage condition shall warrant an
additional five percent (5%) lot area coverage.
b. A rear-loading below-grade garage condition shall warrant an
additional ten percent (10%) lot area coverage.
3. The following restrictions shall apply to below-grade, front-loading
garages:
a. The applicant shall demonstrate that all potential alternative
garage locations have been ruled out.
b. Front-loading garages shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet in
width or fifty percent (50%) of the total length of the home's
front facade, whichever is less.
c. Front-loading garages along the street edge shall utilize
landscaping and strategic tree plantings to break up paved
areas.
4. For larger, multi-unit structures, shared driveway access to a
parking garage serving a single building is strongly encouraged.
The following incentives shall apply:
a. A parking garage serving multiple units in a single building
with a shared driveway access shall warrant up to an
additional ten percent (10%) lot area coverage.
Section
410.515
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.520
AO:855
Section 410.520. Building Materials/Colors [Ord. No. 5814 §9a.12,
4-27-2004]
A. Topton-Brighton, as with many Clayton neighborhoods, has traditionally
been dominated by the use of masonry building materials. Standard
size brick in earth tones is the primary material found. Accent materials
on original structures range from painted trim, lap siding, shutters and
stone veneer in a few cases. Redevelopment projects, although much
more elaborate in design, have integrated this established theme by
utilizing a similar palette of materials to create a unified appearance.
The intent of these standards is to allow for flexibility and creativity in
design, while retaining the traditional brick character of the
neighborhood.
Typical palette of materials and architectural detailing.
1. Primary building materials shall be limited to brick with a limit of
one (1) wall surface accent material not to exceed twenty-five
percent (25%) of any wall elevation. Brick may be painted when
compatible with the existing neighborhood.
2. The following materials shall be permitted as accent materials, not
to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total wall area:
a. Stucco,
b. Stone, or
c. Wood lap siding.
3. The following materials are prohibited:
a. EIFS,
b. "Jumbo" brick,
c. Split-faced block, or
d. Vinyl siding.
Section
410.520
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.520
AO:856
Section 410.525. Building Height/ Scale/ Massing/ Form
(Relationship To Surrounding Development) [Ord. No. 5814 §9a.13,
4-27-2004]
4. Muted, earth-toned colors shall be used on below-grade garage
doors to help reduce their visual prominence from the street.
5. Retaining walls shall be constructed of materials similar in color,
texture and scale as those used on the primary structure.
Retaining walls shall be constructed of materials similar in
color, texture and scale as those used on the primary
structure.
The following materials shall not be used for any retaining
walls visible from the street or from the ground level of any
adjoining residence:
a. Wood ties,
b. Versa-lok,
c. Keystone,
d. Windsor, or
e. Similar modular block wall systems.
f. Asphalt shall not be used for driveways or driveway aprons.
These features shall be constructed of one (1) of the following
materials:
g. Exposed aggregate;
h. Brick pavers; or
i. Stamped concrete.
6. Metal shall not be used as a primary roof material.
A. The two-story apartment homes originally found in Topton-Brighton are
fairly modest in scale and boxy in form. Though most are oriented
towards the street, several are clustered in groups oriented towards a
central yard. Many of these structures are being replaced with larger
town home style units in groups of two (2), three (3) or four (4). These
Section
410.520
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.525
AO:857
homes are typically taller, with a strong vertical emphasis. Also
becoming more prevalent are larger, blocky multi-family buildings,
often on combined lots. The height and massing of these structures
should be designed to be compatible with the variety of established
forms found in the neighborhood.
1. Building height shall not exceed three (3) stories or forty-five (45)
feet above the average existing grade, whichever is less. Partial
stories with dormers or sheds shall be permitted under sloping
roofs. Partial stories shall be completely contained beneath the
slope of the roof line.
Building height shall not exceed 3 stories or 45 feet above
the average existing grade, whichever is less.
2. Building facades (with street frontage) fifty (50) feet or greater in
length shall incorporate wall offsets, a minimum of three (3) feet in
depth, a minimum of every thirty-five (35) feet.
Buildings 50 feet or greater in length shall incorporate wall
offsets, a minimum of 3 feet in depth, a minimum of every 35 feet.
3. To further break up large wall expanses or to differentiate
individual units, the following variations shall be provided:
variations in roof line, structural delineation, window placement or
exterior trim.
Section
410.525
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.525
AO:858
Section 410.530. Architectural Detail (Facades, Roof Form, Entries)
[Ord. No. 5814 §9a.14, 4-27-2004]
4. Replication of the facades of more than four (4) attached town
home units in any single row shall be prohibited.
5. Exposed concrete foundation shall not be permitted where visible
from the street.
A. Architectural detailing on structures within Topton-Brighton range
from dormer windows, pitched roof lines and raised entrances to stone
accents and shuttered windows. New structures should use detailing to
visually "break-up" large walls and create interest at the street.
Characteristic architectural detailing, with dormers, pitched rooflines
and raised entrances.
1. Flat, mansard or exotic roof forms not characteristic of the
neighborhood shall be prohibited.
2. New structures shall use architectural detailing that is compatible
with the established architectural style of the neighborhood to
visually "break-up" large walls.
3. Exposed concrete foundation shall not be permitted where visible
from the street.
4. Columns shall be compatible with the predominant architectural
style of the neighborhood. Size, materials and proportions of the
columns to the structure shall be provided on submitted plans.
Section
410.525
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.530
AO:859

ARTICLE X
Westwood Corridor ("R-6") Urban Design Zoning District
Section 410.535. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §10a.1,
4-27-2004]
The general intent of these standards is to ensure that renovation and
redevelopment responds to and protects the established character of the
Westwood Corridor. Renovation standards shall apply only to structures
constructed prior to 1940.
Section 410.540. Location of Urban Design Zoning District [Ord.
No. 5814 §10a.2, 4-27-2004]
The Westwood Corridor ("R-6") Urban Design Zoning District is bounded by
Wydown Boulevard on the north and Clayton Road on the south, limited to
those properties zoned "R-6", as depicted below:
Section 410.545. Significance of Designation [Ord. No. 5814 §10a.3,
4-27-2004]
The regulations of this urban design zoning district shall supersede or
supplement, as applicable, the regulations of the base zoning district.
Where conflict results between the regulations of the urban design zoning
district and the provisions of the base zoning district, the provisions of the
urban design zoning district shall control.
Section 410.550. Uses Permitted [Ord. No. 5814 §10a.4, 4-27-2004]
The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in the
Table of Permitted Uses found in the base zoning district. If a "P" (permitted
by right) or a "C" (permitted by conditional use permit) is not indicated for
a use in the base zoning district or a use is not included in the base zoning
district, it is prohibited.
Section
410.535
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.555
AO:861
Section 410.555. Front Lot Coverage [Ord. No. 5814 §10a.5,
4-27-2004]
Section 410.560. Total Lot Coverage [Ord. No. 5814 §10a.6,
4-27-2004]
A. The high visibility of the front setback from the street creates a
significant impact on a neighborhood's character. In the Westwood
Corridor, the setback and open courtyards provided by the many Ushaped
buildings provides a soft, landscaped buffer between the
building and the street. New structures and renovations should
generally reflect the configuration of the structure being removed to
maintain the established character of the street.
B. New Construction—Design Standards.
1. A new structure replacing a U-shaped or other courtyard-oriented
structure shall be designed in a similar configuration to maintain
an open appearance at the street.
When replacing a courtyard-oriented structure, a new
structure should be designed in a similar configuration to
maintain an open character at the street.
2. Underground parking structures shall be accessed by a single
drive, as typically found in the corridor, to the maximum extent
feasible.
A. The Westwood Corridor is home to a variety of lot sizes and
configurations. Many of the lots offer limited opportunities for flexibility
in coverage due to their smaller size and proximity to adjacent homes.
However, a small number of lots along the southwest side of Westwood
are significantly deeper and wider, creating the potential for additional
coverage towards the rear of the lot without creating negative visual
impacts.
Section
410.555
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.560
AO:862
Section 410.565. Orientation of Primary Structure [Ord. No. 5814
§10a.7, 4-27-2004]
Section 410.570. Tree Preservation [Ord. No. 5814 §10a.8,
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6430 §1, 6-14-2016]
The shady canopy provided by mature trees is an important characterdefining
feature in many of Clayton's older residential neighborhoods. This
is particularly true in the Clayton Gardens and Clayshire where large,
evenly spaced trees line the street, buffering homes from traffic and giving
the neighborhood a more intimate feeling for pedestrians and residents.
Also contributing to this character are the many additional large caliper
trees scattered among the homes. As larger homes are introduced, they
should be sensitive to this character, preserving trees and vegetation.
Specific requirements are set forth in Article XXX: Trees and Landscaping
Regulations.
B. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the total lot shall be covered by
impervious material. Structures providing a front courtyard or
increased front yard setback, as specified in Section 410.585 Rear Yard
Setbacks, shall not be bound to a maximum total lot coverage, provided
that required front and side yard setbacks are met.
A. Building entrances in the corridor have typically been oriented towards
the front yard or courtyard and the street, accenting the primary facade
of the building. Although the physical layout of the structures vary from
a "U" shaped design opening to a courtyard, to a more uniform,
rectangular shape, the repetition of the entries help form a uniform line
along the street. New structures should be designed to be consistent
with the typical organization of the neighborhood.
Main entrances should be oriented towards the street, as typically
found in the Corridor.
B. The front entrance to a building shall be located on the front facade of
the building oriented towards the front yard or courtyard and street, as
found typically in the corridor.
Section
410.560
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.570
AO:863
Along Westwood, evenly spaced trees line the street, buffering the
sidewalk from traffic and enhancing the neighborhood character.
Section 410.575. Grading and Drainage [Ord. No. 5814 §10a.9,
4-27-2004]
Section 410.580. Front Yard Setbacks [Ord. No. 5814 §10a.10,
4-27-2004]
Section 410.585. Rear Yard Setbacks [Ord. No. 5814 §10a.11,
4-27-2004]
A. The wooded, gently rolling topography typical of the St. Louis area
contributes to the visual interest and variety of Clayton's residential
neighborhoods. Disturbing existing site topography to accommodate
larger homes with walk-out basements or below-grade garages can lead
to significant drainage problems, particularly for adjacent properties.
New homes should minimize site disturbances and should mitigate
runoff.
1. To the maximum extent feasible, development shall follow and
respect the existing topography of the site.
2. Extensive grading or unusual site improvements (e.g., retaining
walls greater than four (4) feet in height) shall not be permitted,
unless deemed compatible with the neighborhood and approved by
the Plan Commission.
3. Site drainage patterns shall be designed to prevent concentrated
surface drainage from collecting on and flowing across adjacent
lots, pedestrian paths, walks and sidewalks. Stormwater drainage
shall be connected to a storm sewer where available as determined
by the City.
A. The consistent appearance of a broad, landscaped front setback and
uniform building edge creates a sense of visual continuity along the
street and creates an open appearance characteristic of the
neighborhood. As redevelopment occurs, the open character of the
front setback should be preserved.
B. The front yard setback shall not be less than the average of those found
along a block face.
Section
410.570
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.585
AO:864
Section 410.590. Parking — New Construction [Ord. No. 5814
§10a.12, 4-27-2004]
A. The deep lot configurations found in the southwest area of the corridor
provide an opportunity for new development to utilize the rear yard
setback to acquire additional buildable area and density without
negatively impacting adjacent development. Actual appropriate
setbacks will vary slightly in order to accommodate services, such as
trash receptacles, and will be evaluated during the site plan review
process.
B. The minimum rear yard setback shall be fifteen (15) feet from the rear
property line to the closest rear wall of the principal structure. The
following incentives shall apply:
1. Structures designed in a U-shaped form that provide a front
courtyard space open to and visible from the street shall not be
required to have a minimum rear yard setback. The total area of a
front courtyard shall not be less than twenty percent (20%) of the
total building living area.
2. Structures shall be permitted to increase their allowable front yard
setback by fifteen (15) feet in lieu of providing a rear setback.
A. One (1) of the many appealing features of the Westwood Corridor is its
thoughtful treatment of off-street parking. Most of the structures
provide underground, off-street parking that is visually and functionally
integrated with the structure. As a result, broad lawns and shade trees
border most buildings rather than the unsightly, exposed parking lots
typically found with many more modern multi-family developments.
New development should provide off-street parking that is compatible
with the established character of the neighborhood.
1. Off-street parking shall be accommodated below ground and be
structurally and visually integrated as part of the primary structure
through the use of similar materials and architectural detailing.
Section
410.585
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.590
AO:865
Section 410.595. Building Materials/Colors [Ord. No. 5814 §10a.13,
4-27-2004]
Off-street parking shall be accommodated below ground
and be structurally and visually integrated as part of the
primary structure.
2. As specified in Section 410.555 parking structures shall be
accessed by a single drive, as typically found in the corridor, to the
maximum extent feasible.
A. As with many Clayton neighborhoods, the Westwood Corridor has
traditionally been dominated by the use of masonry building materials.
Standard size brick in predominantly red tones is the primary material
found. Accent materials are more varied, with a several varieties of
stone found on many structures at the foundation or around windows
and doors. Stucco is present as an accent material, but is currently
limited to few English Tudor style structures. Care should be taken to
preserve original building materials and to ensure that new or
replacement materials are of a similar appearance and character as
those traditionally found within the corridor.
This Tudor structure represents the range of accent materials
used to enhance the simple design of many Corridor structures.
B. New Construction—Design Standards.
1. Appropriate primary materials shall be limited to masonry
materials, such as brick or a combination of brick and stone, as
traditionally found within the corridor. Brick may be painted when
compatible with the existing neighborhood.
2. Stucco shall be permitted as an accent material not to exceed
twenty-five percent (25%) of any wall elevation.
3. Retaining walls shall be constructed from masonry materials
similar to those used on the primary structure.
Section
410.590
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.595
AO:866
Section 410.600. Building Height/ Scale/ Massing/ Form
(Relationship To Surrounding Development) [Ord. No. 5814
§10a.14, 4-27-2004]
4. Visible roof materials shall be of a similar scale and texture to those
traditionally used.
5. Asphalt shall not be used for driveways or driveway aprons. These
features shall be constructed of one (1) of the following materials:
a. Exposed aggregate;
b. Brick pavers; or
c. Stamped concrete.
6. Metal shall not be used as a primary roof material.
C. Renovation—Design Standards.
1. Character defining features, such as stone retaining walls, steps
and foundations, shall be preserved to the maximum extent
feasible.
2. Enclosure of or other significant alterations to decks or balconies
that were not originally enclosed shall be prohibited.
3. Original masonry building materials shall not be altered or
otherwise covered with new building materials, such as stucco or
vinyl siding, or painted.
4. Replacement materials on visible roof surfaces shall be of a similar
scale and texture as those traditionally used, such as tile or slate.
Typical architectural detailing in the Corridor.
Section
410.595
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.600
AO:867
Section 410.605. Architectural Detail and Character (Roof Form,
Doors, Windows) [Ord. No. 5814 §10a.15, 4-27-2004]
A. Building heights in the corridor are currently fairly uniform, ranging
from two (2) to three and one-half (3½) stories tall with fairly blocky
rectangular or "U" shaped configurations oriented towards the street or
a center lawn or courtyard. Surrounding development ranges from
blocky, mid-rise development along Hanley to a range of two- to threestory
single- and multi-family dwellings in the Mooreland's
neighborhood to the east. The height and mass of new development
should respond to both surrounding development and adjacent
development within the corridor. Subtle articulation of the wall surface
with design elements such as a soldier course, stone lintels or sills or
brick row-lock are common details in the neighborhood.
1. Building height shall not exceed three (3) stories or forty-five (45)
feet above the average existing grade of the site. Exceptions to the
maximum height shall be permitted on lots west of Westwood Drive
and south of Buckingham, building heights shall not exceed three
(3) stories or forty-five (45) feet above the average grade of the site
within twenty (20) feet of the front setback. Beyond twenty (20)
feet from the setback, building heights may "step-up" to a
maximum of five (5) stories or sixty-five (65) feet.
South of Buckingham, building heights may "step-up" from 3
stories or 45 feet to a maximum of 5 stories or 65 feet beyond 20
feet from the front setback.
2. Articulation of the wall surface shall be required. This may be
accomplished by a change in the brick pattern or the addition of
stone detailing.
A. Though fairly simple in their overall form, generally rectangular or "U"
shaped with gently pitched roof lines or pediment walls, the structures
found in the Westwood Corridor have many subtle architectural details
that add to their character. A wide variety of decorative windows add
visual interest. They range from groupings of multi-paned windows or
double-hung windows to some more ornate accent windows, such as
Section
410.600
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.605
AO:868
leaded or stained glass. Stone sills, headers or casings further enhance
many of the windows. Also significant are the many well-defined
entryways. Typically above the grade of the sidewalk, many have
elegant curving staircases, ornamental railing or stone retaining walls
leading to the entrance. In order to protect the rich character of the
corridor, care should be taken to preserve traditional architectural
detailing during significant renovation projects and ensure that infill
development utilizes window, roof line and entryway design and
placement that complements this established character.
A sampling of the Corridor's rich architectural detailing.
B. New Construction—Design Standards.
1. Windows shall be of a similar size, shape and architectural
character to those traditionally found in the corridor.
2. Roof forms and treatments shall be similar to those found on
existing structures in the corridor. Flat roof lines shall be concealed
by a parapet wall or other decorative feature as found in the
corridor.
3. New structures shall have a solid-to-void (wall-to-window) ratio
similar to that found on original structures in the corridor.
C. Renovation—Design Standards.
Section
410.605
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.605
AO:869
1. The character, proportion, size and general appearance of original
windows shall be preserved during renovation.
a. Original window openings shall not be enclosed, enlarged or
otherwise modified.
2. Replacement windows shall have a similar appearance as the
original window's design.
Replacement windows shall have a similar appearance as
the original window's design.
a. Replacement windows shall be of the same material as the
original to the maximum extent feasible. Alternatively,
substitute materials shall be considered if the dimension,
profile and finish closely match the original.
b. Snap-in muntins shall be used to create similar light and
shadow patterns, if direct replacement of true divided light
windows is not feasible.
Section
410.605
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.605
AO:870
ARTICLE XI
Christian Brothers Campus ("R-5") Urban Design Zoning District
Section 410.610. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5814 §11a.1,
4-27-2004]
The general intent of these standards is to ensure that redevelopment
occurring on the Christian Brothers Campus preserves the existing
character of the structures and is compatible with the established homes
in the surrounding neighborhood in terms of architectural character, scale
and design. Due to the uncertainty surrounding a future use for the campus,
these standards provide three (3) potential development scenarios. The first
(1st) scenario assumes the site will be redeveloped and integrated into
the existing neighborhood with structures of a similar scale. The standards
address the basic contextual tools for accomplishing this scenario, such
as setbacks, height and materials. This scenario would maintain very little
of the existing open character of the campus. The second (2nd) scenario
acknowledges that redevelopment of the campus could occur at a higher
intensity than the surrounding neighborhood, perhaps with the addition
of more buildings similar in height and scale to the Brother's Residence
along University or the original school building along Clayton Road. The
final concept assumes the campus would be maintained as an institutional
use, such as an educational facility. The latter two (2) concepts would
have the potential to maintain more of the existing open character of
the campus, due to a more clustered building configuration. A connection
through the campus is provided by the extension of Alamo in all three
(3) scenarios. Many of the standards would be applicable in all three (3)
scenarios, such as those provided for materials, architectural detailing and
parking. In cases where it was simply not realistic to predict the specifics
of future development scenarios, a detailed intent statement is provided
that addresses what would be desired from a plan submitted under any
of the three (3) scenarios. This statement provides guidance to both the
City and developers in the event a redevelopment plan is submitted for
the site. Renovation standards are also provided and apply only to campus
structures constructed prior to 1940.
Section
410.610
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.610
AO:871
Conceptually, Scenario 1 would
include infill development of the
campus in a scale and pattern
similar to the surrounding
neighborhood.
Conceptually, Scenario's 2 and 3
would include more intense infill
development on the campus for
either residential or institutional
use.
Section 410.615. Location of Urban Design Zoning District [Ord.
No. 5814 §11a.2, 4-27-2004]
The Christian Brothers Campus ("R-5") urban design zoning district is
bounded by San Bonita on the north, St. Rita on the west, University Lane
on the east and Clayton Road on the south as depicted below:
Section 410.620. Significance of Designation [Ord. No. 5814 §11a.3,
4-27-2004]
The regulations of this urban design zoning district shall supersede or
supplement, as applicable, the regulations of the base zoning district.
Where conflict results between the regulations of the urban design zoning
Section
410.610
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.620
AO:872
district and the provisions of the base zoning district, the provisions of the
urban design zoning district shall control.
Section 410.625. Uses Permitted [Ord. No. 5814 §11a.4, 4-27-2004]
The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in the
Table of Permitted Uses found in the base zoning district. If a "P" (permitted
by right) or a "C" (permitted by conditional use permit) is not indicated for
a use in the base zoning district or a use is not included in the base zoning
district, it is prohibited.
Section 410.630. Orientation of Buildings [Ord. No. 5814 §11a.5,
4-27-2004]
Section 410.635. Tree Preservation [Ord. No. 5814 §11a.6,
4-27-2004; Ord. No. 6430 §1, 6-14-2016]
The shady canopy provided by mature trees is an important characterdefining
feature in many of Clayton's older residential neighborhoods. This
is particularly true in the Clayton Gardens and Clayshire where large,
evenly spaced trees line the street, buffering homes from traffic and giving
the neighborhood a more intimate feeling for pedestrians and residents.
Also contributing to this character are the many additional large caliper
trees scattered among the homes. As larger homes are introduced, they
should be sensitive to this character, preserving trees and vegetation.
Specific requirements are set forth in Article XXX: Trees and Landscaping
Regulations.
Mature trees on the Campus, particularly along the perimeter, should be
preserved to help preserve the overall neighborhood character.
A. The entrances of buildings found along the Campus' perimeter streets
have typically been oriented towards the front yard and the street,
accenting the primary facade of the building and creating a uniform line
along the street. To reinforce this established pattern and help
integrate new development, new structures should be designed to be
consistent with the typical organization of the surrounding
neighborhood.
B. Structures along the street edge of the campus shall orient their front
entry towards the front yard and adjacent street.
Section
410.620
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.640
AO:873
Section 410.640. Grading and Drainage [Ord. No. 5814 §11a.7,
4-27-2004]
Section 410.645. Setbacks [Ord. No. 5814 §11a.8, 4-27-2004]
Section 410.650. Garage Width and Location [Ord. No. 5814 §11a.9,
4-27-2004]
A. The wooded, gently rolling topography typical of the St. Louis area
contributes to the visual interest and variety of Clayton's residential
neighborhoods. Disturbing existing site topography to accommodate
larger homes with walk-out basements or below-grade garages can lead
to significant drainage problems, particularly for adjacent properties.
New homes should minimize site disturbances and should mitigate
runoff.
1. To the maximum extent feasible, development shall follow and
respect the existing topography of the site.
2. Extensive grading or unusual site improvements (e.g., retaining
walls greater than four (4) feet in height) shall not be permitted,
unless deemed compatible with the neighborhood and approved by
the Plan Commission.
3. Site drainage patterns shall be designed to prevent concentrated
surface drainage from collecting on and flowing across adjacent
lots, pedestrian paths, walks and sidewalks. Stormwater drainage
shall be connected to a storm sewer where available as determined
by the City.
A. The consistent appearance of a broad, landscaped front setback and
uniform building edge creates a sense of visual continuity along the
street and creates an open appearance characteristic of the
neighborhood. As redevelopment occurs, the open character of the
front setback should be preserved.
1. Setbacks shall be consistent with the average of those found on the
block face of the other side of the street.
2. Setbacks from future streets interior to the CBC site shall be
consistent with the average of those found on the block face across
from the CBC boundary.
3. Larger residential or institutional structures may be permitted
larger setbacks as specified in the City of Clayton Municipal Code,
based on additional open space provisions.
4. The exact setback should be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.
A. In the residential neighborhood surrounding the Campus, garages are
located to the rear of the structure, creating little visual impact from
the street. This design characteristic should be carried through to new
Section
410.640
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.650
AO:874
Section 410.655. Parking [Ord. No. 5814 §11a.10, 4-27-2004]
residential development along the perimeter of the Campus, where
minimizing the visibility and impact of garages upon the street and
surrounding development is most important.
1. Garages shall be located at the rear of the lot and accessed by an
alley.
2. Front-loaded garages, at or below-grade, shall not be allowed.
Front-loaded garages, at or below-grade, shall not be
allowed.
A. The predominance and visibility of parking lots and covered parking on
the Campus from perimeter streets needs to be minimized. This is
particularly an issue for more intense residential development, as
described in Scenario 2 or for institutional uses as described in
Scenario 3, where larger, shared parking areas are likely to be
provided. The appearance of these areas should be enhanced and
buffered with landscaping to minimize potential impacts on
surrounding neighborhood.
1. Parking shall be located on the interior of the campus site or within
enclosed parking structures to the maximum extent feasible.
2. The number of contiguous surface parking spaces shall be limited
to twenty (20) and each block of twenty (20) shall be separated
from each other by at least one (1) of the following methods:
a. A landscaped median that is at least ten (10) feet wide;
b. A pedestrian walkway or sidewalk within a landscaped median
that is at least ten (10) feet wide;
c. A decorative fence or wall, a maximum of three (3) feet in
height, bordered by landscaping on at least one (1) side;
d. An access drive or public street; or
e. A building or buildings.
3. The perimeter of all surface parking areas shall be screened by one
(1) of the following methods:
Section
410.650
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.655
AO:875
Section 410.660. Building Materials/Colors [Ord. No. 5814 §11a.11,
4-27-2004]
a. A low continuous landscaped hedge at least three (3) feet high
consisting of a double row of shrubs planted three (3) feet on
center in a triangular pattern; or
b. A low decorative masonry wall or fence three (3) feet high in
combination with landscaping (landscaping shall be planted
between the wall and the public right-of-way, sidewalk or
boundary).
The perimeter of all parking areas shall be screened.
4. The visual impacts of parking structures shall be minimized by:
a. Screening cars in a parking structure so that they are not
visible from the street.
b. Locating parking structures towards the center of the lot when
feasible, reserving the street frontage for residential uses.
5. Parking structures shall be visually integrated with buildings in the
surrounding area.
a. Facade of the structure shall match the height of existing
structures if it faces the street.
b. Facade shall be constructed of brick to match adjacent
structures.
Parking structures shall be visually integrated with adjacent
buildings.
A. The CBC campus has traditionally been characterized by the use of
masonry building materials. Standard size brick in red tones is the
primary material found along with stone accents on many structures at
the foundation or around windows and doors. Care should be taken to
Section
410.655
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.660
AO:876
preserve original building materials and to ensure that new or
replacement materials are of a similar appearance and character as
those traditionally found within the neighborhood. Infill development
should retain the traditional brick character of existing historic
structures on the CBC site and of surrounding residential
neighborhood.
New or replacement materials should be of a similar appearance and
character as those traditionally found within the neighborhood.
B. New Construction—Design Standards.
1. Primary materials shall be limited to masonry materials, such as
brick or a combination of brick and stone, as found within the site
and surrounding neighborhood. Brick may be painted when
compatible with the existing neighborhood.
2. The following materials are prohibited:
a. EIFS;
b. "Jumbo" brick;
c. Split-faced block; or
d. Stucco.
3. Retaining walls shall be constructed of materials similar in color,
texture and scale as those used on the primary structure. The
following materials shall not be used for any retaining walls visible
from the street or from the ground level of any adjoining residence:
a. Wood ties;
b. Versa-lok;
c. Keystone;
d. Windsor; or
e. Similar modular block wall systems.
4. Asphalt shall not be used for driveways or driveway aprons. These
features shall be constructed of one (1) of the following materials:
a. Exposed aggregate;
Section
410.660
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.660
AO:877
Section 410.665. Building Height/ Scale/ Massing; Form/ Transition
(Relationship To Surrounding Development) [Ord. No. 5814
§11a.12, 4-27-2004]
b. Brick pavers; or
c. Stamped concrete.
C. Renovation—Design Standards.
1. Original building materials shall be repaired rather than replaced
to the maximum extent feasible.
2. Character defining features, such as stone retaining walls, steps
and foundations, shall be preserved to the maximum extent
feasible.
3. Enclosure of or other significant alterations to decks or balconies
that were not originally enclosed shall be prohibited.
4. Original masonry building materials shall not be altered or
otherwise covered with new building materials, such as stucco or
vinyl siding, or painted.
5. Replacement materials on visible roof surfaces shall be of a similar
scale and texture as those traditionally used.
A. Existing campus development ranges in height from four (4) stories
along Clayton Road to single- story accessory buildings near San
Bonita, while existing homes adjacent to the campus range between
two (2) and three (3) stories. The height of new structures should vary
or transition where appropriate in order to respond to and ensure
compatibility with surrounding development.
1. The height of structures with frontage on the residential streets
bordering the campus shall "step-down" to the approximate height
of structures on the fronting block face.
The height of structures with frontage on the residential
streets bordering the campus shall "step-down" to the
median height of structures on the fronting block face.
2. Larger residential uses or institutional uses shall provide a
transition between single-family residential and non-single-family
uses.
Section
410.660
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.665
AO:878
Section 410.670. Architectural Detail (Windows, Doors, Balconies)
[Ord. No. 5814 §11a.13, 4-27-2004]
Larger residential uses or institutional uses shall provide
a transition between single-family residential and nonsingle-
family uses.
These transitions may be:
a. A step-down in building height, or
b. A greater than required building-to-building setback.
3. The facades of townhouses shall be punctuated by a change in
texture or material, offset or other architectural feature to
differentiate individual units. [Ord. No. 6509, 11-28-2017]
A. General. Though fairly simple in their overall form, generally
rectangular with gently pitched roof lines and decorative pediment
walls, the original structures found on the CBC Campus have many
subtle architectural details that add to their character. Facades are
accented with numerous groupings of windows. Stone sills, headers or
casings further enhance many of the windows. In order to protect the
rich character of the Campus, care should be taken to preserve
traditional architectural detailing during renovation. Infill
development, regardless of its use or scale, should complement this
established character and the scale of the surrounding neighborhood.
B. New Construction—Design Standards.
1. Infill development shall utilize architectural detailing similar to
that found on existing campus structures.
Infill development should integrate architectural detailing similar
to that found on existing campus structures.
Section
410.665
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.670
AO:879
2. Windows shall be of a similar size, shape and architectural
character to those found on the campus.
3. Roof forms and treatments shall be similar to those found on the
CBC Campus.
4. New structures shall have a solid-to-void (wall-to-window) ratio
similar to that found on original campus structures.
5. The facades of townhouses shall be punctuated by a change in
texture or material, offset or other architectural feature to
differentiate individual units. [Ord. No. 6509, 11-28-2017]
6. Decks or balconies fronting block faces shall not be permitted
facing adjacent residences to protect the privacy of residents.
7. Exposed concrete foundations shall not be permitted where visible
from the street.
8. Columns shall be compatible with the predominant architectural
style of the neighborhood. Size, materials and proportions of the
columns to the structure shall be provided on submitted plans.
C. Renovation—Design Standards.
1. The character, proportion, size and general appearance of original
windows shall be preserved during renovation.
a. Original window openings shall not be enclosed, enlarged or
otherwise modified.
b. Original ornamental or specialty windows such as casement,
composite or double hung shall be repaired rather than
replaced to the maximum extent feasible.
2. Replacement windows shall have a similar appearance as the
original window's design.
a. Replacement windows shall be of the same material as the
original to the maximum extent feasible. Alternatively,
substitute materials shall be considered if the dimension,
profile and finish closely match the original.
Section
410.670
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.670
AO:880
ARTICLE XII
Clayton Road ("C-2") Urban Design Zoning District
Section 410.675. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 5906 §3(12a.1),
10-25-2005]
The general intent of these regulations and standards is to minimize the
impact of future development within the Clayton Road Urban Design
District ("CR-UDD") on adjacent residential neighborhoods, promote a
mixed-use/residentially-oriented pattern of development that is more
compatible with the adjacent neighborhoods than traditional commercial
uses found in other areas of the Clayton Road corridor, to increase the
predictability and flexibility of future development within the "CR-UDD"
and to maintain the "CR-UDD" a visually appealing gateway for the City of
Clayton and the adjacent neighborhoods.
Section 410.680. Location of Urban Design Zoning District [Ord.
No. 5906 §3(12a.2), 10-25-2005]
The Clayton Road ("C-2") Urban Design Zoning District encompasses the
properties fronting the north side of Clayton Road from Big Bend Boulevard
to the east City limits as depicted on the map below:
Section 410.685. Significance of Designation [Ord. No. 5906
§3(12a.3), 10-25-2005]
The regulations of this urban design zoning district shall supersede or
supplement, as applicable, the regulations of the base zoning district.
Where conflict results between the regulations of the urban design zoning
district and the provisions of the base zoning district, the provisions of the
urban design zoning district shall control.
Section 410.690. Uses Permitted [Ord. No. 5906 §3(12a.4),
10-25-2005]
The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in the
Table of Permitted Uses found at the end of this Article. If a "P" (permitted
by right) or a "C" (permitted by conditional use permit) is not indicated for
a use in the Table, it is prohibited.
Section
410.675
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.695
AO:881
Section 410.695. Definitions [Ord. No. 5906 §3(12a.5), 10-25-2005]
This Section provides definitions specific to the "CR-UDD". Definitions
governing all urban design districts inclusive of the "CR-UDD" are found in
Chapter 405.
LIVE/WORK UNIT — A structure with a combination of uses where work
activities occur and a dwelling unit is included for the business occupant.
Such unit shall have only one (1) kitchen and not more than fifty percent
(50%) of the structure shall be dedicated for a business use. The dwelling
unit shall be occupied by either the owner, the tenant or the owner or
tenant's employee. The residence must be the residence of a person
responsible for the work performed on the premises.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — It is the responsibility of the
developer to show clearly and convincingly to the satisfaction of the Plan
Commission that, under the circumstances, reasonable efforts have been
undertaken to comply with the regulation or requirement, that the cost
of additional compliance measures clearly outweigh the potential benefits
to the public or would unreasonably burden the proposed project and
reasonable steps have been undertaken to minimize any potential harm or
adverse impacts resulting from non-compliance.
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT — Development containing a mix of
complimentary uses within the same building. Typically, mixed-use
buildings contain some combination of retail, office and residential uses,
with retail uses located at the ground floor and office or residential uses
located above. Residential uses shall contain a floor area no less than seven
hundred fifty (750) square feet.
Section 410.700. Front Setbacks [Ord. No. 5906 §3(12a.6),
10-25-2005]
A. This Section provides the following standards designed to maintain the
pedestrian-oriented, landscaped character of the front setback (where
still evident), to avoid creating an imposing, "canyon" of taller buildings
along Clayton Road and to establish intersections within the "CR-UDD"
as prominent gateways to the adjacent neighborhoods.
B. Front setback may be reduced to twelve and one-half (12.5) feet for
mixed-use development located on corner lots. Reduced setback shall
be allowed within sixty (60) feet of the applicable intersection (as
measured from the property line at the back of the sidewalk) and shall
only be applicable to lots adjacent to the following intersections:
1. DeMun Avenue and Clayton Road;
2. Seminary Place and Clayton Road;
3. St. Rita Avenue and Clayton Road; and
4. Concordia Lane and Clayton Road.
Section
410.695
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.705
AO:882
Section 410.705. Front Lot Coverage [Ord. No. 5906 §3(12a.7),
10-25-2005]
Section 410.710. Building Orientation [Ord. No. 5906 §3(12a.8),
10-25-2005]
Section 410.715. Landscaping and Screening [Ord. No. 5906
§3(12a.9), 10-25-2005; Ord. No. 6430 §1, 6-14-2016]
A. This Section is intended to minimize the impact of paving and other
hard materials that can detract from the existing green, landscaped
character desirable along the north Clayton Road frontage and to
maintain the green, landscape character of the front setback where still
evident.
1. Residential and mixed-use developments shall have no more than
thirty percent (30%) of the required front yard setback covered by
impervious material. This standard shall not be applicable to
commercial development and shall only be applicable to the portion
of a corner development where a reduced front setback is not
permitted. If a corner development does not opt to reduce the front
setback for the area permitted, the above provision would apply to
the entire lot frontage.
2. Surface parking shall be prohibited between the site's primary
building and Clayton Road.
A. This Section is intended to maintain the traditional orientation of
buildings and the pedestrian-oriented character of development along
the Clayton Road frontage.
1. The primary entrance of all new structures shall be oriented
towards Clayton Road.
A. This Section provides the following standards to enhance and soften the
appearance of new development as viewed from adjacent
neighborhoods and Clayton Road, to ensure parking and service areas
are screened from adjacent neighborhoods and Clayton Road, and to
maintain the tree lined appearance of the Clayton Road frontage by
protecting the established tree canopy within the district. Specific
requirements are set forth in Article XXX: Trees and Landscaping
Regulations.
1. The perimeter of all surface parking and service areas shall be
screened using one (1) of the following methods:
a. A low continuous landscaped hedge a minimum of three (3)
feet high, consisting of a double row of shrubs planted three (3)
feet on center in a triangular pattern, or
Section
410.705
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.715
AO:883
Section 410.720. Side Setback [Ord. No. 5906 §3(12a.10),
10-25-2005]
Section 410.725. Rear Setback [Ord. No. 5906 §3(12a.11),
10-25-2005]
b. A low masonry wall or fence three (3) feet high in combination
with landscaping (landscaping shall be planted between the
wall and the public right-of-way, sidewalk or boundary).
2. Existing tree lawns shall be retained as part of any redevelopment
project. In instances where the tree lawn has been removed
previously, it shall be re-established as part of any redevelopment
project.
3. Retaining walls shall not exceed five (5) feet in height. Where a
larger wall is required to create a transition in grade, a landscape
terrace, a minimum of three (3) feet in depth, shall be provided
between each five (5) foot wall section.
A. This Section provides the following standards to maintain light access
and air circulation for adjacent residential neighborhoods and to
maintain visual breaks in development along Clayton Road, particularly
when multiple lots are consolidated for a single development.
1. A five (5) foot side yard setback shall be provided for all
development within the "CR-UDD" with the following exception:
a. Town house development:
(1) Required side yard setbacks may be reduced or eliminated
to allow for creativity in building design, however, the
following additional standards shall apply:
(a) Building heights shall not exceed three (3) stories or
forty-five (45) feet above the average existing grade,
whichever is less;
(b) Total building length shall not exceed one hundred ten
(110) feet and shall contain the required offsets
specified in these standards (Partial stories with
dormers or sheds may be permitted under sloping
roofs. Partial stories shall be completely contained
beneath the slope of the roof line); and
(c) A five (5) foot side yard setback shall be provided on
either end of a multi-unit town home structure where
the structure is adjacent to an existing structure or a
property not under ownership of the applicant.
A. This Section provides the following standards to maintain visual relief
between residential lots south of the alley within the Hi-Pointe/DeMun
Section
410.715
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.725
AO:884
Section 410.730. Grading and Drainage [Ord. No. 5906 §3(12a.12),
10-25-2005]
Section 410.735. Building Materials [Ord. No. 5906 §3(12a.13),
10-25-2005]
neighborhood and new development within the "CR-UDD" and to
minimize shadowing of residential lots north of the alley.
1. A landscape buffer a minimum of four (4) feet shall be provided
along the rear building wall to soften its appearance when viewed
from the alley or adjacent residences. The landscape buffer shall
include evergreen shrubs with an upright growth habit that are a
minimum of five (5) feet tall at the time of installation and are
spaced a maximum of four (4) feet on center. A variety of other
complementary planting material shall also be incorporated to
provide visual interest.
2. The following incentives shall be provided to increase buffering and
open space for by right mixed-use developments:
a. Floor area ratio may be increased by 0.1 above the 1.5 floor
area ratio maximum for:
(1) Each two hundred (200) square feet of usable open space
provided in the form of a central courtyard opening onto
the alley; or
(2) Each additional two (2) feet added to the minimum rear
setback.
b. The maximum floor area ratio that may be achieved using this
incentive shall be two (2.0).
A. This Section provides the following standards to mitigate stormwater
runoff caused by new development within the "CR-UDD" onto
properties in the adjacent residential neighborhoods.
1. To the maximum extent feasible, development shall follow and
respect the existing topography of the site. The finished grade of
the front yard shall match that of adjacent properties to avoid
creating a "stepped" appearance along the Clayton Road frontage.
2. Site drainage patterns shall be designed so as to minimize
concentrated surface drainage and runoff onto adjacent properties.
3. Stormwater drainage shall be connected to a storm sewer where
available.
A. This Section provides the following standards to ensure that future
development provides an attractive gateway to the City of Clayton,
incorporates materials that are compatible with the traditional
development character found in the district and adjacent residential
Section
410.725
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.735
AO:885
neighborhoods and to use materials that provide a sense of permanence
and quality.
1. Primary building materials shall be limited to masonry materials
such as brick or a combination of brick and stone, as traditionally
found within the district and adjacent residential neighborhoods.
All materials shall be similar in color, texture and scale as those
traditionally found within the district and in adjacent residential
neighborhoods and the Hi-Pointe/DeMun Historic District.
Materials characteristic of the Hi-Pointe/DeMun Historic District
include:
a. Decorative terra cotta tile (either red unglazed or green
glazed) and slate roof accents;
b. Decorative brick patterns;
c. Cut stone foundations and accents;
d. Varied, but muted, brick colors including greens, tans, yellows
and browns;
e. Varied brick textures ranging from smooth faced to heavily
textured; and
f. Varied mortar colors including brown, red, light gray and sand,
but with black being predominate.
2. The following materials shall not be permitted for use as primary
building materials or accent materials:
a. EIFS;
b. "Jumbo" brick;
c. Split-faced block; or
d. Stucco.
3. Retaining walls shall be constructed of materials similar in color,
texture and scale as the primary building materials. The following
materials shall not be used for any retaining walls visible from
Clayton Road, the alley or any adjacent property:
a. Wood ties;
b. Keystone;
c. Windsor; or
d. Similar modular block wall systems.
4. All exposed concrete walls (such as for the exterior walls of
enclosed parking areas) shall be faced with the primary building
material and/or a predominant accent material.
Section
410.735
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.740
AO:886
Section 410.740. Building Height/ Massing/ Form (Relationship To
Surrounding Development) [Ord. No. 5906 §3(12a.14), 10-25-2005]
A. This Section provides the following standards to ensure that height,
mass and bulk of new development does not adversely affect the
character of adjacent residential properties or the quality of life of
neighboring residents, to maintain visual breaks along Clayton Road,
particularly when multiple lots are consolidated for a single
development, to maintain light access and air circulation for adjacent
residential neighborhoods and emphasize the role of the "CR-UDD" as a
gateway to adjacent neighborhoods.
1. Buildings that exceed three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet in
height shall step down to the height of the adjacent rear building
elevation or thirty (30) feet, whichever is greater. The height of the
adjacent rear building elevation shall be measured from the
average existing grade of the site to the peak of the roof. The depth
of each step shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet.
2. The following incentive shall be provided to encourage a reduction
in total building height for by right mixed-use development:
a. An increase in floor area ratio of 0.1 above the 1.5 floor area
ratio maximum may be granted for each two (2) foot reduction
in height below the allowable maximum.
b. The maximum floor area ratio that may be achieved using this
incentive shall be two (2.0).
(Note: The ability of an applicant to seek an increased
FAR through the "PUD" process would not be affected.)
3. A shadow study shall be provided for all new development that
exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in height. Such study shall be funded
by the applicant and shall be conducted by an independent
contractor to the City. The study shall demonstrate that shadows
would not have a significant adverse affect on neighboring
residents.
4. Where multiple lots have been assembled, resulting in a combined
lot that is significantly larger than the traditional forty (40) foot lot
width typically found within the district, the following standards
shall apply:
a. For buildings that exceed three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet
in height, one (1) of the following standards or combinations of
standards shall apply:
(1) Option A:
(a) The total length of buildings shall be limited to eighty
(80) feet; and
Section
410.740
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.740
AO:887
(b) Variation in the building facade shall be provided
using a combination of accent materials, offsets,
windows and other features.
(2) Option B:
(a) The total length of buildings may be increased to a
maximum of one hundred sixty-five (165) feet
provided that the building is organized as a series of
smaller building modules defined by a gap or
separation in the building facade to allow light to
penetrate through the "CR-UDD" to the adjacent
neighborhood.
(b) The gap or separation shall:
(i) Be a minimum of five (5) feet in width;
(ii) Extend from the top of the first (1st) floor of the
building to the top of the roof for buildings up to
four (4) stories or fifty-two (52) feet in height; and
(iii) Extend from the top of the second (2nd) story of
the building to the top of the roof for buildings
that exceed four (4) stories or fifty-two (52) feet in
height.
(iv) For the purposes of satisfying the above
standards, the width of building modules may
vary dependent upon the total length and design
of the building, however, no individual building
module shall exceed eighty (80) feet in length.
(3) Option C: The total length of a building may be increased
to a maximum of one hundred sixty-five (165) feet provided
that the building is organized in a courtyard or "u-shaped"
configuration and that the courtyard is a minimum of
twenty-five (25) feet deep (as measured from the front
setback) and a minimum of forty (40) feet in length.
(4) Option D:
(a) The total length of a building may be increased to a
maximum of one hundred sixty-five (165) feet
provided that a minimum of three (3) offsets are
provided along the front facade of the building.
(b) Offsets shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in depth.
b. For buildings that are less than three (3) stories or forty-five
(45) feet in height, the following standards shall apply:
Section
410.740
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.740
AO:888
Section 410.745. Architectural Detail (Roof Form, Facades, Doors,
Windows) [Ord. No. 5906 §3(12a.15), 10-25-2005]
Section 410.750. Revisions [Ord. No. 5906 §3(12a.16), 10-25-2005]
(1) The total length of buildings shall be limited to eighty (80)
feet; and
(2) Variation in the building facade shall be provided using a
combination of accent materials, offsets, windows and
other features.
A. This Section provides the following standards to ensure that new
development is compatible with the traditional character of original
structures within the district and that of adjacent neighborhoods.
B. New structures shall incorporate architectural detailing that is
compatible with the traditional character of original structures found in
the "CR-UDD" and that of structures in adjacent neighborhoods and the
Hi-Pointe/DeMun Historic District (i.e., scale and types of materials,
roof treatments or other similar features). Architectural accents
characteristic of the Hi-Point/DeMun Historic District include:
1. Decorative terra cotta roof tile accents;
2. Contrasting brick work and limestone or terra cotta accents; and
3. Divided light windows above the first (1st) floor level for mixed-use
buildings.
C. "Warehouse" style architecture typically characterized by a blocky
form, flat roof lines and sparse architectural detail shall be prohibited.
D. Blank walls, void of windows or architectural detailing are prohibited.
All facades visible from Clayton Road frontage or other public right-ofway
(including the alley) shall incorporate a similar level of wall
articulation and architectural detailing as the front facade.
E. Mixed-use and commercial structures shall incorporate large
"storefront" windows, architectural detailing and other features at the
ground level to maintain a pedestrian-friendly environment at the street
edge.
A. The following Section provides revisions to the base "C-2" zoning
district regulations in the "CR-UDD" in order to allow for a broader
range of uses within the "CR-UDD" to promote neighborhood
compatibility and to enhance opportunities for the future
redevelopment of mid-block lots, to encourage mixed-use development
within the "CR-UDD", particularly at key intersections, where access
can be more easily managed and mixed-use can help reinforce these
locations as gateways to the adjacent neighborhood, to limit autointensive
uses that are incompatible with and could potentially be
Section
410.740
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.750
AO:889
disruptive to adjacent residential neighborhoods and to promote uses
within the "CR-UDD" (such as live/work) that generate low volumes
of traffic, making them more compatible with adjacent residential
neighborhoods.
1. For properties located within the "CR-UDD", the following use may
be permitted by right, subject to applicable design standards set
forth in this Article and in the Zoning Ordinance and subject to site
plan review which may include studies to evaluate the potential
effects or functions of one (1) or more of the following: lighting,
traffic, parking and shadowing:
a. Mixed-use development (see definition in Section 410.695).
2. Residential uses shall be prohibited on the first (1st) floor of mixeduse
developments unless such units are used for live/work
purposes.
3. For properties located within the "CR-UDD", the following uses
may be permitted by conditional use permit or through the planned
unit development process, subject to the design standards set forth
above.
a. Live/work development (see definition in Section 410.695).
Such uses are required a live/work occupancy permit to be
renewed on an annual basis for the first (1st) three (3) years of
such use. Staff will submit an annual report to the City's Plan
Commission regarding live/work uses each January for three
(3) years.
4. Live/work developments containing four (4) or less units shall
provide parking as follows:
a. One and one-half (1.5) spaces per residential unit and two (2)
spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of business space.
5. Live/work developments containing more than four (4) units shall
provide a parking study that demonstrates adequate parking will
be provided.
6. The following uses may be permitted by conditional use permit or
through the planned unit development process, subject to the
design standards set forth in this Article and in the Zoning
Ordinance:
a. Multi-family residential development; and
b. Town home residential development.
7. To maintain corner properties for commercial and mixed-use
development, single-use residential development shall not be
permitted within sixty (60) feet of the following intersections:
Section
410.750
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.750
AO:890
Section 410.755. Permitted Uses For "CR-UDD" [Ord. No. 5906
§3(12a.17), 10-25-2005]
PERMITTED USES FOR "CR-UDD"
Accessory uses and buildings incidental to permitted
uses.
P
Amateur radio, home antennas and associated
equipment (subject to Article XXVI of Chapter 405).
P
Art gallery or studio. P
Bakeries limited to the processing of bakery goods for
sale only on the premises and consumption off the
premises.
C
Banks, savings and loans, credit unions and other
financial institutions.
P
Commercial antennas (subject to Article XXVI of
Chapter 405).
P
Dry cleaning and dyeing establishment. P
Kiosk (subject to the provisions of Article II, Section
405.310).
P
Laundry shop--either drop-off or self-service providing
no more than 30 machines.
P
Medical or dental clinic. P
Messenger and telephone exchange building. P
Mixed-use developments (per definition in Section
410.695).
P
a. DeMun Avenue and Clayton Road;
b. Seminary Place and Clayton Road;
c. St. Rita Avenue and Clayton Road; and
d. Concordia Lane and Clayton Road.
8. The following uses shall be prohibited within the "CR-UDD":
a. Utility, utility station or substation;
b. Gasoline and oil service stations;
c. Car wash establishments;
d. Surface parking as a primary use; and
e. Structured parking as a primary use.
9. Surface and structured parking shall continue to be permitted as a
primary use for municipal purposes.
Section
410.750
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.755
AO:891
PERMITTED USES FOR "CR-UDD"
Offices--Business or professional. P
Pharmacies. P
Place of religious worship. P
Recreation building or structure or grounds. P
Retail establishments. P
Academy (including dancing, painting, theater, karate
and similar disciplines).
P
Automobile agencies. P
Banquet facilities. P
Catering establishment. P
Church spires, belfries, monuments, ornamental towers
and spires and chimneys exceeding the maximum
height in the zoning district may be erected to such
height authorized by the Board of Aldermen of the City
by conditional use permit or general ordinance.
P
Day care, nursery, pre-kindergarten, play and special
schools and kindergarten.
C
Drive-through establishments for financial institutions. C
Funeral homes, mortuaries and undertaking
establishments.
C
Grocery stores. C
Health clubs. C
Hotel. C
Institution--Public buildings, hospitals, institutions or
schools, when permitted in a district, may be erected to
a height not exceeding 110 feet if the building is set
back from each yard line at least 1 foot for each foot of
additional building height above the height limit
otherwise permitted in the district in which the
building is built.
C
Live/work unit (per definition in Section 410.695). C
Lodge hall or club. C
Microbreweries. P
Nursing and convalescent home. C
Section
410.755
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.755
AO:892
PERMITTED USES FOR "CR-UDD"
Public buildings erected or used by any department of
the City, County, State or Federal Government. Public
buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools, when
permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not
exceeding 110 feet if the building is set back from each
yard line at least 1 foot for each foot of additional
building height above the height limit otherwise
permitted in the district in which the building is built.
C
Public interest signs. C
Residential--multi-family residential development or
town home development.
C
Restaurants (including carry-out, self-seating and fullservice)
and prepared food dispensing uses.
C
Schools for business, professional and technical
training, but not including outdoor areas for driving or
heavy equipment training.
C
Theaters, both live performance and movies. C
P = Permitted by right
C = Permitted with conditional use permit
Note: Uses not appearing in this table are prohibited.
Section
410.755
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.755
AO:893

ARTICLE XII-A
Transit Oriented Development Overlay District – Central Avenue
Station
Section 410.757.1. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 6052 §1,
1-13-2009]
The Central Avenue Station Transit Oriented Development Overlay District
(herein referred to in this Article as the Central Avenue TOD District) is
intended to apply to redevelopment in the immediate vicinity of the Central
Avenue MetroLink Station. This location presents a unique opportunity for
the City to leverage the benefits of its proximity to MetroLink with future
mid to high density office, retail and mixed-use development.
Section 410.757.2. Location of Overlay Zone [Ord. No. 6052 §1,
1-13-2009]
The Central Avenue TOD District is bounded by Shaw Park Drive on the
south, Hanley Road on the east, Brentwood Boulevard on the west and
Bonhomme Avenue on the north. The Central Avenue TOD District is an
overlay to the base zoning district contained within its boundaries and is
indicated by the designation of the Central Avenue TOD Overlay Zoning
District on the District Map.
Section 410.757.3. Significance of Designation [Ord. No. 6052 §1,
1-13-2009]
The regulations of this overlay district shall supersede or supplement, as
applicable, the regulations of the base zoning district. Where conflict results
between the regulations of the overlay district and the provisions of the
base zoning district, the provisions of the overlay district shall control.
Section
410.757.1
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.757.4
AO:895
Section 410.757.4. Uses Permitted [Ord. No. 6052 §1, 1-13-2009]
The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in the
Table of Permitted Uses found in the base zoning district. If a "P" (Permitted
by Right) or a "C" (Permitted by Conditional Use Permit) is not indicated
for a use in the base zoning district or a use is not included in the base
zoning district, it is prohibited. In addition, the following auto-related uses
are prohibited or permitted only by conditional use permit:
* Service stations (prohibited use)
* Car wash establishments (prohibited use)
* Automobile agencies (conditional use permit)
* Surface parking lots and garages without ground floor retail
(conditional use permit)
Section 410.757.5. Special Development District (SDD) or Planned
Unit Development (PUD) Required [Ord. No. 6052 §1, 1-13-2009]
Any person requesting a building permit involving construction of a new
building or structure shall submit an application for a rezoning to a Special
Development District or Planned Unit Development District in accordance
with Chapter 405.
Section 410.757.6. Rezoning Amendment [Ord. No. 6052 §1,
1-13-2009]
The application process includes a request for rezoning pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 405. Rezoning must be completed concurrently with
the approval process for a special development or planned unit
development.
Section 410.757.7. Maximum Building Height [Ord. No. 6052 §1,
1-13-2009]
There is no maximum building height in this district.
Section 410.757.8. Maximum Floor Area [Ord. No. 6052 §1,
1-13-2009]
There is no maximum floor area ratio (FAR) in this district, except on the
east side of Brentwood Boulevard (R-7), where FAR must conform to the
regulations of the base zoning.
Section 410.757.9. Setback Requirements [Ord. No. 6052 §1,
1-13-2009]
The setback requirements are the same as in the base zoning district,
except that the front yard setback must be a minimum of ten (10) feet.
Setback requirements may be modified subject to the provisions and
Section
410.757.4
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.757.9
AO:896
requirements of the special development or planned unit development
process as outlined in Chapter 405.
Section 410.757.10. Off-street Parking and Loading Requirements
[Ord. No. 6052 §1, 1-13-2009]
There is no minimum parking requirement in the Central Avenue TOD
District. Parking requirements are at the discretion of the Plan Commission
and Board of Aldermen based upon a parking study provided by a parking
professional substantiating the developer's stated parking need. Loading
requirements are as stated in Chapter 405, Article XXV, Off-Street Parking
and Loading Regulations.
Section 410.757.11. Site Plan and Architectural Considerations
[Ord. No. 6052 §1, 1-13-2009]
Section 410.757.12. Consideration of Relevant Plans [Ord. No. 6052
§1, 1-13-2009]
The Board of Aldermen shall, in arriving at its decision on a proposed
SDD or PUD, consider these regulations, Chapter 405, the Master Plan
and any other land use or urban design policies relevant to the specific
site which have been accepted or adopted by the Board of Aldermen. The
A. This district is intended to foster development with a substantially
enhanced environmental profile by, in part, emphasizing public transit
and enhanced pedestrian accessibility. To achieve these goals, the
district incentivizes more economically productive use of available land
by reducing on-site parking thereby affording more economically
productive use of available land. In evaluating whether proposed
developments achieve these objectives, the Plan Commission/
Architectural Review Board shall assess compliance with the following
standards:
1. Linkage between the development and the Central Avenue
MetroLink Station, if one does not currently exist.
2. Leadership in energy and environmental design (LEED)
certification from the U.S. Green Building Council at a minimum
"Certified" level including applicable regional priorities or an
equivalent certification from a nationally recognized third (3rd)
party verified organization as determined by the Plan Commission.
3. City streetscape consistent with the City of Clayton's streetscape
standards.
4. Greenspace/urban gathering areas open to the street and
proportionate to the development size and scope.
B. The special development or planned unit development ordinance shall
specify whether and how individual standards are to be satisfied and
penalties for failure to fulfill agreed undertakings.
Section
410.757.9
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.757.12
AO:897
Plan Commission shall, at the time of forwarding its recommendations to
the Board of Aldermen, forward any recommendation(s) pertaining to the
specific site that is contained in the Master Plan. If the Plan Commission's
recommendations vary from such specific recommendation(s) in the Master
Plan for the site, such variations shall be noted and explained in the Plan
Commission's report to the Board of Aldermen.
Section
410.757.12
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.757.12
AO:898
ARTICLE XII-B
Transit Oriented Development Overlay – Forsyth Boulevard Station
Section 410.759.1. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 6053 §1,
1-13-2009]
The Forsyth Station Transit Oriented Development Overlay District (herein
referred to in this Article as the Forsyth TOD District) is intended to apply to
redevelopment in the immediate vicinity of the Forsyth MetroLink Station.
This location presents a unique opportunity for the City to leverage the
benefits of its proximity to MetroLink with future mid to high density
residential and mixed-use development.
Section 410.759.2. Location of Overlay Zone [Ord. No. 6053 §1,
1-13-2009]
The Forsyth TOD District is generally bounded by the alley north of Forsyth
on the north, the City limits on the east, Forest Park Parkway on the south
west of the Carondelet Plaza fountain to alley on the south side of Forsyth
Boulevard to Hanley Road on the west. The Forsyth TOD District is an
overlay to the base zoning district contained within its boundaries and is
indicated by the designation of the Forsyth TOD Overlay Zoning District on
the District Map.
Section 410.759.3. Significance of Designation [Ord. No. 6053 §1,
1-13-2009]
The regulations of this overlay district shall supersede or supplement, as
applicable, the regulations of the base zoning district. Where conflict results
between the regulations of the overlay district and the provisions of the
base zoning district, the provisions of the overlay district shall control.
Section
410.759.1
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.759.4
AO:899
Section 410.759.4. Uses Permitted [Ord. No. 6053 §1, 1-13-2009]
The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in the
Table of Permitted Uses found in the base zoning district. If a "P" (Permitted
by Right) or a "C" (Permitted by Conditional Use Permit) is not indicated
for a use in the base zoning district or a use is not included in the base
zoning district, it is prohibited. In addition, the following auto-related uses
are specifically prohibited or permitted only by conditional use permit:
* Service stations (prohibited use)
* Car wash establishments (prohibited use)
* Automobile agencies (conditional use permit)
* Surface parking lots and garages without ground floor retail
(conditional use permit)
All buildings fronting Forsyth Boulevard or Hanley Road must contain first
(1st) floor retail.
Section 410.759.5. Special Development District (SDD) or Planned
Unit Development (PUD) Required [Ord. No. 6053 §1, 1-13-2009]
Any person requesting a building permit involving construction of a new
building or structure shall submit an application for a rezoning to a Special
Development District or Planned Unit Development District in accordance
with Chapter 405.
Section 410.759.6. Rezoning Amendment [Ord. No. 6053 §1,
1-13-2009]
The application process includes a request for rezoning pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 405. Rezoning must be completed concurrently with
the approval process for the special development or planned unit
development.
Section 410.759.7. Maximum Building Height [Ord. No. 6053 §1,
1-13-2009]
A. There is no maximum building height on the south portion of the district
between the east City limits and Lyle Avenue, on the south side of
Forsyth Boulevard. Upper levels of tall buildings fronting the south side
of Forsyth Boulevard between Lyle Avenue and Hanley Road and on the
north side of Forsyth in the "C-2" and "R-4" District should step back to
mitigate height.
B. Height must be in compliance with the base zoning height regulations
in the "C-2" and "R-4" portions of the Forsyth TOD District north of
Forsyth Boulevard and south of Forsyth Boulevard between Lyle Avenue
and Hanley Road except as modified by a Special Development District
(SDD) or planned unit development (PUD) as outlined in Chapter 405.
Section
410.759.4
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.759.8
AO:900
Section 410.759.8. Maximum Floor Area [Ord. No. 6053 §1,
1-13-2009]
Section 410.759.12. Setback Requirements [Ord. No. 6053 §1,
1-13-2009]
The setback requirements are the same as in the base zoning district,
except that the front yard setback must be a minimum of ten (10) feet.
Setback requirements may be modified subject to the provisions and
requirements of the special development or planned unit development
process as outlined in Chapter 405. The Forsyth TOD District will allow
limited daytime valet parking with appropriate permit.
Section 410.759.13. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
[Ord. No. 6053 §1, 1-13-2009]
There are no minimum parking requirements in the Forsyth TOD District.
Parking requirements are at the discretion of the Plan Commission and
Board of Aldermen based upon a parking study provided by a parking
professional substantiating the developer's stated parking need. Loading
requirements are as stated in Chapter 405, Article XXV, Off-Street Parking
and Loading Regulations.
Section 410.759.14. Site Plan and Architectural Considerations
[Ord. No. 6053 §1, 1-13-2009]
A. There is no maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for redevelopment on the
south side of Forsyth Boulevard between Lyle and the east City limits
and the area south of Forsyth Boulevard within the Forsyth TOD
District. To encourage density, the minimum FAR for this area is three
(3.0).
B. The FAR for the properties on the north side of Forsyth Boulevard and
the south side from Lyle to Hanley shall conform to the FAR regulations
of the base zoning. FAR may be modified subject to the provisions and
requirements of the Special Development District (SDD) or planned
unit development process as outlined in Chapter 405.
A. This district is intended to foster development with a substantially
enhanced environmental profile by, in part, emphasizing public transit
and enhanced pedestrian accessibility. To achieve these goals, the
district incentivizes development by reducing on-site parking thereby
affording more economically productive use of available land. In
evaluating whether proposed developments achieve these objectives,
the Plan Commission/Architectural Review Board shall assess
compliance with the following standards:
1. Linkage between the development and the Forsyth MetroLink
Station, if one does not currently exist.
Section
410.759.8
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.759.14
AO:901
Section 410.759.15. Consideration of Relevant Plans [Ord. No. 6053
§1, 1-13-2009]
The Board of Aldermen shall, in arriving at its decision on a proposed
SDD or PUD, consider these regulations, Chapter 405, the Master Plan
and any other land use or urban design policies relevant to the specific
site which have been accepted or adopted by the Board of Aldermen. The
Plan Commission shall, at the time of forwarding its recommendations to
the Board of Aldermen, forward any recommendation(s) pertaining to the
specific site that is contained in the Master Plan. If the Plan Commission's
recommendations vary from such specific recommendation(s) in the Master
Plan for the site, such variations shall be noted and explained in the Plan
Commission's report to the Board of Aldermen.
2. Leadership in energy and environmental design (LEED)
certification from the U.S. Green Building Council at a minimum
"Certified" level including applicable regional priorities or an
equivalent certification from a nationally recognized third (3rd)
party verified organization as determined by the Plan Commission.
3. City streetscape consistent with the City of Clayton's streetscape
standards.
4. Greenspace/urban gathering areas open to the street and
proportionate to the development size and scope.
The special development or planned unit development
ordinance shall specify whether and how individual standards
are to be satisfied and penalties for failure to fulfill agreed
undertakings.
Section
410.759.14
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.759.15
AO:902
ARTICLE XIII
(Reserved)
Section 410.760. through Section 410.785. (Reserved)113
113. Editor’s Note: Former Article XIII, Guidelines For Tree Preservation, containing Sections
410.760 through 410.785, which derived from Ord. No. 5814 §§12a.1 12a.6, 4-27-2004;
Ord. No. 5906 §1, 10-25-2005 was repealed 6-14-2016 by Ord. No. 6430. See now Chapter
405, Article XXX, Trees and Landscaping Regulations.
Section
410.760
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.760
AO:903

ARTICLE XIV
Maryland Gateway Overlay Zoning District (MDG)
Section 410.790. Purpose Statement [Ord. No. 6276 §1, 6-25-2013]
A. The Maryland Gateway Overlay Zoning District (hereinafter known in
this Article as the "MD" Overlay District) applies to properties along the
north and south sides of the Maryland Avenue corridor from the
western City limits, east, to the centerline of Brentwood Boulevard,
which are identified in the 2010 Master Plan Update and Retail
Strategy. The area encompassed in the Maryland Gateway Overlay
Zoning District is considered a gateway to downtown which gives the
opportunity for creating a memorable and representative entry to the
core of the City and is adjacent to the heart of commercial and service
activities in the City of Clayton. The Maryland Gateway District is
intended to maintain a walkable, pedestrian scale, human-focused
corridor with changes to the streetscape to reflect the urban character
of downtown. Much of this can be built upon the already strong
presence of small retail establishments on the north side of the street,
which help define the street edge and serve as a transition to adjacent
residential areas. The purpose is to create a lower density mixed use
district that provides an iconic gateway into downtown Clayton while
respecting the northern residential neighborhood and the civic uses to
the south. In order to maintain this area as "pedestrian friendly",
structures must be human in scale. Building mass, density and frontage
variations should create a visually attractive and inviting streetscape
within the urban context.
B. The purpose of these regulations is to foster appropriate use of existing
structures and enable compatible redevelopment, which serves the
following goals:
1. Support and enhance existing retail development along Maryland
Avenue and promote structures that have sidewalk frontage
suitable for smaller retail and personal service activities.
2. Stimulate designs that minimize scale and mass as perceived from
the sidewalk.
3. Orient front doors and align buildings to address Maryland Avenue.
4. Careful stepping of building height and regulation of uses to ensure
that adjacencies are appropriate and not overly abrupt.
5. Encourage mixed use development, with ground level commercial
retail and upper level residential uses.
6. Encourage a built environment that is friendly to the presence of
people living, shopping, visiting, enjoying or spending time in the
area.
Section
410.790
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.795
AO:905
Section 410.795. Location of Overlay Zone [Ord. No. 6276 §1,
6-25-2013]
The Maryland Gateway Overlay Zoning District generally includes those
parcels fronting Maryland Avenue from the western City limit, east to the
centerline of Brentwood Boulevard.
Section 410.800. Significance of Designation [Ord. No. 6276 §1,
6-25-2013]
The regulations of the overlay district shall supersede or supplement, as
applicable, the regulations of the base zoning district. Where a conflict
exists between the regulations of the overlay districts and the provisions of
the base zoning district, the provisions of the overlay district shall control,
except for those properties governed by the Special Development Zoning
District (SDD), adopted by Ordinance Number 4220, in which case the
provisions of that ordinance shall control.
Section 410.805. Uses Permitted [Ord. No. 6276 §1, 6-25-2013]
A. The uses allowed are the same as in the base zoning district.
B. For purposes of this Article, "Mixed Use" shall be defined as follows:
Retail land uses coupled with residential, office or personal service land
uses inside a single structure or as part of a unified development.
C. In addition to those uses allowed in the base zoning district, the
following uses will be allowed and use restrictions shall be adhered to
as follows:
1. All ground floor uses shall be retail or restaurant uses, but may also
include beauty salons, dry cleaning facilities and similar personal
care services. Financial institutions (banks, savings and loans and
credit unions) and other office uses are also permissible. In no case
shall retail, restaurant or personal service uses constitute less than
fifty percent (50%) of the total ground floor area of a structure, or
in the case of a development project with multiple structures, less
than fifty percent (50%) of the total gross ground floor area of all
structures.
2. Residential dwellings shall be located on the second (2nd) floor or
higher.
3. Drive-through facilities for financial institutions subject to
conditional use permit approval. Drive-through facilities for
financial institutions are limited to a maximum of two (2) drivethrough
lanes per site and shall be developed as part of a mixed use
development. On larger sites in excess of two (2) acres in area,
more than two (2) drive-through lanes per site may be considered,
up to a maximum of three (3) drive-through lanes.
Section
410.795
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.805
AO:906
Section 410.810. Planned Unit Development [Ord. No. 6276 §1,
6-25-2013]
Section 410.815. Maximum Building Height [Ord. No. 6276 §1,
6-25-2013]
4. Financial institutions which incorporate drive-through facilities
shall be subject to the site plan review process pursuant to the
procedures and standards outlined in Chapter 405, Article VIII, and
shall be developed in accordance with the design guidelines and
requirements for drive- through facilities.
A. A development proposal shall be eligible for consideration under the
planned unit development option per the provisions of Chapter 405 if
the development incorporates ground floor retail or a ground floor
public restaurant and one (1) of the following four (4) categories of use:
1. Office use;
2. Residential use;
3. Public parking (as defined in Article III. Definitions, Section
405.390);
4. Hotel use.
B. Limitation. No change, alteration, modification or waiver authorized by
a "PUD" shall authorize a change in the uses permitted in any district or
a modification with respect to any zoning district standard made
specifically applicable to planned unit developments, unless such
district regulations expressly authorize such a change, alteration,
modification or waiver.
A. The maximum building height in the "MD" Overlay District is three (3)
stories, not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet for properties in an underlying
"C-1" zoning district, and seven (7) stories or ninety (90) feet,
whichever is less, for properties in other underlying zoning districts.
The maximum building height for properties south of Maryland Avenue
may be modified subject to the provisions and requirements of the
planned unit development process outlined in Chapter 405.
B. For buildings permitted to exceed the maximum height through the
planned unit development process, a fifteen (15) foot stepback (upper
story building setback) shall be provided beginning at the third (3rd)
story level or thirty (30) feet above grade, whichever is less. However,
the Plan Commission shall have the authority to require a different
stepback(s) for buildings dependent upon building height, lot size,
nearby land uses and structures, and other relevant factors. Stepbacks
shall be proportional to the amount of building height. The upper story
stepback shall be provided along all building elevations with street
frontage, excluding alleys.
Section
410.805
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.820
AO:907
Section 410.820. Maximum Floor Area [Ord. No. 6276 §1,
6-25-2013]
The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) is three (3.0). The maximum floor areas
may be modified subject to the provisions and requirements of the planned
unit development process outlined in Chapter 405.
Section 410.825. Setback/Stepback Requirements [Ord. No. 6276
§1, 6-25-2013]
A. The following are setback/stepback requirements in the Maryland
Gateway Overlay Zoning District:
1. Front yard. There is no minimum front yard setback requirement in
the Maryland Gateway Overlay District. All property lines which
abut a street are considered frontages. Building up to the front
property line is encouraged.
2. Rear yard. The required rear yard setback in the Maryland
Gateway Overlay District is a minimum of fifteen (15) feet.
Modifications to the required rear yard setback are permitted/
required under the following conditions:
a. Where a corner lot exists, the property line opposite to the
front yard line with the greater street frontage shall be
considered the side yard and the property line opposite to the
front yard line with the lesser street frontage shall be
considered the rear yard.
b. Where a property has three (3) or more street frontages, that
portion of the property opposite the frontage on the street
designed or classified for the highest traffic volume shall be
considered the rear yard.
c. An accessory building not exceeding twenty (20) feet in height
may occupy up to thirty percent (30%) of the area of a required
rear yard. Accessory buildings may be attached to the principal
building or not less than ten (10) feet from the principal
building. In all cases, no accessory building shall be closer than
five (5) feet to any rear property line or to any property line
that abuts a residential zoning district, nor shall they be
located along any street frontage.
3. Side yard setbacks.
a. The side yard setback requirements are zero (0), except where
a lot abuts a residential district, a side yard of at least five (5)
feet shall be provided.
b. Buildings shall be constructed from side lot line to side lot line,
along the entire street frontage of streets designed or
classified for the highest traffic volume. The developer shall
Section
410.820
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.825
AO:908
Section 410.830. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
[Ord. No. 6276 §1, 6-25-2013]
Every principal commercial structure must provide off-street parking in
accordance with Chapter 405.
Section 410.835. Site Plan Review and Design [Ord. No. 6276 §1,
6-25-2013]
have the option of excluding no more than twenty percent
(20%) of the lots' frontage to create space for a public plaza or
public green space area. This public space can be located no
less than fifty (50) feet from any corner of the lot.
A. Site Plan Review. Site plan review, pursuant to the procedures and
standards outlined in Chapter 405, is required for any development or
redevelopment proposal over ten thousand (10,000) square feet in
gross floor area and for financial institutions that are proposed to be
developed with drive-through facilities.
B. Site Plan Review Design.
1. The following criteria shall be applied by the City's Plan
Commission/Architectural Review Board for development
proposals located in the Maryland Gateway Overlay Zoning
District:
a. Footprint geometry should be square and true with the
roadway to the extent possible. Odd shapes and building
orientations which compete with the total urban setting should
be avoided.
b. Parking should be located within the City block interior and
deeper into parcels.
c. Surface parking, drive aisles or vehicular access ways should
not abut any sidewalk.
d. Buildings and uses must incorporate expansive street front
windows and shall be sited in a manner so as to achieve a
pedestrian friendly scale, appearance and feel.
2. For projects located in an underlying "C-2" zoning district, an onsite
sidewalk system shall be constructed along a project's internal
drives (both public and private) and shall connect to the public
sidewalk system on Maryland Avenue and abutting streets. For
these purposes, parking lot drive aisles are not to be considered
drives or streets. Sidewalks shall also be constructed to lead to
pedestrian crossings at off-site full access median openings, trail
crossings, and pedestrian signal crossings on abutting streets.
Section
410.825
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.835
AO:909
Section 410.840. Architectural Review Board Standards [Ord. No.
6276 §1, 6-25-2013]
3. The Plan Commission shall have the discretion to consider
alternatives and modifications to these site plan review criteria if
their strict application will result in unusual or practical difficulties,
or a particular hardship, or if the Plan Commission determines that
such alternatives or modifications to these guidelines will improve
the attractiveness or usefulness of the district as a whole and serve
the best interests of the City.
A. The standards applicable to the Architectural Review Board are as
follows:
1. Buildings shall occupy the property frontage from property line to
property line to ensure a continuous building facade.
2. Building skylines should provide interest through introduction of
compatible shapes and roof forms. Long uninterrupted rooflines
and cornices should be avoided.
3. Facade relief should be incorporated into all building elevations.
Long uninterrupted elevations should be avoided.
4. Window openings should be incorporated into all building
elevations. Blank walls, long horizontal openings, odd shapes and
glass walls should be avoided.
5. Street level (ground floor) elevation facing the street should be
storefront architecture with large show windows interrupted at
regular intervals with building piers and generous entrances. Blank
walls, long uninterrupted show windows, odd-shaped and small
show windows should be avoided.
6. Parking structures visible from the street should be avoided.
Parking structures should be of design material and color
compatible with the urban setting.
7. Building renovations and improvements should incorporate green
space, pedestrian connections, pedestrian gathering spaces, street
furniture and other elements of active pedestrian areas.
8. Building design should integrate components that offer protection
to pedestrians, such as overhangs, awnings and canopies, as a
means to encourage pedestrian activity along the street.
9. Building design should maintain and be compatible with the
architectural character of the City's nearby residential and existing
commercial neighborhoods.
Section
410.835
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.840
AO:910
ARTICLE XV
Entertainment Overlay Zoning District (EO)
Section 410.845. Purpose Statement. [Ord. No. 6596, 5-28-2019]
The Entertainment Overlay District is intended to allow for entertainment
uses to establish a more vibrant and active downtown area. The overlay
district applies to select downtown Clayton blocks generally located
between the boundaries of Maryland Avenue, Forsyth Boulevard, North
Bemiston Avenue and North Meramec Avenue. The purpose of these
regulations is to expand entertainment opportunities in the pedestrianfocused
commercial and service node of downtown, allowing for more
destination venues. The Entertainment Overlay District modifies the
underlying zoning district regulations and any other overlay districts only
to the extent specifically set forth in this Article. If not specifically modified
in this Article, all the regulations in effect in the underlying zoning districts
and other overlay districts will remain in full force and effect.
Section 410.850. Location Of Overlay Zone. [Ord. No. 6596,
5-28-2019]
A. The Entertainment Overlay District consists of property within the
following boundaries:
1. The northern boundary consists of those properties having
frontage on the south side of Maryland Avenue;
2. The eastern boundary consists of those properties having frontage
on either side of North Bemiston Avenue;
3. The southern boundary consists of those properties having
frontage on either side of Forsyth Boulevard; and
4. The western boundary consists of those properties having frontage
on either side of North Meramec Avenue; all as generally shown
crosshatched on the diagram above; provided, however, that for
Section
410.845
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.850
AO:911
Section 410.855. Definitions. [Ord. No. 6596, 5-28-2019]
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENTERTAINMENT USE — Any establishment (indoors or outdoors) where
entertainment, either passive or active, is provided for the pleasure of the
patrons, either independently or in conjunction with a non-entertainmentrelated
use such as a restaurant. Such entertainment includes but is not
limited to vocal and instrumental music, dancing, karaoke, comedy, acting,
games, or other activities. This definition does not include private clubs,
health clubs, country clubs, golf courses, adult uses, casinos, or performing
arts studios where the primary purpose is teaching or training students.
Section 410.860. Significance Of Designation. [Ord. No. 6596,
5-28-2019]
The regulations of the overlay district shall supersede or supplement, as
applicable, the regulations of the base zoning district and any other overlay
district. Where conflict results between the regulations of the overlay
districts and the provisions of the base zoning district, the provisions of this
overlay district shall control.
Section 410.865. Uses Permitted. [Ord. No. 6596, 5-28-2019]
any venue/use to be used pursuant to this overlay district it must
have its primary entrance within the overlay boundaries
established by this Section and provided further that the primary
entrance to the venue/use may not be located along Maryland
Avenue.
A. The uses permitted by right and by conditional use permit are listed in
the Table of Permitted Uses found in the base zoning district.
B. The overlay district shall allow for the following principal uses with the
approval of a conditional use permit:
1. Entertainment use (as defined).
C. The overlay district shall allow for an entertainment use as an
accessory use to the following principal uses with the approval of a
conditional use permit:
1. Restaurant.
2. Hotel.
3. Retail.
D. If a restaurant or hotel offers entertainment activities pursuant to a
conditional use permit as provided herein, the requirement that not
more than fifty percent (50%) of gross sales may be derived from the
sale of alcoholic beverages as specified in Section 600.110 (E) of the
Section
410.850
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.865
AO:912
Section 410.870. Provisions Applicable To All Uses. [Ord. No. 6596,
5-28-2019]
Section 410.875. Planned Unit Development. [Ord. No. 6596,
5-28-2019]
The boundaries of the Entertainment District shall not be removed or
otherwise relocated through the rezoning of any properties within the
overlay district to Planned Unit Development (PUD) or Special Development
District (SDD).
Section 410.880. Off-Street Parking And Loading Requirements.
[Ord. No. 6596, 5-28-2019]
Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
405 based on the requirements of the most similar use listed as determined
by the Director of Planning and Development Services.
City Code shall be suspended; provided, however, that not more than
seventy-five percent (75%) of the gross sales for such hotel or
restaurant may be derived from the sale of alcoholic beverages.
A. Outdoor entertainment, including recorded or live music or sound that
is electronically amplified, is permitted at any establishment with an
approved outdoor dining permit which allows for dedicated outdoor
seating areas for food and beverage service.
B. Establishments shall comply with the noise regulations set forth in
Chapter 215, Offenses.
Section
410.865
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.880
AO:913
Chapter 415
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
410.880
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
410.880
AO:914
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 415.010. Purpose [CC 1970 App. B §1.1; Ord. No. 5765 §1,
6-24-2003]
It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide for the orderly and efficient
development of the City of Clayton by providing rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision within the City of Clayton, Missouri.
This Chapter is to be administered in a manner that will insure the orderly
growth and development of the community, the conservation of greenspace,
protection and proper use of land in accordance with the Clayton Zoning
Ordinance and adequate provision for traffic circulation, utilities and other
municipal purposes.
Section 415.020. Authority [CC 1970 App. B §1.2; Ord. No. 5765 §1,
6-24-2003]
The City of Clayton hereby establishes and adopts these regulations
governing the platting or declarations of any and all condominium or
condominium building conversions, boundary adjustments, minor
subdivisions, major subdivisions and amendments to approved plats
pursuant to the authority granted in Chapter 89, Section 89.410, RSMo., or
as may be amended, of the general Statutes of the State of Missouri.
Section 415.030. Jurisdiction [CC 1970 App. B §1.3; Ord. No. 5765
§1, 6-24-2003]
These regulations shall govern the platting or declarations of any and
all condominium declarations and platting or condominium building
conversions, boundary adjustments, minor subdivisions, major subdivisions
and amendments to approved plats within the corporate limits of the City of
Clayton.
Section 415.040. Compliance Requirements [CC 1970 App. B §1.4;
Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
No condominium declarations and platting or condominium building
conversion, boundary adjustment, minor subdivision, major subdivision or
amendment to approved plat within Clayton may be filed or recorded with
the St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds until it has been submitted to and
approved by the City as specified herein and until the approval is entered
on the face of the plat.
Section 415.050. Enforcement — Penalties For Violation [CC 1970
App. B §1.5; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
A. After the effective date of this Chapter, any plat filed or recorded in the
office of the St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds without required
approval shall be null and void for purposes of this Chapter. No building
or repair permits shall be issued for any structure located on a lot, the
Section
415.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.050
AO:915
Section 415.060. Variations and Exceptions [CC 1970 App. B §1.6;
Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
The Board of Adjustment shall have no authority to vary or modify the
requirements of the subdivision regulations.
Section 415.070. Appeals [CC 1970 App. B §1.7; Ord. No. 5765 §1,
6-24-2003]
Any applicant who feels aggrieved by any decision made regarding the
approval of a plat may, within fifteen (15) days of the decision for which
redress is sought, file directly to the Board of Aldermen a written request
for reconsideration and appeal. The written request must set forth in a
concise manner the decision being appealed and all grounds known to the
appellant as to wherein and why the decision is allegedly in error. The Board
of Aldermen may consider the appeal on the record of the prior decision or
may, at its sole discretion, receive additional evidence in such manner as it
deems appropriate in light of the circumstances.
plat of which has been prepared after the date of the adoption of this
Subdivision Ordinance, but which has not been approved in accordance
with the provisions contained herein. Additionally, the City of Clayton
shall not permit any public improvements to be made or any funds to
be expended for improvements on any property that has been platted
after the date of the adoption of this Chapter, unless such condominium
or condominium building conversion, boundary adjustment, minor
subdivision, major subdivision or amendment to approved plat or street
has been approved in accordance with the provisions contained in this
Chapter.
B. Any person or entity who sells or attempts to sell a lot by metes and
bounds or otherwise or condominium building or the unit(s) therein in
violation of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each and every day that such violation
shall continue or by imprisonment for ten (10) days for each and every
day such violation shall continue or by both such fine and imprisonment
at the discretion of the court. Any person, firm or corporation who
violates or fails to comply with or permits or causes any person in his/
her or its employ to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this
Chapter shall upon conviction thereof be subject to a fine of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each and everyday that such violation shall continue or by
imprisonment for ten (10) days for each and every day such violation
shall continue or by both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion
of the court.
Section
415.050
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.080
AO:916
Section 415.080. Severability [CC 1970 App. B §1.8; Ord. No. 5765
§1, 6-24-2003]
If any portion of this Chapter is adjudged invalid or unconstitutional by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall apply only to the portion
so adjudged and the remainder of this Chapter shall be deemed valid and
effective.
Section 415.090. Fees [CC 1970 App. B §1.9; Ord. No. 5765 §1,
6-24-2003]
At the time an application is filed, the applicant shall pay a fee as required
by the fee schedule approved by the Board of Aldermen.
Section
415.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.090
AO:917

ARTICLE II
Definitions
Section 415.100. Definitions [CC 1970 App. B §2.1; Ord. No. 5765
§1, 6-24-2003]
Words and terms used in this Chapter shall be given their commonly
accepted meaning unless specifically defined herein or unless used in
context to indicate a clearly different meaning. For the purposes of this
Chapter, the words "shall" and "will" are mandatory; the word "may" is
permissive except when used in the negative; words used in the present
tense include the future tense; words used in the singular number include
the plural number and the plural number includes the singular number,
unless the context of the particular usage clearly indicates otherwise.
ALLEY — A minor right-of-way used primarily for vehicular access to the
rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
APPLICANT — Any person(s), firm, entity, related entity or corporation
subdividing, consolidating or seeking approval of a boundary change to
existing parcels of land within the boundaries of the City of Clayton. An
applicant must either be the property owner or have permission from the
legal property owner to submit such application.
BLOCK — An area of land, consisting of a series of lots, entirely surrounded
by streets, streams, right-of-way, parks, etc., or a combination thereof.
BOARD OF ALDERMEN — The City of Clayton Board of Aldermen.
BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENT — An adjustment to the lot lines of platted lots
or other lawful parcels for the purpose of adjusting the dimensions of said
lots or changing the configuration of buildable lots. A lot line adjustment
results in the same number of lots (no new lots are created nor are the
number of lots reduced).
BUILDING LINE — The distance from the lot line in which no building or
use shall be erected or maintained.
BYLAWS AND INDENTURES (CONDOMINIUMS) — The instrument and
amendments by which the administration of every condominium property
shall be governed, which may either be embodied in the declaration or in a
separate instrument, a true copy of which shall be appended to or recorded
with the declaration.
CITY — City of Clayton.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common
ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real estate is not a
condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are
vested in the unit owners.
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION BUILDING — A building that at any time
before creation of the condominium was occupied wholly or partially by
Section
415.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.100
AO:919
persons other than purchasers and persons who occupy with the consent of
purchasers.
CONDOMINIUM PLAT — A survey of the parcel and all units of a multi-unit
structure for the purpose of compliance with the State of Missouri and the
City of Clayton standards as they pertain to condominiums.
DAY — For the purposes of this Chapter, a day shall mean a calendar day.
DECLARATIONS — The instrument and amendments by which a property
is submitted to the provisions of Chapter 448, RSMo., to create a
condominium.
DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES — City of
Clayton Department of Planning and Development Services.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — City of Clayton Department of Public
Works.
DEVELOPMENT — Any manmade change to add improvement to real estate
including, but not limited to, construction of buildings or other structures,
filling, grading and paving of yard area.
EASEMENT — A grant by a property owner for use of a specific area of
land for a particular use by the public, a corporation, person(s) or entities;
usually for the installation and maintenance of utilities, sidewalk and/or
roadway uses.
FLOODWAY — An area identified on the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps within the designated
special flood hazard zone identified as the portion of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one (1) foot.
IMPROVEMENTS — Utilities and infrastructure including, but not limited
to: street pavements, sidewalks, pedestrian walkways, water mains,
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, street signs, survey monuments,
landscaping, street light installations and other similar items.
INDENTURES/RESTRICTIONS (SUBDIVISIONS) — The instrument and
amendments by which the administration of any private subdivision
properties shall be governed. The copy of any trust indenture proposed for a
private subdivision shall describe any proposed covenants, restrictions and
conditions applicable to properties within the private subdivision.
LOT — A platted parcel of land intended to be separately owned, developed
or otherwise used, which is a part of a subdivision, the plat of which has
been recorded at the St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds or a lot described
by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded at the St.
Louis County Recorder of Deeds.
LOT CONSOLIDATION — The consolidation of one (1) or more lots into
fewer lots. See "MINOR SUBDIVISION".
Section
415.100
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.100
AO:920
LOT, FLAG — A lot located behind another lot, with no direct access to
the street other than a driveway or other narrow corridor. Flag lots are
prohibited.
LOT LINES — The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
METES AND BOUNDS — The method used to describe a tract of urban
land so that it can be recorded in the St. Louis County Recorder's office,
as contrasted with the description of a part of a properly approved and
recorded subdivision plat by lot and block number.
PLAT — A plan of a subdivided tract or parcel of land.
PRIVATE STREET — A vehicular street or road not intended for dedication
to or maintenance by the City of Clayton or any other public agency.
PROPERTY — All land, property or properties and space comprising the
parcel or parcels, all improvements and structures erected, constructed
or contained therein or thereon, including the building and all easements,
rights and appurtenances belonging thereto and all fixtures and equipment
intended for the mutual use, benefit or enjoyment of the owners.
RECORDER OF DEEDS — St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, RIGHTS-OF-WAY OR ROW — Unless otherwise restricted
herein, the area, the air space above the area, the area below and the
area adjacent to any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk,
boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, parkway, waterway, public easement or
sidewalk in which the City, County or State now or hereafter holds any
property interest which, consistent with the purposes for which it was
dedicated, may be used for the purpose of installing and maintaining
facilities. Rights-of-way shall not include:
SETBACK — A line or lines on the plat of a lot designating the area outside
of which buildings may not be erected.
SIDEWALK — A paved, pedestrian walkway located within the public rightof-
way or immediately adjacent to a public street; including a paved
pedestrian walkway within an easement dedicated for public use.
City facilities or the City's proprietary property, such as City-owned or
operated buildings, parks or other similar property;
1.
Airwaves used for cellular, non-wire telecommunications or broadcast
services;
2.
3. Easements obtained by ROW users;
4. Railroad rights-of-way or ground used or acquired for railroads; or
Facilities owned and used by the City for the transmission of one (1) or
more services pursuant to the City Charter.
In the case of a private street, the right-of-way shall be dedicated to
the property owners or trustees for street maintenance purposes.
5.
Section
415.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.100
AO:921
SIGHT DISTANCE — That area of a lot immediately adjacent to any
vehicular intersection (i.e., street, driveway) which must remain
unobstructed to allow a clear line of sight to any cross-traffic.
SITE PLAN — An accurately scaled development plan that shows existing
conditions on a site as well as depicting details of proposed development.
STREETS — A general term denoting a public or private roadway which
affords a principal means of vehicular access to abutting property(ies). The
term includes all facilities which normally occur within the right-of-way (i.e.,
sidewalks within the public right-of-way). The term shall also include such
other designations as highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road,
pike, avenue, boulevard, lane, place and/or court, but shall not include an
alley, driveway, common driveway, driveway easement or pedestrian way
(i.e., pedestrian trail).
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any division of a tract or parcel of land into two
(2) or more lots, building sites or other divisions or the consolidation of two
(2) or more lots, for the purpose of sale or building development, which
involves the dedication of new streets or a change in existing streets or
other public improvements.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — Any division or consolidation of a tract or parcel
of land or building sites for the purpose of sale or building development,
which does not involve any public improvements or the dedication of new
streets or a change in existing streets.
ZONING ORDINANCE — Chapter 405 and Chapter 410 of the Municipal
Code for the City of Clayton.
Section
415.100
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.100
AO:922
ARTICLE III
Condominiums and Condominium Building Conversions
Section 415.110. Purpose [CC 1970 App. B §3.1; Ord. No. 5765 §1,
6-24-2003]
The purpose of this Article is to outline and describe the process for a
condominium declaration and platting and condominium building
conversion. A condominium declaration and plat or condominium building
conversion is required for the approval of any condominium plat. This
streamlined process applies to all applications for condominium
consideration or conversion that do not require any dedications to the
City, public improvements or condominium projects where improvements
have already been approved as part of a separate subdivision or site plan
approval.
Section 415.120. Application For Condominium Plat Approval [CC
1970 App. B §3.2; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
Section 415.130. Condominium Plat Requirements [CC 1970 App. B
§3.3; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
A. Whenever a condominium declaration and plat or condominium
building conversion is proposed and before any permit for the
development of or construction of any improvement in such proposed
condominium or condominium building conversion shall be granted, the
applicant shall apply for and secure approval of a condominium plat or
condominium building conversion plat in accordance with the following
procedure.
B. Before filing an application for approval of a plat, the applicant may, at
its election, confer with the Director of Planning and Development
Services and representatives of any other City departments regarding
the proposal. Such action does not require formal application fees or
filing of a plat and is not to be construed as an application for formal
approval and shall not be in lieu of the same. Comments made by staff
during such conferences shall not constitute representations or
warranties with respect to any matter discussed and shall not be
binding upon staff members or members of the Plan Commission or
Board of Aldermen.
A. All condominium plats are to be prepared by a surveyor, registered to
practice in the State of Missouri and shall be drawn on one (1) or more
sheets (maximum dimension of twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36)
inches). The scale of the drawing shall be twenty (20) feet or less to the
inch. If multiple sheets are required, then a key map shall be provided
on a title sheet showing all units at reduced scale. In addition to the
items required by Chapter 448, RSMo., or any similar Statute then in
force, the plat shall contain the following information:
Section
415.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.130
AO:923
1. Condominium name and project title or name, the north arrow,
scale and date.
2. Accurate legal description of the boundary of the lot(s).
3. Boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings or angles, which
provide an accurate survey of the lot(s).
4. Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the developer, owner
and engineer.
5. Accurate location of all existing and recorded streets, the street
name(s) and right-of-way width(s), alley(s) or other right-of-way
adjacent to the subject lot(s) with accurate dimensions, bearing
curve data, including radii arcs, points of tangency and central
angles.
6. Location, dimensions and purpose of each easement.
7. Each building footprint and an identification system for all
buildings and units.
8. Each unit's identifying number.
9. The location and dimensions of limited common elements,
including porches, balconies and patios, other than parking spaces
and the other limited common elements.
10. The area in square feet for lot(s), building(s) and unit(s) in the
project.
11. A legally sufficient description of any real estate in which the unit
owners will own only an estate for years, labeled as "leasehold real
estate".
12. Any units in which the declarant has reserved the right to create
lesser and larger units or common elements, identified
appropriately.
13. A plat must also show the intended location and dimensions of any
contemplated improvement to be constructed anywhere within the
condominium. Any contemplated improvement shown must be
labeled either "shall be built" or "need not be built".
14. The location and dimensions of all real estate not subject to
development rights or subject only to the development right to
withdraw and the location and dimensions of all existing
improvements within that real estate.
15. The location and dimensions of the vertical boundaries of each unit.
16. Any horizontal unit boundaries, with reference to established
datum.
Section
415.130
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.130
AO:924
17. Building setback lines required by the Clayton Zoning Ordinance
with dimensions.
18. Location, type, material and size of all survey monuments and lot
markers, including bench marks with elevations referenced to
mean sea level datum.
19. Purposes for which areas are dedicated or reserved (i.e., open
space, common area).
20. Location of water mains, valves and fire hydrants.
21. Certificate of the owner creating the condominium, granting
easements with statement of the use or uses for which granted,
establishing building lines and referring to the restrictions of all
types and trusteeships which will run with the land and become
covenants in the deeds for the lots.
22. Certificates of all owners and holders of the deeds of trust,
approving the plat as prepared and releasing from the lien created
by said deeds of trust all land dedicated to the public use on the
plat.
23. Certification by a registered land surveyor or engineer that the plat
represents a survey made by him/her and that all the necessary
survey monuments are correctly shown thereon and that the size of
each lot, building and unit is correctly indicated by dimensions and
square feet of area. Impressed thereon and affixed thereto shall be
the personal seal and signature of the registered land surveyor or
engineer by whom or under whose authority and direction the plat
was prepared in conformance with Missouri Revised Statutes. Any
certification of a plat required shall be made by a registered and
licensed surveyor, whereas, any certification of a plan required
shall be made by an architect or engineer.
24. Certification that real estate taxes are paid shall be furnished in the
form of copies of paid real estate tax bills on the land subject to the
condominium plat or condominium building conversion plat.
25. Certificate indicating approval of the plat by the Board of Aldermen
of the City of Clayton, prepared for execution by the Mayor and City
Clerk over the seal of the City of Clayton. Such certification shall
include signature lines for the surveying company, owner(s) or
developer(s). These two (2) signature lines must have notary
signature lines. Also required is a signature line for the City Clerk
and a separate line stating: "Approved by the Board of Aldermen
this __________ day of ____________________ by Ordinance No.
__________" to be completed by the City Clerk.
26. Additional information, drawings, plans or documentation may be
requested when deemed necessary or appropriate for a full and
proper consideration and disposition of the application.
Section
415.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.130
AO:925
B. Declaration Requirements. In addition to the plat, an applicant will be
required to submit a copy of the declaration in compliance with Section
415.150 below. The declaration shall contain the following information
as required by Chapter 448, RSMo., or any similar Statute then in force:
1. The name of the condominium, which shall include the word
"condominium" or be followed by the words "a condominium" and
the association.
2. The name of every County in which any part of the condominium is
situated.
3. A legally sufficient description of the real estate included in the
condominium.
4. A statement of the maximum number of units, which the declarant
reserves the right to create.
5. A description of the boundaries of each unit created by the
declaration, including each unit's identifying number.
6. A description of any limited common elements.
7. A description of any real estate, except real estate subject to
development rights, which may be allocated subsequently as
limited common elements, together with a statement that they may
be so allocated.
8. A description of any development rights and other special
declarant rights reserved by the declarant, together with a legally
sufficient description of the real estate to which each of those
rights applies and a time limit within which each of those rights
shall be exercised.
9. If any development right may be exercised with respect to different
parcels of real estate at different times, a statement to that effect,
together with (a) either a statement fixing the boundaries of those
portions and regulating the order in which those portions may be
subjected to the exercise of each development right or a statement
that no assurances are made in those regards and (b) a statement
as to whether, if any development right is exercised in any portion
of the real estate subject to that development right, that
development right shall be exercised in all or in any other portion
of the remainder of that real estate.
10. Any other conditions or limitations under which rights may be
exercised or will lapse.
11. An allocation to each unit of the allocated interests.
12. Any restrictions on use, occupancy and alienation of the units.
Section
415.130
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.130
AO:926
13. The recording data for recorded easements and licenses
appurtenant to or included in the condominium or to which any
portion of the condominium is or may become subject by virtue of a
reservation in the declaration.
14. All matters required under Chapter 448, RSMo.
15. The declaration may contain any other matters the declarant
deems appropriate.
C. Bylaws Requirements. In addition to the plat, an applicant will be
required to submit a copy of the declaration/bylaws in compliance with
Section 415.150 below. The bylaws shall contain the following
information as required by Chapter 448, RSMo., or any similar Statute
then in force:
1. The number of members of the executive board and the titles of the
officers of the association;
2. Election by the executive board of a president, treasurer, secretary
and any other officers of the association the bylaws specify;
3. The qualifications, powers and duties, terms of office and manner
of electing and removing executive board members and officers
and filling vacancies;
4. Which, if any, of its powers the executive board or officers may
delegate to other persons or to a managing agent;
5. Which of its officers may prepare, execute, certify and record
amendments to the declaration on behalf of the association; and
6. The method of amending the bylaws subject to the following:
a. Unless the declarant otherwise agrees in writing to permit an
amendment to the bylaws, for so long as a declarant is the
owner of units representing an aggregate of ten percent (10%)
or more of the units in which votes in the association are
allocated, the bylaws may only be amended with the
affirmative vote of at least sixty-seven percent (67%) of the unit
owners of units to which votes in the association are allocated;
and
b. After the declarant ceases to own ten percent (10%) or more of
the units to which votes in the association are allocated, the
bylaws may only be amended with the affirmative vote of a
majority of the unit owners of units to which the votes in the
association are allocated.
7. Subject to the provisions of the declaration, the bylaws may provide
for any other matters the association deems necessary and
appropriate.
Section
415.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.140
AO:927
Section 415.140. Criteria [CC 1970 App. B §3.4; Ord. No. 5765 §1,
6-24-2003]
Section 415.150. Staff Procedure — New Construction [CC 1970
App. B §3.5; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
A. In considering and acting upon plats and other applicable plans, staff
and the Board of Aldermen shall take the following objectives into
consideration:
1. Compatibility of lot size and density;
2. Creation of a lot which provides adequate dimensions to construct
improvements of similar size and nature to the surrounding area;
3. Creation of a lot which is in compliance with the area and frontage
requirements (no flag lots) as specified in the Zoning Ordinance
and provides for an orderly pattern of development;
4. Promotion of a creative approach to the use of land and related
physical facilities resulting in better site layout and development;
5. Preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics
such as natural topography, vegetation and geologic features and
the prevention of soil erosion;
6. Elimination of incompatible land configurations;
7. Consistency with good planning practices;
8. Compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances and standards.
A. An applicant pursuing approval of a condominium plat within the City of
Clayton shall submit to the Department of Planning and Development
Services the required number of copies of the subdivision plat and the
following information:
1. The completed application form;
2. Proof of payment of current property taxes and that no delinquent
fees are owed to the City;
3. Written letter describing the scope and nature of the of the
application; and
4. A copy of the declaration/bylaws.
B. Staff will verify that the new development complies with all applicable
codes and is being constructed in accordance to approved plans. Any
improvement required as part of new development shall be previously
approved (via approval of a subdivision plat or site plan) prior to the
submission of an application for a condominium plat approval.
Additionally, all improvements required must be either fully installed or
Section
415.140
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.150
AO:928
Section 415.160. Staff Procedure — Condominium Building
Conversion Plat Approval [CC 1970 App. B §3.6; Ord. No. 5765 §1,
6-24-2003]
guaranteed by a cash deposit or construction bond as per the
requirements of this Chapter.
C. The Director of Planning and Development Services or his/her
designee, in addition to other staff as appropriate, shall review the
submittal and make a determination as to whether the submittal is
complete and accurate. If the submittal is deemed incomplete, the
Director of Planning and Development Services shall notify the
applicant as to what additional information is needed. Once the
submittal is complete, then the application will be forwarded to the
Board of Aldermen for consideration. However, if staff determines an
application to be incomplete, the applicant may request in writing that
the application be forwarded to the Board of Aldermen nonetheless.
The application will then be forwarded to the Board of Aldermen for
their consideration as outlined in Section 415.170 below.
A. For owners of existing buildings desiring to convert to condominium
ownership, the following procedure will apply:
1. Prior to or concurrent with the submittal of an application for
condominium building conversion plat approval, the applicant must
have the subject building inspected by the Department of Planning
and Development Services. The Building Inspector shall conduct an
inspection to verify that the existing structure is in compliance with
applicable codes and ordinances. If not in compliance, all violations
must be corrected prior to Board of Aldermen consideration.
2. For Board of Aldermen consideration, the applicant must submit to
the Department of Planning and Development Services the
required number of copies of the subdivision plat and the following
information:
a. The completed application form; and
b. Proof of payment of current property taxes and that no
delinquent fees are owed to the City; and
c. Written letter describing the scope and nature of the of the
application; and
d. Declaration/bylaws.
B. The Director of Planning and Development Services or his/her
designee, in addition to other staff as appropriate, shall review the
submittal and make a determination as to whether the submittal is
complete and accurate. If the submittal is deemed incomplete, the
Director of Planning and Development Services shall notify the
applicant as to what additional information is needed. Once the
Section
415.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.160
AO:929
Section 415.170. Board of Aldermen Procedure — Condominium
and Condominium Building Conversion Plat Approvals [CC 1970
App. B §3.7; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
The Board of Aldermen will consider condominium plats at their regularly
scheduled meetings. It is necessary that the applicant or applicant's
representative familiar with the requested condominium plat appear
personally at the meeting to answer questions. A condominium plat is
approved by ordinance. the Board of Aldermen may, at its discretion, add to
or delete conditions recommended by the staff.
Section 415.180. Unit Modification Plat Amendment [CC 1970 App.
B §3.8; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
If a declarant wishes to amend an approved condominium plat for the
purpose of modifying the vertical dimension of specific units or combining
one (1) or more units, the Director of Planning and Development Services is
authorized to administratively approve such amendments if it is determined
that the proposed modifications otherwise comply with applicable City
ordinances. The administrative approval authorized hereby shall not extend
to or encompass any amendment that would increase the number of units or
alter the exterior dimensions of the building in which the units are located.
Section 415.190. Appeals [CC 1970 App. B §3.9; Ord. No. 5765 §1,
6-24-2003]
Any applicant who feels aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Aldermen
may, within fifteen (15) days of the decision for which redress is sought, file
directly to the Board of Aldermen a written request for reconsideration and
appeal. The written request must set forth in a concise manner the decision
being appealed and all grounds known to the appellant as to wherein and
why the decision is allegedly in error. The Board of Aldermen may consider
the appeal on the record of the prior decision or may, at its sole discretion,
receive additional evidence in such manner as it deems appropriate in light
of the circumstances.
Section 415.200. Reapplication [CC 1970 App. B §3.10; Ord. No.
5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
In the event that the Board of Aldermen denies an application for a
condominium plat approval, the same application or substantially similar
submittal is complete and the Building Official or his/her designee has
verified that the existing structure is in compliance with applicable
codes, then the application will be forwarded to the Board of Aldermen
for consideration. However, if staff determines an application to be
incomplete, the applicant may request in writing that the application be
forwarded to the Board of Aldermen nonetheless. The application will
then be forwarded to the Board of Aldermen for their consideration as
outlined in Section 415.170 below.
Section
415.160
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.200
AO:930
application will not be accepted for a period of at least one (1) year from the
date of denial by the Board of Aldermen.
Section 415.210. Time Limit On Approval [CC 1970 App. B §3.11;
Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
Condominium plats which have been approved by the Board of Aldermen
must be filed and recorded with the St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds.
The applicant must submit proof of such filing to the City Clerk within
thirty (30) days from the approval date by the Board of Aldermen. After that
time, the applicant shall be required to resubmit the original or a revised
condominium plat for Board of Aldermen approval. The Board of Aldermen
may reject such a reapplication in light of new facts and circumstances
relating to the context within which the prior condominium plat approval
was granted.
Section
415.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.210
AO:931

ARTICLE IV
Boundary Adjustment
Section 415.220. Purpose [CC 1970 App. B §4.1; Ord. No. 5765 §1,
6-24-2003]
The purpose of this Article is to outline and describe the process for
application, review and approval of a boundary adjustment. The purpose of
the boundary adjustment plat is to establish a legal record in accordance
with the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance. A boundary adjustment
is required any time an applicant proposes to adjust the boundary line(s)
of a lot(s). The boundary adjustment process only applies in circumstances
where the number of lots remains the same (no new lots are being created
nor are the number of lots being reduced). No public improvements,
dedications or the establishment of new public or private streets, alleys or
other thoroughfares or a change in existing streets may be involved.
Section 415.230. Application For Boundary Adjustment [CC 1970
App. B §4.2; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
Section 415.240. Boundary Adjustment Plat Requirements [CC
1970 App. B §4.3; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
A. Whenever any boundary adjustment is proposed and before any permit
for the development of or construction of any improvement on any land
in such area shall be granted, the applicant shall apply for and secure
approval of a boundary adjustment plat in accordance with the
following procedure.
B. Before filing an application for approval of a plat, the applicant may, at
its election, confer with the Director of Planning and Development
Services and representatives of any other City departments regarding
the proposal. Such action does not require formal application fees or
filing of a plat and is not to be construed as an application for formal
approval and shall not be in lieu of the same. Comments made by staff
during such conferences shall not constitute representations or
warranties with respect to any matter discussed and shall not be
binding upon staff members or members of the Plan Commission.
A. A plat must be prepared from an accurate survey, completed and sealed
by a surveyor registered to practice in the State of Missouri. The plat
shall be drawn on one (1) or more sheets of a maximum dimension of
twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches. The scale of the
drawing shall be at a scale of one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet or
greater or other scale if deemed appropriate by the Director of
Planning and Development Services. In certain instances where the
subdivided area is of unusual size or shape, the Director of Planning
and Development Services may permit a variation of these dimensional
requirements. If multiple sheets are required, then a key map shall be
provided on a title sheet showing the entire subdivision at a reduced
Section
415.220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.240
AO:933
scale. In addition to the items required by Chapter 445, RSMo., or any
similar Statute then in force, the submitted boundary adjustment plat
shall include:
1. Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owner and
engineer.
2. Accurate legal description, together with the statement of the
included area calculated to the nearest one hundredth (100th) of an
acre.
3. Boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings or angles, which
provide an accurate survey of the lot(s).
4. Name and right-of-way width of all street(s), alley or other right-ofway
within the lot(s).
5. Location, dimensions and purpose of each easement.
6. Each lot line and an identification system for all lot(s).
7. The area in square feet for each site parcel or lot affected.
8. Purposes for which sites are dedicated or reserved (i.e., residential,
park, open space).
9. Location, type, material and size of all survey monuments and lot
markers, including bench marks with elevations referenced to
mean sea level datum.
10. Subdivision title or name, north arrow, scale and date.
11. All section, township and range lines and the boundary lines of
sewer, school and other established districts within or adjoining the
lot(s).
12. Accurate location of all existing and recorded streets intersecting
the boundaries of the lot(s) and the lines and record owners of all
adjoining lands with book and page numbers of the recorded deeds.
13. Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted ground
by record name and date.
14. Right-of-way lines of streets and other rights-of-way and the
property lines of all lots with accurate dimensions, bearing curve
data, including radii ares, points of tangency and central angles.
15. Location of all utilities, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers,
electrical, cable, gas, water, etc.
16. Location of fire hydrants.
17. Building setback lines required by the Clayton Zoning Ordinance
with dimensions.
Section
415.240
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.240
AO:934
Section 415.250. Criteria [CC 1970 App. B §4.4; Ord. No. 5765 §1,
6-24-2003]
18. Certificate of the owner, granting easements with statement of the
use or uses for which granted, establishing building lines and
referring to the restrictions of all types and trusteeships which will
run with the land and become covenants in the deeds for the lots.
19. Certificates of all owners and holders of the deeds of trust,
approving the plat as prepared and releasing from the lien created
by said deeds of trust all land dedicated to the public use on the
plat.
20. Certificate indicating approval of the plat by the Plan Commission
of the City of Clayton, prepared for execution by the Chairperson
and Recording Secretary over the seal of the City of Clayton.
21. Certification by a registered land surveyor or engineer that the plat
represents a survey made by him/her and that all the necessary
survey monuments are correctly shown thereon and that the size of
each lot is correctly indicated by dimensions and square feet of
area. Impressed thereon and affixed thereto shall be the personal
seal and signature of the registered land surveyor or engineer by
whom or under whose authority and direction the plat was
prepared in conformance with Missouri Revised Statutes.
22. Certification that real estate taxes are paid shall be furnished in the
form of copies of paid real estate tax bills on the land subject to the
boundary adjustment.
23. Additional information, drawings, plans or documentation may be
requested whenever deemed necessary or appropriate for a full
and proper consideration and disposition of the application.
A. In considering and acting upon plats and other applicable plans, staff
and the Plan Commission shall take the following objectives into
consideration:
1. Compatibility of lot size and density;
2. Creation of a lot which provides adequate dimensions to construct
improvements of similar size and nature to the surrounding area;
3. Creation of a lot which is in compliance with the area and frontage
requirements (no flag lots) as specified in the Zoning Ordinance
and provides for an orderly pattern of development;
4. Promotion of a creative approach to the use of land and related
physical facilities resulting in better site layout and development;
5. Preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics
such as natural topography, vegetation and geologic features and
the prevention of soil erosion;
Section
415.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.250
AO:935
Section 415.260. Staff Procedure [CC 1970 App. B §4.5; Ord. No.
5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
6. Elimination of incompatible land configurations;
7. Consistency with good planning practices;
8. Compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances and standards.
A. All applications for a boundary adjustment plat approval shall first be
reviewed by staff at a staff plat review meeting. The applicant shall
submit as many copies as determined necessary by the Director of
Planning and Development Services of the boundary adjustment plat
and any additional information, as required by staff, to the Department
of Planning and Development Services at least seven (7) days prior to a
regularly scheduled staff plat review meeting date. Such meetings shall
be held regularly at a time agreed upon by the departments concerned.
B. At such meeting, joint review of the plat shall be conducted by the
department staff which may include, but not be limited to, the Director
of Planning and Development Services, Director of Public Works, Fire
Marshal, Building Official and City Manager. Plats shall be reviewed for
completeness and compliance with all applicable requirements of the
adopted Building Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, Electrical
Code, Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance, Public Right-Of-Way
Standards and any other applicable City ordinances, codes, standards,
guidelines and good planning practices. This review shall not constitute
or substitute for compliance with applicable technical codes and the
application and approval process required for issuance of building and
other required permits.
C. If the plat is deemed complete and in compliance with all applicable
codes and regulations, then within seven (7) calendar days of the
meeting, a letter shall be forwarded to the person or firm submitting
the plat requesting that plats be submitted as per Section 415.240
above, which can then be forwarded to the Plan Commission.
D. If the plat is not deemed complete and/or in compliance with all
applicable codes and regulations, then within seven (7) calendar days of
the meeting date, a letter shall be forwarded to the person or firm
submitting the plat stating the comments and concerns of the reviewing
departments. Sixty (60) days from the date on the comment letter, a
revised plat addressing the listed comments and concerns must be
submitted for further review. If revised a plat is not submitted within
the said time limit, review of the plat will be suspended.
E. The Director of Planning and Development Services or his/her designee
shall submit the plat to the Plan Commission at such time the plat is
deemed complete and satisfactory to the staff. The applicant and staff
may confer until the plat is determined to be complete and satisfactory.
Section
415.250
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.260
AO:936
Section 415.270. Plan Commission Procedure [CC 1970 App. B §4.6;
Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
Section 415.280. Appeals [CC 1970 App. B §4.7; Ord. No. 5765 §1,
6-24-2003]
Any applicant who feels aggrieved by any decision of the Plan Commission
may, within fifteen (15) days of the decision for which redress is sought, file
directly to the Board of Aldermen a written request for reconsideration and
appeal. The written request must set forth in a concise manner the decision
being appealed and all grounds known to the appellant as to wherein and
why the decision is allegedly in error. The Board of Aldermen may consider
the appeal on the record of the prior decision or may, at its sole discretion,
receive additional evidence in such manner as it deems appropriate in light
of the circumstances.
City staff will make every effort to insure the plat is processed in a
timely manner.
F. However, if staff determines an application to be incomplete, the
applicant may request in writing that the application be forwarded to
the Plan Commission nonetheless. The application will then be
forwarded to Plan Commission for their consideration as outlined in
Section 415.270 below.
G. The Plan Commission shall not accept any plat and application that
does not contain all required information for review. The boundary
adjustment plat shall substantially meet all land development standards
of this Subdivision Ordinance and those of any other applicable City
regulations. The Director of Planning and Development Services shall
submit a report to the Plan Commission regarding the proposed
boundary adjustment.
A. The Plan Commission shall hear all applications for boundary
adjustment plat approval. The Plan Commission may approve the
boundary adjustment plat as submitted, require modifications or
conditions to mitigate possible negative impacts or the Plan
Commission may deny the boundary adjustment plat.
B. The Plan Commission shall render a decision on a boundary adjustment
plat application within sixty (60) days from the date of the meeting at
which the Plan Commission first considers the application. If the Plan
Commission fails to render a decision within the said sixty (60) day
period, the boundary adjustment plat shall be deemed to have been
approved. The sixty (60) day period may be extended through mutual
written agreement between the applicant and the City Plan
Commission.
Section
415.260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.290
AO:937
Section 415.290. Reapplication [CC 1970 App. B §4.8; Ord. No.
5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
In the event that the Plan Commission denies an application for a boundary
adjustment plat approval, the same application or substantially similar
application will not be accepted for a period of at least one (1) year from the
date of denial by the Plan Commission.
Section 415.300. Time Limit On Approval [CC 1970 App. B §4.9;
Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
Boundary adjustment plats which have been approved by the Plan
Commission must be filed and recorded with the St. Louis County Recorder
of Deeds. The applicant must submit proof of such filing to the City Clerk
within thirty (30) days from the approval date by the Plan Commission.
After that time, the applicant shall be required to resubmit the original
or a revised boundary adjustment plat for Plan Commission approval. The
Plan Commission may reject such a reapplication in light of new facts
and circumstances relating to the context within which the prior boundary
adjustment plat approval was granted.
Section
415.290
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.300
AO:938
ARTICLE V
Minor Subdivision
Section 415.310. Purpose [CC 1970 App. B §5.1; Ord. No. 5765 §1,
6-24-2003]
The purpose of this Article is to outline and describe the process involved
in filing an application for a minor subdivision. A minor subdivision is
required any time an applicant proposes any division or consolidation of a
tract or parcel of land or building sites for the purpose of sale or building
development. No public improvements, dedications or the establishment of
new public or private streets, alleys or other thoroughfares or a change in
existing streets may be involved.
Section 415.320. Application For Minor Subdivision [CC 1970 App.
B §5.2; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
Section 415.330. Minor Subdivision Plat Requirements [CC 1970
App. B §5.3; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
A. Whenever a minor subdivision of land is proposed and before any
permit for the development of or construction of any improvement on
any land in such proposed minor subdivision shall be granted, the
applicant shall apply for and secure approval of such proposed minor
subdivision in accordance with the following procedure.
B. Before filing an application for approval of a plat, the applicant may, at
its election, confer with the Director of Planning and Development
Services and representatives of any other City departments regarding
the proposal. Such action does not require formal application fees or
filing of a plat and is not to be construed as an application for formal
approval and shall not be in lieu of the same. Comments made by staff
during such conferences shall not constitute representations or
warranties with respect to any matter discussed and shall not be
binding upon staff members or members of the Plan Commission or
Board of Aldermen.
A. A plat must be prepared from an accurate survey, completed and sealed
by a surveyor registered to practice in the State of Missouri. The plat
shall be drawn on one (1) or more sheets of a maximum dimension of
twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches. The scale of the
drawing shall be at a scale of one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet or
greater or other scale if deemed appropriate by the Director of
Planning and Development Services. In certain instances where the
subdivided area is of unusual size or shape, the Director of Planning
and Development Services may permit a variation of these dimensional
requirements. If multiple sheets are required, then a key map shall be
provided on a title sheet showing the entire subdivision at a reduced
scale. In addition to the items required by Chapter 445, RSMo., or any
Section
415.310
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.330
AO:939
similar Statute then in force, the submitted minor subdivision plat shall
include:
1. Subdivision title or name, north arrow, scale and date.
2. The names and adjoining boundaries of all adjoining subdivisions
and the names of record owners.
3. All new and existing sanitary and storm sewers, water mains,
culverts and other underground structures within the tract or
immediately adjacent thereto. The location and size of the nearest
water main and sewer or outlet are to be indicated upon the plat.
4. Existing and proposed future contours with intervals of two (2) feet
or less referred to sea level datum.
5. Approximate (to nearest foot) dimensions and area of:
a. Overall subdivision;
b. Each lot; width, depth and area;
c. Street right-of-ways including radii of cul-de-sacs and curbs;
d. Common open space or other land to be dedicated for a public
use.
6. Proposed use of each lot and existing and proposed zoning of all
property within the subdivision.
7. Any zoning district or districts that affect the property to be
subdivided or adjoining property.
8. Location of common open space, parks and other public or semipublic
areas or facilities.
9. Site drainage system including general surface drainage patterns:
a. Drainage swales, detention storage areas, sewers, culverts and
other improvements proposed to accommodate stormwater
and minimize erosion;
b. Floodplain definition and effect of applicable local, State or
Federal floodplain standards or regulations.
10. Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the subdivider, owner
and engineer.
11. Boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings or angles, which
provide an accurate survey of the tract.
12. Location, dimensions and purpose of each easement.
13. Identification system for all lots and blocks.
Section
415.330
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.330
AO:940
Section 415.340. Staff Procedure [CC 1970 App. B §5.4; Ord. No.
5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
14. Location and purpose for which sites are dedicated or reserved
(i.e., residential, park, open space).
15. Building lines with setback distances.
16. Location, type, material and size of all survey monuments and lot
markers, including bench marks with elevations referenced to
mean sea level datum.
17. Location of all utilities, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers,
electrical, cable, gas, water, etc.
18. Location of fire hydrants.
19. Certificate of the owner creating the subdivision, granting
easements with statement of the use or uses for which granted,
establishing building lines and referring to the restrictions of all
types and trusteeships which will run with the land and become
covenants in the deeds for the lots.
20. Certificates of all owners and holders of the deeds of trust,
approving the plat as prepared and releasing from the lien created
by said deeds of trust all land dedicated to the public use on the
plat.
21. Certificate indicating approval of the plat by the Board of Aldermen
of the City of Clayton prepared for execution by the Mayor and City
Clerk over the seal of the City of Clayton.
22. Certification by a registered land surveyor or engineer that the plat
represents a survey made by him/her and that all the necessary
survey monuments are correctly shown thereon and that the size of
each lot is correctly indicated by dimensions and square feet of
area. Impressed thereon and affixed thereto shall be the personal
seal and signature of the registered land surveyor or engineer by
whom or under whose authority and direction the plat was
prepared in conformance with Missouri Revised Statutes.
23. Certification that real estate taxes are paid shall be furnished in the
form of copies of paid real estate tax bills on the land within the
proposed subdivision.
24. Additional information, drawings, plans or documentation may be
requested whenever deemed necessary or appropriate for a full
and proper consideration and disposition of the application.
A. All applications for minor subdivision plat approval shall first be
reviewed by staff at a staff plat review meeting. The applicant shall
submit as many copies as determined necessary by the Director of
Planning and Development Services of the minor subdivision plat and
Section
415.330
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.340
AO:941
any additional information, as required by staff, to the Department of
Planning and Development Services at least seven (7) days prior to a
regularly scheduled staff plat review meeting date. Such meetings shall
be held regularly at a time agreed upon by the departments concerned.
B. At such meeting, joint review of the plat shall be conducted by the
department staff which may include, but not be limited to, the Director
of Planning and Development Services, Director of Public Works, Fire
Marshal, Building Official and City Manager. Plats shall be reviewed for
completeness and compliance with all applicable requirements of the
adopted Building Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, Electrical
Code, Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance, Public Right-Of-Way
Standards and any other applicable City ordinances, codes, standards,
guidelines and good planning practices. This review shall not constitute
or substitute for compliance with applicable technical codes and the
application and approval process required for issuance of building and
other required permits.
C. If the plat is deemed complete and in compliance with all applicable
codes and regulations, then within seven (7) calendar days of the
meeting, a letter shall be forwarded to the person or firm submitting
the plat requesting that plats be submitted as per Section 415.330
above, which can then be forwarded to the Plan Commission.
D. If the plat is not deemed complete and/or in compliance with all
applicable codes and regulations, then within seven (7) calendar days of
the meeting, a letter shall be forwarded to the person or firm
submitting the plat stating the comments and concerns of the reviewing
departments. Sixty (60) days from the date on the comment letter, a
revised plat addressing the listed comments and concerns must be
submitted for further review. If a revised plat is not submitted within
the said time limit, review of the plat will be suspended.
E. The Director of Planning and Development Services or his/her designee
shall submit the plat to the Plan Commission at such time the plat is
deemed complete and satisfactory to the staff. The applicant and staff
may confer until the plat is determined to be complete and satisfactory.
City staff will make every effort to insure the plat is processed in a
timely manner.
F. However, if staff determines an application to be incomplete, the
applicant may request in writing that the application be forwarded to
the Plan Commission nonetheless. The application will then be
forwarded to Plan Commission for their consideration as outlined in
Section 415.350 below.
G. The Plan Commission shall not accept any plat and application that
does not contain all required information for review. The minor
subdivision plat shall substantially meet all land development standards
of this Subdivision Ordinance and those of any other applicable City
regulations. The Director of Planning and Development Services shall
Section
415.340
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.340
AO:942
Section 415.350. Plan Commission Procedure [CC 1970 App. B §5.5;
Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
Section 415.360. Criteria [CC 1970 App. B §5.6; Ord. No. 5765 §1,
6-24-2003]
submit a report to the Plan Commission regarding the proposed minor
subdivision.
A. The Plan Commission shall hear all applications for minor subdivision
plat(s). The Plan Commission may choose to recommend approval of the
plat as submitted, recommend additional conditions to mitigate
possible negative impacts or recommend denial of the plat.
B. The Plan Commission shall render a decision on a minor subdivision
plat application within sixty (60) days from the date of the meeting at
which the Plan Commission first considers the application. The plat
shall be deemed to have received a positive recommendation if the Plan
Commission fails to render a decision within the said sixty (60) day
period. The sixty (60) day period may be extended through mutual
written agreement between the applicant and the City Plan Commission
Chairperson.
C. The Plan Commission shall submit a written report to the Board of
Aldermen of its decision stating any conditions of approval or reasons
for recommending denial of the minor subdivision plat.
A. In considering and acting upon plats and other applicable plans, staff,
the Plan Commission and the Board of Aldermen shall take the
following objectives into consideration:
1. Compatibility of lot size and density;
2. Creation of a lot which provides adequate dimensions to construct
improvements of similar size and nature to the surrounding area;
3. Creation of a lot which is in compliance with the area and frontage
requirements (no flag lots) as specified in the Zoning Ordinance
and provides for an orderly pattern of development;
4. Promotion of a creative approach to the use of land and related
physical facilities resulting in better site layout and development;
5. Preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics
such as natural topography, vegetation and geologic features and
the prevention of soil erosion;
6. Elimination of incompatible land configurations;
7. Consistency with good planning practices;
8. Compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances and standards.
Section
415.340
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.370
AO:943
Section 415.370. Board of Aldermen Procedure [CC 1970 App. B
§5.7; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
Section 415.380. Appeals [CC 1970 App. B §5.8; Ord. No. 5765 §1,
6-24-2003]
Any applicant who feels aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Aldermen
may, within fifteen (15) days of the decision for which redress is sought, file
directly to the Board of Aldermen a written request for reconsideration and
appeal. The written request must set forth in a concise manner the decision
being appealed and all grounds known to the appellant as to wherein and
why the decision is allegedly in error. The Board of Aldermen may consider
the appeal on the record of the prior decision or may, at its sole discretion,
receive additional evidence in such manner as it deems appropriate in light
of the circumstances.
Section 415.390. Reapplication [CC 1970 App. B §5.9; Ord. No.
5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
In the event that the Board of Aldermen denies an application for a minor
subdivision plat, the same application or substantially similar application
will not be accepted for a period of at least one (1) year from the date of
denial by the Board of Aldermen.
Section 415.400. Time Limit On Approval [CC 1970 App. B §5.10;
Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
Minor subdivision plats which have been approved by the Board of
Aldermen must be filed and recorded with the St. Louis County Recorder
of Deeds. The applicant must submit proof of such filing to the City Clerk
within thirty (30) days from the approval date by the Board of Aldermen.
After that time, the applicant shall be required to resubmit the original
or a revised minor subdivision plat for Plan Commission consideration
A. After receipt of the Plan Commission's recommendation and report, the
Board of Aldermen shall consider the proposed minor subdivision plat
at a hearing. The public hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper not
less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing date. A subdivision plat is
approved by ordinance. The Board of Aldermen may, at its discretion,
add to or delete conditions recommended by the City Plan Commission.
The Board of Aldermen may refer the application back to the Plan
Commission for further study before making its final decision. The
decision rendered by the Board of Aldermen shall require a simple
majority vote except that a vote of at least five (5) members of the Board
of Aldermen will be required to approve any application contrary to the
City Plan Commission recommendation.
B. In the event that the Board of Aldermen denies an application for a
subdivision plat, no request for hearing upon the same application or
substantially similar application will be accepted for a period of at least
one (1) year from the date of denial by the Board of Aldermen.
Section
415.370
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.400
AO:944
and Board of Aldermen approval. The Plan Commission and/or Board of
Aldermen may reject such a reapplication in light of new facts and
circumstances relating to the context within which the prior minor
subdivision plat approval was granted.
Section
415.400
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.400
AO:945

ARTICLE VI
Major Subdivisions
Section 415.410. Purpose [CC 1970 App. B §6.1; Ord. No. 5765 §1,
6-24-2003]
The purpose of this Article is to outline and describe the process involved
in filing an application for a major subdivision. The purpose of the major
subdivision plat is to establish a legal record of the subdivision in
accordance with the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance. A major
subdivision is required any time an applicant proposes to create one (1) or
more new lots or consolidate two (2) or more lots and public improvements,
dedications or the establishment of new public or private streets, alleys or
other thoroughfares or a change in existing streets is involved.
Section 415.420. Application For Major Subdivision [CC 1970 App.
B §6.2; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
Section 415.430. Major Subdivision Plat Requirements [CC 1970
App. B §6.3; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
A. Whenever a major subdivision of land is proposed and before any
permit for the development of or construction of any improvement on
any land in such proposed major subdivision shall be granted, the
applicant shall apply for and secure approval of such proposed major
subdivision in accordance with the following procedure.
B. Before filing an application for approval of a plat, the applicant may, at
its election, confer with the Director of Planning and Development
Services and representatives of any other City departments regarding
the proposal. Such action does not require formal application fees or
filing of a plat and is not to be construed as an application for formal
approval and shall not be in lieu of the same. Comments made by staff
during such conferences shall not constitute representations or
warranties with respect to any matter discussed and shall not be
binding upon staff members or members of the Plan Commission or
Board of Aldermen.
A. Letter Of Transmittal. The letter of transmittal shall be addressed to the
Board of Aldermen and summarize the entire scope of the project.
B. Subdivision Plat. A plat must be prepared from an accurate survey,
completed and sealed by a surveyor registered to practice in the State
of Missouri. The plat shall be drawn on one (1) or more sheets of a
maximum dimension of twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches.
The scale of the drawing shall be at a scale of one (1) inch equals twenty
(20) feet or greater or other scale if deemed appropriate by the Director
of Planning and Development Services. In certain instances where the
subdivided area is of unusual size or shape, the Director of Planning
and Development Services may permit a variation of these dimensional
requirements. If multiple sheets are required, then a key map shall be
Section
415.410
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.430
AO:947
provided on a title sheet showing the entire subdivision at a reduced
scale. In addition to the items required by Chapter 445, RSMo., or any
similar Statute then in force, the submitted major subdivision plat shall
include:
1. Subdivision title or name, north arrow, scale and date.
2. Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the subdivider, owner
and engineer.
3. The names and adjoining boundaries of all adjoining subdivisions
and the names of record owners of adjoining lot(s).
4. All new and existing sanitary and storm sewers, water mains,
culverts and other underground structures within the tract or
immediately adjacent thereto. The location and size of the nearest
water main and sewer or outlet are to be indicated upon the plat.
5. Existing and proposed future contours with intervals of two (2) feet
or less referred to sea level datum.
6. Approximate (to nearest foot) dimensions and area of:
a. Overall subdivision;
b. Each lot; width, depth and area;
c. Street right-of-ways including radii of cul-de-sacs and curbs;
d. Common open space;
e. Other land to be dedicated for a public use.
7. Proposed use of each lot and existing and proposed zoning of all
property within the subdivision.
8. Any zoning district or districts that affect the property to be
subdivided or adjoining property.
9. Location of common open space, parks and other public or semipublic
areas or facilities.
10. Site drainage system including:
a. General surface drainage patterns;
b. Drainage swales, detention storage areas, sewers, culverts and
other improvements proposed to accommodate stormwater
and minimize erosion;
c. Floodplain definition and effect of applicable local, State or
Federal floodplain standards or regulations.
11. Boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings or angles, which
provide an accurate survey of the tract.
Section
415.430
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.430
AO:948
Section 415.440. Supporting Technical Information [CC 1970 App.
B §6.4; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
12. Location, dimensions and purpose of each easement.
13. Identification system for all lots and blocks.
14. Location and purpose for which sites are dedicated or reserved
(i.e., residential, park, open space).
15. Location, type, material and size of all survey monuments and lot
markers, including bench marks with elevations referenced to
mean sea level datum.
16. Location of all utilities, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers,
electrical, cable, gas, water, etc.
17. Location of fire hydrants.
18. Building setback lines required by the Clayton Zoning Ordinance
with dimensions.
19. Certificate of the owner creating the subdivision, granting
easements with statement of the use or uses for which granted,
establishing building lines and referring to the restrictions of all
types and trusteeships which will run with the land and become
covenants in the deeds for the lots.
20. Certificates of all owners and holders of the deeds of trust,
approving the plat as prepared and releasing from the lien created
by said deeds of trust all land dedicated to the public use on the
plat.
21. Certificate indicating approval of the plat by the Board of Aldermen
of the City of Clayton prepared for execution by the Mayor and City
Clerk over the seal of the City of Clayton.
22. Certification by a registered land surveyor or engineer that the plat
represents a survey made by him/her and that all the necessary
survey monuments are correctly shown thereon and that the size of
each lot is correctly indicated by dimensions and square feet of
area. Impressed thereon and affixed thereto shall be the personal
seal and signature of the registered land surveyor or engineer by
whom or under whose authority and direction the plat was
prepared in conformance with Missouri Revised Statutes.
23. Certification that real estate taxes are paid shall be furnished in the
form of copies of paid real estate tax bills on the land within the
proposed subdivision.
24. Additional information, drawings, plans or documentation may be
requested whenever deemed necessary or appropriate for a full
and proper consideration and disposition of the application.
Section
415.430
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.440
AO:949
A. Additional supporting technical information may be required, as
follows:
1. Floodplain analysis. Where a portion of a plat is known or
suspected to be flood prone and the sufficient information is not
available, an engineering analysis shall be required. Such analysis
performed by a registered engineer for the applicant shall
determine the 100-year floodplain line. Regardless of the method of
determination, the 100-year floodplain line shall be clearly and
legibly drawn on the grading and excavation plan.
2. Erosion and stormwater runoff control plan. The grading and
excavation plan shall seek to minimize the amount of grading
necessary, protect to the maximum extent possible the natural
features and vegetation on the site and minimize erosion resulting
from grading activities. It shall include, in addition to existing and
proposed contours at two (2) foot intervals, engineering
calculations of the amount of soil to be moved, removed or added to
the site. The detailed storm drainage plan shall incorporate
proposed easement location and dimensions, typical sections and
construction details as necessary. The erosion control plan shall
include details of soil preparation, erosion control and revegetation
or soil stabilization measures to be taken during construction
including construction of berms, diversions or other barriers to
siltation, temporary mulching and landscape planting.
3. Utilities plan. This plan shall indicate public and private water and
sewer facilities, lines, valves, pumps, fire hydrants, pump stations
and treatment which shall be designed to conform to the
development standards for water and sewer services as adopted by
the water company and the metropolitan sewer district. This plan
shall also indicate all other utilities proposed for installation as part
of the major subdivision, which may include, but not be limited to,
electrical, cable, gas, telecommunication infrastructure, etc.114
4. Trust indenture. A copy of any trust indenture proposed for the
subdivision describing proposed covenants, restrictions and
conditions applicable to a property shall be submitted for review by
staff at the time of staff plat review. The trust indentures shall be
forwarded to the Plan Commission for their consideration and
recommendation to the Board of Aldermen. The Board of Aldermen
shall have the authority to approve any trust indenture proposed as
part of a major subdivision. In considering and acting upon trust
indentures, staff, the Plan Commission and the Board of Aldermen
shall take the following standards into consideration:
a. Timely conversion to owners;
114. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection (A)(4), which immediately followed, regarding Street
tree and common area landscape plan, was repealed 6-14-2016 by Ord. No. 6430.
Additionally, former Subsections (A)(5) through (A)(6) were redesignated as Subsections
(A)(4) through (A)(5), respectively.
Section
415.440
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.440
AO:950
Section 415.450. Criteria [CC 1970 App. B §6.5; Ord. No. 5765 §1,
6-24-2003]
b. Equal treatment of developer;
c. Compliance with all applicable City codes, ordinances and
standards;
d. In the event the subdivision includes open space or other
facilities commonly useable and accessible to the residents of
the subdivision, said trust indenture shall provide for
assessments to be levied against property owners within the
subdivision to maintain, insure, repair and replace said
facilities or open space as necessary.
5. Street cross sections. Typical street cross sections shall be shown
with complete dimensions and construction information. Street
profiles showing existing and proposed elevations at stations
located at fifty (50) foot intervals on the centerline and at a point
twenty-five (25) feet from the proposed street right-of-way on a line
drawn perpendicular to each station along the centerlines of all
roads. These street profiles shall be drawn at a horizontal and
vertical scale of one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet or as required
by the Director of Public Works. Such profiles shall be prepared by
an engineer licensed and registered to practice in the State of
Missouri.
A. In considering and acting upon plats and other applicable plans, staff,
the Plan Commission and the Board of Aldermen shall take the
following objectives into consideration:
1. Compatibility of lot size and density;
2. Creation of a lot which provides adequate dimensions to construct
improvements of similar size and nature to the surrounding area;
3. Creation of a lot which is in compliance with the area and frontage
requirements (no flag lots) as specified in the Zoning Ordinance
and provides for an orderly pattern of development;
4. Promotion of a creative approach to the use of land and related
physical facilities resulting in better site layout and development;
5. Preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics
such as natural topography, vegetation and geologic features and
the prevention of soil erosion;
6. Elimination of incompatible land configurations;
7. Consistency with good planning practices;
8. Compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances and standards.
Section
415.440
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.460
AO:951
Section 415.460. Staff Procedure [CC 1970 App. B §6.6; Ord. No.
5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
A. All applications for major subdivision plat approval shall first be
reviewed by staff at a staff plat review meeting. The applicant shall
submit as many copies as determined necessary by the Director of
Planning and Development Services of the major subdivision plat and
any additional information, as required by staff, to the Department of
Planning and Development Services at least seven (7) days prior to a
regularly scheduled staff plat review meeting date. Such meetings shall
be held regularly at a time agreed upon by the departments concerned.
B. At such meeting, joint review of the plat shall be conducted by the
department staff which may include, but not be limited to, the Director
of Planning and Development Services, Director of Public Works, Fire
Marshal, Building Official and City Manager. Plats shall be reviewed for
completeness and compliance with all applicable requirements of the
adopted Building Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, Electrical
Code, Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance, Public Right-Of-Way
Standards and any other applicable City ordinances, codes, standards,
guidelines and good planning practices. This review shall not constitute
or substitute for compliance with applicable technical codes and the
application and approval process required for issuance of building and
other required permits.
C. If the plat is deemed complete and in compliance with all applicable
codes and regulations, then within seven (7) calendar days of the
meeting, a letter shall be forwarded to the person or firm submitting
the plat requesting that plats be submitted as per Section 415.430
above, which can then be forwarded to the Plan Commission.
D. If the plat is not deemed complete and/or in compliance with all
applicable codes and regulations, then within seven (7) calendar days of
the meeting date, a letter shall be forwarded to the person or firm
submitting the plat stating the comments and concerns of the reviewing
departments. Sixty (60) days from the date on the comment letter, a
revised plat addressing the listed comments and concerns must be
submitted for further review. If a revised plat is not submitted within
the said time limit, review of the plat will be suspended.
E. The Director of Planning and Development Services or his/her designee
shall submit the plat to the Plan Commission at such time the plat is
deemed complete and satisfactory to the staff. The applicant and staff
may confer until the plat is determined to be complete and satisfactory.
City staff will make every effort to insure the plat is processed in a
timely manner.
F. However, if staff determines an application to be incomplete, the
applicant may request in writing that the application be forwarded to
the Plan Commission nonetheless. The application will then be
Section
415.460
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.460
AO:952
Section 415.470. Plan Commission Procedure [CC 1970 App. B §6.7;
Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
Section 415.480. Board of Aldermen Procedure [CC 1970 App. B
§6.8; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
forwarded to Plan Commission for their consideration as outlined in
Section 415.470 below.
G. The Plan Commission shall not accept any plat and application that
does not contain all required information for review. The major
subdivision plat shall substantially meet all land development standards
of this Subdivision Ordinance and those of any other applicable City
regulations. The Director of Planning and Development Services shall
submit a report to the Plan Commission regarding the proposed major
subdivision.
A. The Plan Commission shall hear all applications for major subdivision
plat(s). The Plan Commission may choose to recommend approval of the
plat as submitted, recommend additional conditions to mitigate
possible negative impacts or recommend denial of the plat.
B. The Plan Commission shall render a decision on a major subdivision
plat application within sixty (60) days from the date of the meeting at
which the Plan Commission first considers the application. The plat
shall be deemed to have received a positive recommendation if the Plan
Commission fails to render a decision within the said sixty (60) day
period. The sixty (60) day period may be extended through mutual
written agreement between the applicant and the City Plan Commission
Chairperson.
C. The Plan Commission shall submit a written report to the Board of
Aldermen of its decision stating any conditions of approval or reasons
for recommending denial of the major subdivision plat.
A. After receipt of the Plan Commission's recommendation and report, the
Board of Aldermen shall consider the proposed major subdivision plat
at a hearing. The public hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper not
less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing date. A subdivision plat is
approved by ordinance. The Board of Aldermen may, at its discretion,
add to or delete conditions recommended by the City Plan Commission.
The Board of Aldermen may refer the application back to the Plan
Commission for further study before making its final decision. The
decision rendered by the Board of Aldermen shall require a simple
majority vote except that a vote of at least five (5) members of the Board
of Aldermen will be required to approve any application contrary to the
City Plan Commission recommendation.
B. In the event that the Board of Aldermen denies an application for a
subdivision plat, no request for hearing upon the same application or
Section
415.460
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.480
AO:953
Section 415.490. Additional Procedures [CC 1970 App. B §6.9; Ord.
No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
substantially similar application will be accepted for a period of at least
one (1) year from the date of denial by the Board of Aldermen.
A. The applicant will be required to deposit cash or post an escrow
agreement to guarantee the construction, completion and installation
of the public or common improvements shown on the approved
subdivision plat within a specified time period approved by the Director
of Public Works, which shall not exceed three (3) years. No surety shall
be eligible to provide the escrow agreement required herein, unless
approved in advance by the City and the City Attorney on such terms
and criteria as may be established by the City and the City Attorney.
Deposit agreements shall provide that there shall be deposited with the
City of Clayton:
1. A cash amount not less than the project engineer's estimate, as
approved by the Director of Public Works, of the cost of the
construction, completion and installation of the public or common
improvements indicated on approved subdivision plans; or
2. The escrow agreement shall be approved by the Director of Public
Works and City Attorney and shall be issued by a surety company
qualified to do business in Missouri and shall insure or guarantee,
to the extent of the project engineer's estimate, as approved by the
Director of Public Works, of the cost of construction, completion
and installation of the public or common improvements indicated
on the approved subdivision plans.
B. The deposit agreement shall be held by the City of Clayton and remain
in effect until such time as the Director of Public Works shall release the
cash or release the bond. Such releases may be in part and may occur
from time to time as work on constructing improvements is performed,
provided however that:
1. The Director of Public Works shall release the cash or release the
surety from all or any part of its obligation only after construction,
completion and installation of some phase of work on the
improvements indicated on the approved subdivision plat, receipt
of requisite written notification from the appropriate inspecting
public authority and approval by the Department of Public Works.
In order to accommodate the development process while protecting
the public from deficient and uncompleted improvements, the City
of Clayton will initiate releases upon written request to approve
improvements when practical. Such a written request shall be in
such form as required by the Director of Public Works and shall not
be made until the improvements are susceptible of inspection and
approval in accordance with standards established by the Director
of Public Works (i.e., concrete work has reached final cure, street
lights have been activated, etc.).
Section
415.480
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.490
AO:954
2. If, at the end of the specified time period, all the improvements
shown on the approved subdivision plans have not been completed,
the Director of Public Works may extend the improvement
completion period for a period of up to two (2) years if after review
by the Department of Public Works such longer period is deemed
necessary to facilitate adequate and coordinated provisions for
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds or
other public improvements, facilities or requirements so long as all
guarantees are extended and approved by the City Attorney.
3. The Director of Public Works shall not release more than ninety-five
percent (95%) of the sum estimated for the construction cost of all
guaranteed improvements. The developer continues to be
responsible for defects, deficiencies and damage to all guaranteed
improvements during development. Upon final acceptance of the
guaranteed improvements, the remaining five percent (5%) of the
original construction cost estimate thereof shall be released.
C. The obligation of the developer to construct, complete and install the
improvements indicated on the approved subdivision plans and provide
for street maintenance shall not cease until the developer shall be
finally released by the Director of Public Works. After the initial
improvement completion period, or after a later period as extended
pursuant to this Section, the improvements indicated on the approved
subdivision plans are not constructed, completed, installed and
accepted or if the developer shall violate any provision of the deposit
agreement as determined by the Director of Public Works, the Director
shall notify the developer and surety provider to show cause within not
less than ten (10) days why the developer should not be declared in
default. If the developer or surety provider fails to cure any default or
present compelling reason why no default should be declared, the
Director of Public Works shall declare the developer in default and may
take any one (1) or more of the following acts:
1. Deem the balance under the deposit agreement not theretofore
released as forfeited to the City, to be then placed in an appropriate
trust and agency account for such purposes as letting contracts to
bring about the completion of the improvements indicated on the
approved subdivision plans or other appropriate purposes in the
interest of the public safety, health and welfare; or
2. Require the surety to perform on the bond and pay to the City of
Clayton the balance of the bond not theretofore released; or
3. Require the developer to submit an additional cash sum sufficient
to guarantee the completion of the improvements indicated on the
approved subdivision plans after recalculation in order to allow for
any inflated or increased costs of constructing improvements.
D. If the surety fails to comply with the Director of Public Works'
requirements above or if the Director of Public Works determines that
Section
415.490
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.490
AO:955
forfeiture of the remaining deposit or surety balance will not allow
completion of the required improvements and if the developer fails to
comply with the Director's requirements as listed above, the Director of
Public Works may:
1. Suspend the right of anyone to build or construct on the
undeveloped portion of the subdivision. For the purpose of this
Subsection, the "undeveloped portion of the subdivision" means all
lots other than lots which have been sold for personal use and
occupancy or are under bona fide contract for sale to any person
for personal use or occupancy. The Director of Public Works shall
give the developer ten (10) days' written notice of an order under
this Subsection, with copies to all issuers of sureties, as
appropriate, who have outstanding obligations for any undeveloped
portion of the subdivision and shall record an affidavit of such
notice with the Recorder of Deeds. If, within the ten (10) day period
after notice is given, the Director of Public Works is not convinced
by compelling evidence that completion of the improvements is
adequately assured and maintenance of streets assured as
provided herein, the Director shall order construction suspended
on the undeveloped portion of the subdivision. The order shall be
served upon the developer, with a copy to the issuer of the surety as
appropriate and a copy recorded with the Recorder of Deeds.
Public notice of said order shall be conspicuously and prominently
posted at the subdivision site. The suspension may be rescinded in
whole or in part only when the Director is convinced that
completion of the improvements is adequately assured in all or an
appropriate part of the subdivision and a guarantee is provided for.
2. Suspend the rights of the developer to construct structures in any
development platted after the effective date of such suspension
throughout the City of Clayton. The Director of Public Works shall
give the developer ten (10) days' written notice of an order under
this clause, with a copy to issuers of sureties known to have
obligations outstanding on behalf of the developer or related
entities and shall record an affidavit of such notice with the
Recorder of Deeds. If after the ten (10) day period after notice is
given the Director of Public Works is not convinced by compelling
evidence that completion of the improvements is adequately
assured, the Director of Public Works shall order construction
suspended. The order shall be served upon the developer, with a
copy to the issuer of the surety as appropriate and a copy recorded
with the Recorder of Deeds. The suspension shall be rescinded only
when the Director of Public Works is convinced that completion of
the improvements is adequately assured and public street
maintenance assured.
E. If the surety fails to perform on the agreement or any other party fails
to comply with any provision of this Subdivision Ordinance, the Director
Section
415.490
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.490
AO:956
Section 415.500. As-Built Drawing of Subdivision Improvements
[CC 1970 App. B §6.10; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
After the public and common improvements including, but not limited to,
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, sidewalks and pavement have been
constructed and installed, but before the inspecting agencies recommend
final approval or acceptance, the developer shall submit the required
number of as-built drawings and one (1) copy in digital format of the above
improvements to the Department of Public Works. The digital copy shall be
submitted as a CAD file, either AutoCad or Microstation format with State
Plane Coordinate System.
Section 415.510. Appeals [CC 1970 App. B §6.11; Ord. No. 5765 §1,
6-24-2003]
Any applicant who feels aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Aldermen
may, within fifteen (15) days of the decision for which redress is sought, file
directly to the Board of Aldermen a written request for reconsideration and
appeal. The written request must set forth in a concise manner the decision
being appealed and all grounds known to the appellant as to wherein and
why the decision is allegedly in error. The Board of Aldermen may consider
the appeal on the record of the prior decision or may, at its sole discretion,
receive additional evidence in such manner as it deems appropriate in light
of the circumstances.
Section 415.520. Reapplication [CC 1970 App. B §6.12; Ord. No.
5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
In the event that the Board of Aldermen denies an application for a major
subdivision plat, the same application or substantially similar application
will not be accepted for a period of at least one (1) year from the date of
denial by the Board of Aldermen.
Section 415.530. Time Limit On Approval [CC 1970 App. B §6.13;
Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
Major subdivision plats which have been approved by the Board of
Aldermen must be filed and recorded with the St. Louis County Recorder
of Deeds. The applicant must submit proof of such filing to the City Clerk
within thirty (30) days from the approval date by the Board of Aldermen.
After that time, the applicant shall be required to resubmit the original or a
revised major subdivision plat for Plan Commission consideration and Board
of Aldermen approval. The Plan Commission and/or Board of Aldermen may
reject such a reapplication in light of new facts and circumstances relating
to the context within which the prior major subdivision plat approval was
granted.
of Public Works may recommend that the City Attorney take
appropriate legal action.
Section
415.490
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.530
AO:957

ARTICLE VII
Amendments To Approved Plats
Section 415.540. Amendment To Approved Plats [CC 1970 App. B
§7.1; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
Section 415.550. Approval [CC 1970 App. B §7.2; Ord. No. 5765 §1,
6-24-2003]
The amended plat or certificate of correction certified by the Director of
Planning and Development Services shall be filed by the applicant at his/
her sole expense in the office of the County Recorder. Upon such filing,
the original plat shall be deemed to have been conclusively corrected and
A. After a plat is approved by City staff, Plan Commission or Board of
Aldermen or recorded in the office of the County Recorder, it may be
amended by a certificate of correction or by an amending plat in the
following cases:
1. To correct plat errors or omissions, which do not affect any
property right. Errors and omissions may include, but not be
limited to, lots and numbers, acreage, street names and
identification of adjacent record plats. Errors must be
ascertainable from the data shown on the approved plat.
2. To make modifications which make any or all of the conditions of
the plat obsolete. These modifications may not impose any
additional burden on the present owner of the property or alter any
rights, title or interest in the real property reflected on the
recorded plat.
3. To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on
the plat.
B. The amended plat or certificate of correction shall be prepared by a
registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and
contents of the amending plat shall conform to the requirements of this
Chapter. The certificate of correction shall set forth in detail the
corrections to be made and show the names of the present fee owners
of the property affected by the correction.
C. An original amended plat or certificate of correction shall be submitted
to the Department of Planning and Development Services for review
and approval. After submittal, the Director of Planning and
Development Services shall review the amended plat or certificate of
correction to verify that the only changes made are those listed above,
this fact shall be certified on the amending plat or certificate of
correction. The Director of Planning and Development Services may
determine that the proposed amendment be subject to the entire
approval process at his/her discretion.
Section
415.540
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.550
AO:959
shall impart constructive notice of all the corrections in the same manner
as though upon the original plat.
Section 415.560. Time Limit On Approval [CC 1970 App. B §7.3;
Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
Amendments to approved plats, which have been approved by the Director
of Planning and Development Services, must be filed and recorded with
the St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds. The applicant must submit proof
of such filing to the City Clerk within thirty (30) days from the approval
date by the Director of Planning and Development Services. After that
time, the Director of Planning and Development Services may reject such a
reapplication in light of new facts and circumstances relating to the context
of the amendment to approved plat.
Section
415.550
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.560
AO:960
ARTICLE VIII
Minimum Design Standards
Section 415.570. Minimum Design Standards [CC 1970 App. B
(App. A) §A.1; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
The following are intended to provide minimum standards for
infrastructure, public improvements and tree preservation to guide City
staff, the Plan Commission and the Board of Aldermen. The Clayton
Department of Public Works shall have the final decision regarding all
public improvements and infrastructure location on individual projects.
Section 415.580. General Principles [CC 1970 App. B (App. A) §A.2;
Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
Section 415.590. Blocks [CC 1970 App. B (App. A) §A.3; Ord. No.
5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
A. Land with features which may present a hazard to the safety of present
or future inhabitants of a subdivision or to adjacent property (including,
but not limited to, areas with extremely steep slopes and land within the
100-year floodplain) shall not be developed unless mitigation measures
are proposed by the applicant and approved by the City to solve the
problems created by such unsuitable land conditions.
B. Land, which cannot be provided with adequate water, sanitary sewer
service, storm drainage facilities or other essential public services,
shall not be subdivided for purposes which require such services.
C. The proposed subdivision name and streets within subdivisions shall
not duplicate or too closely approximate phonetically the name of any
other street or subdivision within the City of Clayton or adjacent
municipalities. However, streets that are obviously in alignment with
other streets already in existence and named shall bear the names of
such existing streets. All street names shall be approved through the
Department of Public Works and St. Louis County.
A. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard for the following circumstances: the provision of adequate
building sites suitable for the type of use and building contemplated,
zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions, need for convenient
traffic access and circulation and the limitations and opportunities of
topography.
B. Except as approved by the Board of Aldermen, blocks in residential
subdivisions should not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet nor be less
than two hundred (200) feet in length.
C. Blocks may be irregular in shape, provided they are harmonious with
the overall pattern of blocks in the proposed subdivision and provided
their design provides for standard lot sizes and shapes and adequate
Section
415.570
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.590
AO:961
Section 415.600. Lots [CC 1970 App. B (App. A) §A.4; Ord. No. 5765
§1, 6-24-2003]
traffic flow both within and accessing the subdivision. Blocks shall
be sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate
depth unless in the judgment of the Board of Aldermen a different
arrangement is required to accommodate a specific planned
development or use.
A. Every lot shall abut an approved public or private street. The size,
shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the
subdivision and for the type of development and use. The minimum area
of the lots within the subdivision shall be in accordance with the
requirements and use provisions of the zoning district in which the
property is located. The calculation of the lot area shall be exclusive of
the area of the street right-of-way or road or alley easement abutting
the lot. The lots shall also have a width and depth adequate to provide
the necessary front, side and rear yard setback requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance. (Side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight
street lines or radial to curved street lines unless a variation to this rule
will result in a more appropriate street and lot plan.)
B. Where lots that front upon the outside or inside curve of any curved
street, the width at such street right-of-way line shall not be less than
the required lot width being measured as the shortest distance between
the side lot lines, from where they intersect with the front property line.
C. Location of all access points shall be determined by the Director of
Public Works. Residential lots accessed by a residential street (not a
collector or arterial street) may install up to two (2) curb cuts to
accommodate a circular turnaround, subject to the following criteria:
1. Lot size is in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet; and
2. At least one hundred (100) lineal feet of street frontage on a single
street (corner lots must have at least one hundred (100) lineal feet
on any one (1) street frontage); and
3. Written approval from the Director of Public Works.
D. Graphic Link—Lot Access. Access to a corner residential lot may be
from either street, but not both; except when one (1) of the streets is an
arterial, in which case access will only be allowed from the residential
street. Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more
streets, extra width shall be provided sufficient to permit the
establishment of front building lines on both the front and the side or
sides adjoining the street(s). Lots at intersections of streets shall have a
radius of curvature as indicated in the streets section below. On double
frontage lots, the primary access to the lot shall be designated on the
subdivision plat. On a double frontage lot, a common landscape buffer
or easement shall be defined along the secondary street frontage. No
Section
415.590
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.600
AO:962
Section 415.610. Utility and Drainage Easements [CC 1970 App. B
(App. A) §A.5; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
access to the double frontage lot shall be allowed from the secondary
street frontage. Where possible, primary frontage for double frontage
lots shall be on interior subdivision streets; and a landscaped buffer
or low masonry wall within an easement shall be provided along the
secondary frontage on the major street, collector or arterial street to
provide screening of sight and sound and to prevent direct access to
said double frontage lot from this secondary frontage.
A. Easements for wires, conduits, storm sewers or drainage ways, sanitary
sewers, gas lines, water mains and lines and other similar purposes
shall be provided where necessary. Where possible, such easements
shall be located either within alleys, service drives or along the rear and
side lot lines. Such easements shall be no less than ten (10) feet in
width, which width may be divided evenly between abutting properties.
B. Where a subdivision or site to be developed is traversed by a
watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a
stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming
substantially to the lines of such watercourse and of such width and
construction as will be adequate for the purpose.
C. Where topography or other conditions make the provision of drainage
facilities within road rights-of-way unfeasible, perpetual unobstructed
easements at least fifteen (15) feet in width for such drainage facilities
shall be provided across property outside the road rights-of-way and
with satisfactory access by road to accommodate maintenance and
inspection of these facilities as necessary. Easements shall be indicated
on the subdivision plats and shall be a part of an overall erosion and
stormwater runoff control plan for the subdivision as required by this
Chapter.
D. The proposed internal drainage system of the subdivision or land
development shall not discharge water unto public or private land
outside the proposed subdivision or beyond the subject property, except
via natural or publicly dedicated drainage courses. The developer may
be required to dedicate to the City, either in fee simple or by drainage
or conservation easement, land on both sides of existing streams or
drainage areas as required by the Director of Public Works. The City
may also require drainage areas, including detention storage areas, to
be established and maintained by indenture. Such drainage areas shall
be maintained in perpetuity by the subdivision property owners or
dedicated to another legally established entity which has as one (1) of
its primary responsibilities the management and maintenance of storm
drainage systems. Low lying lands within floodways as designated by
FEMA shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as
drainageways. Permanent structures shall not be allowed in flood
zones.
Section
415.600
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.620
AO:963
Section 415.620. Streets [CC 1970 App. B (App. A) §A.6; Ord. No.
5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
Section 415.630. Street Design Standards [CC 1970 App. B (App. A)
§A.7; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
A. Streets shall be related appropriately to the topography so as to
produce usable lots and streets of reasonable width and gradient as
required herein. Grading for streets should involve minimum deviation
from the original topography. The proposed street layout must be
appropriate for the type of development proposed and properly
integrated with the street system in the area adjoining the subdivision.
The layout shall also conform to the existing and proposed land uses.
B. Major traffic generators such as business districts, schools, shopping
centers and large multi-family residential developments shall obtain
primary access from streets classified as collectors or arterial streets or
highways. Residential streets shall be laid out to discourage the use of
through or non-residential traffic, to permit efficient drainage and
utility systems and to require the minimum length of pavement
necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property. Proposed
through streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to
be subdivided, unless the Plan Commission has determined that such
extension is not desirable for the coordination of the layout of the
existing or future subdivision. Conversely, the arrangement of streets in
new subdivisions shall make provision for the continuation of the
principal existing streets in adjoining areas and for their proper
projection where adjoining land is not subdivided. The design of such
streets in new subdivisions shall be in conformance with Section
415.630 Street Design Standards, below.
C. Provision should be made for through streets at intervals of
approximately one-half (½) mile or less. Offset streets and intersections
should be avoided. Outlet streets from a subdivision to an arterial street
or highway shall be located to provide sufficient sight distance to view
oncoming traffic as determined by the Director of Public Works. The
streets, rights-of-way and paving installed in all new subdivisions shall
be connected to an "approved street". Any street that has been
dedicated to and accepted by the City at the date of adoption of this
Subdivision Ordinance shall be considered an approved street for the
purpose of this Subdivision Ordinance.
D. All streets required by these regulations shall be dedicated to the City
or be established as a private road right-of-way constructed to the same
standard as a public street for which the City has no obligation to
provide maintenance. If a private street is vacated, the subject property
must be divided among those having title to adjacent properties.
A. Every subdivision shall be served by an adequate system of publicly
dedicated streets or private streets meeting all City standards as
specified herein. All private streets within any subdivision or segments
Section
415.620
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.630
AO:964
of streets to be built as part of any land development shall be located,
platted and built in such a manner that they may be dedicated to
the City in accordance with the standards defined in this Subdivision
Ordinance.
Table of Street Design Specifications
Commercial
Collector
Residential
Collector
Minor
Commercial
Street
Minor
Residential
Street
Commercial
Alley
Residential
Alley
Minimum rightof-
way
80 64 64 52 24 22
Maximum grade
at centerline
6% 6% 6% 6% 6% 6%
Minimum grade
at centerline
2% 2% 2% 2% 2% 2%
Minimum
pavement width
(back to back of
curb)
50 38 38 26 24 22
Minimum sight
distance at
crest of curve
300 200 150 150 150 150
Minimum
horizontal
radius of
centerline
600 300 150 150 50 50
Minimum
horizontal
tangent
distance
between
reverse curves
200 100 100 100 None None
Minimum
sidewalk width
Both sides 5
feet
Both sides
5 feet
Both sides 5
feet
Both sides
5 feet
None None
City of Clayton
standard curb
Yes Yes Yes Yes No No
Minimum tree
lawn width
7 feet 7 feet 7 feet 7 feet None None
Median Plus 10 feet
ROW
Plus 10
feet ROW
Plus 10 feet
ROW
Plus 10
feet ROW
None None
B. Cul-de-sacs shall have a maximum length of two thousand (2,000) feet
provided each said cul-de-sac meets the approval of the Fire Marshal of
the City of Clayton relative to the maneuverability of fire equipment.
Cul-de-sac or other similar turnarounds shall be provided at the end of
all permanent dead-end streets. Every cul-de-sac on a roadway more
Section
415.630
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.630
AO:965
Section 415.640. Intersections and Street Alignments [CC 1970
App. B (App. A) §A.8; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
Section 415.650. Street Pavement Standards [CC 1970 App. B (App.
A) §A.9; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
The design and construction of all street pavement, including surface
pavement, curbs, subgrade and bridges and overpasses, shall be in
conformance with the specifications and regulations established and
approved separately from this Chapter by the Director of Public Works.
Section 415.660. Sidewalks [CC 1970 App. B (App. A) §A.10; Ord.
No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
than three hundred (300) feet in length shall be provided at the closed
end with a turnaround having not less than a one hundred twenty
(120) feet outside diameter of traveled way. In the case of temporary
dead-end streets, which are stub streets designed to provide future
connections with unsubdivided adjacent areas, the Plan Commission
shall require a temporary easement for a cul-de-sac or an appropriate
area for a turnaround.
C. Radii must be compatible with Fire Department apparatus for both
inside and outside turning radii. Maneuverability of Fire Department
apparatus must be maintained.
A. Non-perpendicular streets shall have a perpendicular approach at
intersections of at least one hundred (100) feet. No more than two (2)
streets shall intersect at any one (1) point. Where collector or arterial
streets intersect other collector or arterial streets, the curb radius at
the intersection shall not be less than forty (40) feet. Minor street
intersections shall have a curb radius of not less than thirty-two (32)
feet. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred fifty
(150) feet should be avoided. Proposed new intersections with an
existing street shall coincide with any existing "T" intersection on the
opposite side of the street.
B. Intersections shall be designed with grades as level as possible,
consistent with proper provision for drainage. Approaches to
intersections shall have a grade not exceeding three percent (3%) for a
distance of not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet measured from the
centerline of the intersecting street. Additional street paving in the
form of turning lanes and/or right-of-way may be required at
intersections of collectors and arterials with other collectors or
arterials. Property line corners at street intersections shall be rounded
with a radius of at least twenty (20) feet.
C. Where visibility at any proposed street intersection would be impeded
by existing earthen berms or vegetation, the developer shall cut such
ground and/or vegetation in conjunction with the grading of the street
right-of-way sufficient to provide adequate sight distance.
Section
415.630
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.660
AO:966
Section 415.670. Stormwater Drainage [CC 1970 App. B (App. A)
§A.11; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
A. All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the standard
specifications required by the Director of Public Works and shall have a
minimum thickness of five (5) inches, which shall be increased to six (6)
inches at driveways. Additionally, drive approaches shall meet current
specifications as required by the Director of Public Works.
B. Unless otherwise required by the Director of Public Works, sidewalks
shall be placed in public right-of-way and located approximately one (1)
foot from and parallel to the edge of the right-of-way.
C. Where sufficient foot traffic is predicted across proposed streets to
merit a crosswalk and/or pedestrian signal, the Director of Public Works
may require the developer to install signals or striping of the street to
provide for the safety of pedestrians.
A. Every land development or subdivision shall make adequate provision
to accommodate or dispose of stormwater by means of connecting to a
storm sewer system, culvert or other such facility. All such connections
shall be made subsurface. Additionally, when connecting to a
combination sewer system, all new storm sewer laterals shall be
directly connected to the combination sewer main line and not to any
sewer lateral line. Such facilities are to be maintained by the owners of
the subject property or owners of the subdivision through agreement by
the appropriate trust indenture or deed restriction. Facilities for storm
drainage should be designed and constructed so as to prevent any
increase in the rate of storm runoff onto adjoining property. Erosion or
flooding which existed prior to development shall not be increased and
all measures shall be taken to decrease such condition by the
development of the subdivision or other land development.
B. The storm drainage system for a proposed subdivision shall be designed
to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage
area, whether inside or outside the subdivision or land development.
The Director of Public Works shall review the proposed system to
assure it is sufficient to accommodate existing stormwater. The Director
of Public Works shall study the effect of each subdivision on the existing
downstream drainage facilities both inside and outside the area of the
subdivision. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incidental
to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing
downstream facility, the Plan Commission may withhold approval of the
plat until sufficient provisions have been made to eliminate such
overload. No subdivision plat shall be approved unless adequate
drainage will be provided for. Upon request by staff, a complete
hydrologic computations including, but not limited to, outlet velocities
shall be submitted to support the storm sewer design.
C. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all
buildings. Individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general
Section
415.660
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.670
AO:967
Section 415.680. Erosion Control [CC 1970 App. B (App. A) §A.12;
Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to
substantially prevent stormwater drainage from each lot onto adjacent
lots. Landscaping shall be provided in the form of seeded or sodded
grass, ground cover, low walls, earth berms, trees and shrubbery to
enhance the appearance and the function of all surface stormwater
drainage facilities and all erosion control facilities. Plans shall also
require metropolitan sewer district approval.
A. Erosion And Stormwater Runoff Control Plan. Every land development
or subdivision shall make adequate provisions to minimize and control
both long- and short-term erosion in accordance with the requirements
of this Subdivision Ordinance.
B. Temporary Control Measures. Temporary erosion and sediment control
measures are intended to maintain siltation on the land development or
subdivision especially if construction is not going to be completed
within a single construction period. Grading shall be phased so that the
amount of exposed area at any one time is minimized. The erosion and
stormwater control plan shall include a map of the site indicating
proposed grading phases and which shows required best management
practices as directed by the Director of Public Works to be in
compliance with the City's Phase II stormwater permit.
C. Graded areas shall be immediately stabilized and maintained to prevent
or minimize erosion until permanent stabilization measures are in
place. Permissible temporary erosion control techniques include
contour furrowing or other surface roughening techniques, fertilizing,
seeding, mulching and/or sodding. On steep slopes (twenty-five percent
(25%) or greater) the application of asphalt emulsion is a desirable
technique.
D. Slope changes should be designed to keep the slope length and
gradient to a minimum, thus minimizing stormwater velocities over
graded areas. Measures shall be taken to direct stormwater from
graded portions of the site. Sediment shall be retained on site by
filtering runoff and/or by providing properly designed siltation basins.
Truck and equipment accessways to the site of the operation shall be
located so as to minimize danger to traffic and nuisance to surrounding
properties. Such access shall be kept either wet or oiled or treated with
a chemical dust deterrent or paved to the extent necessary to prevent
any dust nuisance to surrounding properties. Public streets and
sidewalks shall be maintained free of soil and debris.
E. Long-Term Erosion Control. The erosion and stormwater control plan
shall be prepared and shall be designed to minimize the grading and
erosion of the site and when such activity is in conjunction with land
subdivision, the plan shall be submitted with and incorporated into the
subdivision plat as required per this Subdivision Ordinance. Issuance of
Section
415.670
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.680
AO:968
Section 415.690. Utilities [CC 1970 App. B (App. A) §A.13; Ord. No.
5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
any building or related permit shall be conditional upon the approval by
the Director of Public Works and the Building Official of a satisfactory
plan which conforms with the following standards:
1. All excavations, grading or filling shall have a finished grade not to
exceed thirty-three percent (33%) except that embankments less
than three (3) feet in height shall be exempt therefrom if properly
sloped and sodded. Steeper grades are allowed if the excavation is
through rock or the excavation or fill is protected by a properly
designed revetment or retaining wall approved by the Building
Official. Such walls shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet.
2. Grading plans shall provide for sediment basins, silt barriers,
diversions, grass waterways, mulching, seeding and other
acceptable erosion control techniques whenever necessary to avoid
damage to adjoining properties, roads and storm sewers.
3. The finished grade shall provide for surface water from drainage
areas in excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet to be
intercepted by diversion swales or inlets and lowered to a stable
outlet constructed of concrete, riprap or pipe.
4. Land adjoining the proposed land development or subdivision shall
be provided with protection from accelerated and increased
surface water, silt disposition and any other consequences of
erosion. Where it is necessary for the protection of such property to
enter upon property outside the control of the applicant for such
purpose, the applicant must obtain appropriate consent. The
applicant shall, at his/her own expense, shore up and protect all
buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged
during the progress of the grading and shall be responsible for all
damage to public or private property resulting from his/her failure
to properly protect and carry out such grading.
A. All utility facilities, including, but not limited to, gas, water, sewer,
electric and telephone cables, shall be located underground throughout
any land development or subdivision. In instances where overhead
utility lines are existing either in the public right-of-way or in private
property, the proponent may be required to bury the portions of the
overhead utility line which extend beyond the width or length of the
subject lot(s). All utility facilities existing and proposed throughout the
land development or subdivision shall be shown on the subdivision plat.
Underground service connections to each platted lot shall be installed.
B. Water Facilities. Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to
obtain water for the purpose of providing water to the subdivision or
land development suitable for human consumption for residential,
business and industrial uses and fire protection. The developer shall
Section
415.680
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.690
AO:969
Section 415.700. Street Signs [CC 1970 App. B (App. A) §A.14; Ord.
No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
Street name signs shall be erected at all street intersections on diagonally
opposite corners so that they will be on the far right-hand side of the
intersection for traffic on the more important street per the Manual of
Traffic Control Devices.
Section 415.710. Street Trees [CC 1970 App. B (App. A) §A.15; Ord.
No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
The developer shall plant trees along all streets in new residential
subdivisions and along the street frontage of any land development. Before
any trees are planted, a plan of such planting shall be submitted as part
of the subdivision plat for his/her review and recommendation to the Plan
Commission and/or Board of Aldermen. Factors to be considered in
reviewing the plan shall include, but shall not be limited to, prevention
of the planting of certain species that would become nuisances because
of insects or disease or because of their roots unduly interfering with
the sewer mains or other underground utilities or location of the trees
obstructing sight distances for vehicles at intersections or making the
installation of utilities, sidewalks or similar improvement costly or difficult
or similar location features that may be undesirable. In no case shall a tree
contract and deposit the necessary funds with the appropriate water
utility for water lines to serve all the lots in the subdivision. The
developer shall install adequate water facilities (including fire
hydrants) subject to the specifications and standards of the City of
Clayton and the water company. Water main extensions shall be
approved by the City of Clayton and the water company. The subdivision
plat shall include a water distribution plan.
C. Sewers. All sanitary sewers, sanitary sewer connections, subdivision
sanitary sewer systems, sewage treatment plants and similar sanitary
facilities shall be subject to the regulations, approval and supervision of
the Building Official and the St. Louis Metropolitan Sewer District
(MSD).
D. All storm sewers, storm sewer connections, subdivision storm sewer
systems and other drainage facilities shall be subject to the regulations,
approval and supervision of the Building Official and the St. Louis
Metropolitan Sewer District (MSD).
E. Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed in all subdivisions by the
subdivider under the supervision and in accordance with the standards
of the Fire Marshal of the Clayton Fire Department and the Director of
Public Works.
F. Street Lighting. Installation of street lighting may be required at the
discretion of the Director of Public Works. All proposed street lighting
shall approved by the Department of Public Works prior to installation.
Section
415.690
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.710
AO:970
be planted that has a trunk diameter of less than two and one-half (2½)
inches as measured six (6) inches above the ground.
Section 415.720. Common Open Space or Facilities [CC 1970 App.
B (App. A) §A.16; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
A. Any common open space reserved within a subdivision or land
development shall be planned to have a defined role and purpose. For
instance, common open space shall be laid out to serve as a buffer from
or between surrounding uses or activities, to provide for or
accommodate pedestrian circulation, to encourage passive or active
recreation uses for the residents or occupants of the subdivision or land
development or for utility easements or to allow for the preservation of
unique or special natural features such as mature trees, natural
drainage courses or areas of steep slope.
B. In the event any common open space or improvements as described in
this Section are to be provided in a subdivision for the common use,
protection or enjoyment of the residents thereof, the developer must
include in his/her trust indenture, submitted for approval as part of the
subdivision plat, provision for funding and undertaking the
maintenance, repair or replacement of these common open spaces,
improvements, facilities or utilities.
C. All common land shall be conveyed by the developer in fee simple
absolute title by warranty deed to the trustees of the subdivision. The
developer shall at the time of recording the plat of such subdivision
record a trust indenture providing that such common land shall be held
and maintained by the trustees for the benefit, use and enjoyment of the
lot owners, present and future, of such subdivision. Such trust
indenture shall provide a uniform means of assessment to ensure that
all such common land and any improvements constructed thereon shall
be maintained by the trustees for the lot owners in compliance with the
ordinances of the City of Clayton and in such manner that such land and
improvements will remain attractive and useful to the lot owners and
not be injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the lot owners and
of residents of surrounding areas. Such trust indenture shall also
provide that the conveyance or change of ownership of any lot shall
carry with it ownership in the common land and that no lot owner shall
have the right to convey his/her interest in such common land except as
an incident of the ownership of a platted lot even though such
provisions are not expressly included in the deed of conveyance and
shall further provide that no right or power conferred on the trustees by
such indenture in order to comply with the provisions of this paragraph
may be abrogated. All such trust indentures shall be submitted to the
City Attorney for his/her approval as to legal form and shall be recorded
with the St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds of St. Louis County
simultaneously with the recording of the subdivision plat.
D. If the trustees of any such subdivision should fail to maintain any
common area or street in accordance with the ordinances of the City of
Section
415.710
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.720
AO:971
Section 415.730. Trust Indenture [CC 1970 App. B (App. A) §A.17;
Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003]
Section 415.740. (Reserved)115
Clayton or in such manner as to assure their intended use or in such
manner as to injure the health, safety or welfare of the lot owners or of
residents of surrounding areas or in such manner as to be detrimental
to the property values of surrounding areas, the City of Clayton may
bring an action to compel the trustees or lot owners, or both, to correct
any condition in such common area or street failing to meet any of the
above standards.
A. A copy of any trust indenture proposed for the subdivision describing
proposed covenants, restrictions and conditions applicable to a
property shall be submitted for review by staff at the time of staff plat
review. The trust indentures shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission
for their consideration and recommendation to the Board of Aldermen.
The Board of Aldermen shall have the authority to approve any trust
indenture proposed as part of a major subdivision. In considering and
acting upon trust indentures, staff, the Plan Commission and the Board
of Aldermen shall take the following standards into consideration:
1. Timely conversion to owners;
2. Equal treatment of developer;
3. Compliance with all applicable City codes, ordinances and
standards;
4. In the event the subdivision includes open space or other facilities
commonly useable and accessible to the residents of the
subdivision, said trust indenture shall provide for assessments to
be levied against property owners within the subdivision to
maintain, repair and replace said facilities or open space as
necessary.
115. Editor’s Note: Former Section 415.740, Tree Preservation, which derived from CC 1970
App. B (App. A) §A.18; Ord. No. 5765 §1, 6-24-2003 was repealed 6-14-2016 by Ord. No.
6430. See now Chapter 405, Article XXX, Trees and Landscaping Regulations.
Section
415.720
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
415.740
AO:972
Chapter 420
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
415.740
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.740
AO:973

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, and Purposes
Section 420.010. Statutory Authorization [Ord. No. 6348,
12-9-2014116]
The Legislature of the State of Missouri has, in RSMo. 89.020, delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations designed to protect the health, safety, and general welfare.
Therefore, the Board of Aldermen of the City of Clayton, Missouri, ordains
as follows.
Section 420.020. Findings of Fact [Ord. No. 6348, 12-9-2014]
A. Flood Losses Resulting From Periodic Inundation. The special flood
hazard areas of the City of Clayton, Missouri, are subject to inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of
the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and
general welfare.
B. General Causes Of The Flood Losses. These flood losses are caused by:
1. The cumulative effect of development in any delineated floodplain
causing increases in flood heights and velocities; and
2. The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods,
hazardous to others, inadequately elevated, or otherwise
unprotected from flood damages.
C. Methods Used To Analyze Flood Hazards. The Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) that is the basis of this Chapter uses a standard engineering
method of analyzing flood hazards which consists of a series of
interrelated steps:
1. Selection of a base flood that is based upon engineering
calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors as
its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated, and the
depth of inundation. The base flood selected for this Chapter is
representative of large floods which are characteristic of what can
be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this
Chapter. It is in the general order of a flood which could be
expected to have a one-percent chance of occurrence in any one (1)
year as delineated on the Federal Insurance Administrator's FIS
and illustrative materials for St. Louis County dated February 4,
2015, as amended, and any future revisions thereto.
116. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Ch. 420, Floodplain
Management, adopted as CC 1970 App B, as amended by Ord. No. 5738, 2-11-2003.
Section
420.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.020
AO:975
Section 420.030. Statement of Purpose [Ord. No. 6348, 12-9-2014]
2. Calculation of water surface profiles are based on a standard
hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream
channel and overbank areas to convey the regulatory flood.
3. Computation of a floodway required to convey this flood without
increasing flood heights more than one (1) foot at any point.
4. Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no
development is permitted that would cause any increase in flood
height.
5. Delineation of flood fringe, i.e., that area outside the floodway
encroachment lines but still subject to inundation by the base flood.
A. It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare; to minimize those losses described in Section
420.020(A); to establish or maintain the community's eligibility for
participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) as
defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 59.22(a)(3); and to
meet the requirements of 44 CFR 60.3(d) by applying the provisions of
this Chapter to:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood
heights or velocities;
2. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
that serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time
of initial construction; and
3. Protect individuals from buying lands that are unsuited for the
intended development purposes due to the flood hazard.
Section
420.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
420.030
AO:976
ARTICLE II
General Provisions
Section 420.040. Lands to Which Chapter Applies [Ord. No. 6348,
12-9-2014]
This Chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of
Clayton, Missouri, identified as numbered and unnumbered A Zones and AE
Zones on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) for St. Louis County on
Map Panels 29189C0211K, 29189C0212K, 29189C0213K, 29189C0214K,
and 29189C0218K, dated February 4, 2015, as amended, and any future
revisions thereto. In all areas covered by this Chapter, no development
shall be permitted except through the issuance of a floodplain development
permit, granted by the Board of Aldermen or its duly designated
representative under such safeguards and restrictions as the Board of
Aldermen or the designated representative may reasonably impose for the
promotion and maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants
of the community, and as specifically noted in Article IV.
Section 420.050. Floodplain Administrator [Ord. No. 6348,
12-9-2014]
The Building Official is hereby designated as the floodplain administrator
under this Chapter.
Section 420.060. Compliance Required [Ord. No. 6348, 12-9-2014]
No development located within the special flood hazard areas of this
community shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered
without full compliance with the terms of this Chapter and other applicable
regulations.
Section 420.070. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions [Ord. No.
6348, 12-9-2014]
It is not intended by this Chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Chapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Chapter shall prevail. All
other ordinances inconsistent with this Chapter are hereby repealed to the
extent of the inconsistency only.
Section 420.080. Interpretation [Ord. No. 6348, 12-9-2014]
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor
of the governing body, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other powers granted by State statutes.
Section
420.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.090
AO:977
Section 420.090. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability [Ord. No.
6348, 12-9-2014]
The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and
scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions, or
the flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This Chapter does
not imply that areas outside the floodway and flood fringe or land uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage.
This Chapter shall not create a liability on the part of the City of Clayton,
or any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that may result
from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
Section 420.100. Severability [Ord. No. 6348, 12-9-2014]
If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this Chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, the
remainder of this Chapter shall not be affected thereby.
Section
420.090
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
420.100
AO:978
ARTICLE III
Administration
Section 420.110. Floodplain Development Permit (Required) [Ord.
No. 6348, 12-9-2014]
A floodplain development permit shall be required for all proposed
construction or other development, including the placement of
manufactured homes, in the areas described in Section 420.040. No person,
firm, corporation, or unit of government shall initiate any development
or substantial improvement or cause the same to be done without first
obtaining a separate floodplain development permit for each structure or
other development.
Section 420.120. Designation of Floodplain Administrator [Ord. No.
6348, 12-9-2014]
The Building Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the
provisions of this Chapter.
Section 420.130. Duties and Responsibilities of Floodplain
Administrator [Ord. No. 6348, 12-9-2014]
A. Duties of the Building Official shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Review of all applications for floodplain development permits to
assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding and that the
floodplain development permit requirements of this Chapter have
been satisfied;
2. Review of all applications for floodplain development permits for
proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have
been obtained from Federal, State, or local governmental agencies
from which prior approval is required by Federal, State, or local
law;
3. Review all subdivision proposals and other proposed new
development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions,
to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from
flooding;
4. Issue floodplain development permits for all approved applications;
5. Notify adjacent communities and the Missouri State Emergency
Management Agency (Mo. SEMA) prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA);
6. Assure that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished and shall
be maintained within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse;
Section
420.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.130
AO:979
Section 420.140. Application for Floodplain Development Permit
[Ord. No. 6348, 12-9-2014]
7. Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new
or substantially improved structures;
8. Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved nonresidential
structures have been floodproofed;
9. When floodproofing techniques are utilized for a particular nonresidential
structure, the Building Official shall require
certification from a registered professional engineer or architect.
A. To obtain a floodplain development permit, the applicant shall first file
an application, in writing, on a form furnished for that purpose. Every
floodplain development permit application shall:
1. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot,
block and tract, house and street address, or similar description
that will readily identify and specifically locate the proposed
structure or work;
2. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the floodplain
development permit;
3. Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended;
4. Indicate the assessed value of the structure and the fair market
value of the improvement;
5. Specify whether development is located in a designated flood
fringe or floodway;
6. Identify the existing base flood elevation and the elevation of the
proposed development;
7. Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the
Building Official;
8. Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed
construction; and
9. Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent, who may be
required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.
Section
420.130
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
420.140
AO:980
ARTICLE IV
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
Section 420.150. General Standards [Ord. No. 6348, 12-9-2014]
A. No permit for floodplain development shall be granted for new
construction, substantial improvements, and other improvements,
including the placement of manufactured homes, within any numbered
or unnumbered A Zones and AE Zones, unless the conditions of this
Section are satisfied.
B. All areas identified as unnumbered A Zones on the FIRM are subject to
inundation of the one-hundred-year flood; however, the base flood
elevation is not provided. Development within unnumbered A Zones is
subject to all provisions of this Chapter. If Flood Insurance Study data is
not available, the community shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available from
Federal, State, or other sources.
C. Until a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development, including fill, shall be permitted
within any numbered A Zone or AE Zone on the FIRM, unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
one (1) foot at any point within the community.
D. All new construction, subdivision proposals, substantial improvements,
prefabricated structures, placement of manufactured homes, and other
developments shall require:
1. Design or adequate anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. Construction with materials resistant to flood damage;
3. Utilization of methods and practices that minimize flood damages;
4. All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities be designed and/or located
so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;
5. New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage
systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into
floodwaters, and on-site waste disposal systems be located so as to
avoid impairment or contamination; and
Section
420.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.150
AO:981
Section 420.160. Specific Standards [Ord. No. 6348, 12-9-2014]
6. Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, located within
special flood hazard areas are required to assure that:
a. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage;
b. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage;
c. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards; and
d. All proposals for development, including proposals for
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, of five (5) acres or
fifty (50) lots, whichever is lesser, include within such
proposals base flood elevation data.
E. Storage Of Material And Equipment.
1. The storage or processing of materials within the special flood
hazard area that are, in time of flooding, buoyant, flammable,
explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life is
prohibited.
2. Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not
subject to major damage by floods, if firmly anchored to prevent
flotation or if readily removable from the area within the time
available after a flood warning.
F. Accessory Structures. Structures used solely for parking and limited
storage purposes, not attached to any other structure on the site, of
limited investment value, and not larger than four hundred (400)
square feet, may be constructed at grade and wet-floodproofed,
provided there is no human habitation or occupancy of the structure,
the structure is of single-wall design, a variance has been granted from
the standard floodplain management requirements of this Chapter, and
a floodplain development permit has been issued.
A. In all areas identified as numbered and unnumbered A Zones and AE
Zones, where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth
in Section 420.150(B), the following provisions are required:
1. Residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structures, including manufactured
homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to
one (1) foot above base flood elevation.
[*In all unnumbered and numbered A Zones and AE Zones, the
FEMA Region VII office recommends elevating to one (1) foot above
Section
420.150
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
420.160
AO:982
Section 420.170. Manufactured Homes [Ord. No. 6348, 12-9-2014]
the base flood elevation to accommodate floodway conditions when
the floodplain is fully developed.]
2. Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential
structures, including manufactured homes, shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one (1) foot above
the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the base flood
elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of
this Subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to
the floodplain administrator as set forth in Section 420.130(A)(9).
[*The FEMA Region VII office recommends elevating to one (1) foot
above the base flood elevation to qualify for flood insurance rates
based upon floodproofing.]
3. Require, for all new construction and substantial improvements,
that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor used solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other
than a basement and that are subject to flooding shall be designed
to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
a. A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not
less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided; and
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot
above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves, or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit
the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. All manufactured homes to be placed within all unnumbered and
numbered A Zones and AE Zones on the community's FIRM shall be
required to be installed using methods and practices that minimize
flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured
homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
Section
420.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.170
AO:983
Section 420.180. Floodways [Ord. No. 6348, 12-9-2014]
B. Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within unnumbered or numbered A Zones and AE Zones on
the community's FIRM on sites: outside of manufactured home park or
subdivision; in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; in an
expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or in
an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor
of the manufactured home is elevated to one (1) foot above the base
flood elevation and be securely attached to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
C. Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
within all unnumbered and numbered A Zones and AE Zones on the
community's FIRM, that are not subject to the provisions of Section
420.170(B) of this Chapter, be elevated so that either:
1. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at one (1) foot above
the base flood level; or
2. The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are
no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and are
securely attached to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
[*In all unnumbered and numbered A Zones and AE Zones, the
FEMA Region VII office recommends elevating to one (1) foot
above the base flood elevation to accommodate floodway
conditions when the floodplain is fully developed.]
A. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section
420.040 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry
debris and potential projectiles, the following provisions shall apply:
1. The community shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based
on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway
must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood without
increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one
(1) foot at any point.
2. The community shall prohibit any encroachments, including fill,
new construction, substantial improvements, and other
development, within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has
been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that
the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in
Section
420.170
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
420.180
AO:984
Section 420.190. Recreational Vehicles [Ord. No. 6348, 12-9-2014]
flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
3. If Section 420.180(A)(2) is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood
hazard reduction provisions of Article IV.
4. In unnumbered A Zones, the community shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data
currently available from Federal, State, or other sources as set
forth in Section 420.150(B).
A. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within all
unnumbered and numbered A Zones and AE Zones on the community's
FIRM either:
1. Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days;
2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use*; or
3. Meet the permitting, elevation, and anchoring requirements for
manufactured homes of this Chapter.
*A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quickdisconnect-
type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.
Section
420.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.190
AO:985

ARTICLE V
Floodplain Management Variance Procedures
Section 420.200. Establishment of Appeal Board [Ord. No. 6348,
12-9-2014]
The Board of Adjustment as established by the City of Clayton shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for variances from the floodplain management
requirements of this Chapter.
Section 420.210. Responsibility of Appeal Board [Ord. No. 6348,
12-9-2014]
Section 420.220. Further Appeals [Ord. No. 6348, 12-9-2014]
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment or any
taxpayer may appeal such decision to the St. Louis County Circuit Court as
provided in RSMo. 89.110.
Section 420.230. Floodplain Management Variance Criteria [Ord.
No. 6348, 12-9-2014]
A. Where an application for a floodplain development permit or request for
a variance from the floodplain management regulations is denied by the
Building Official, the applicant may apply for such floodplain
development permit or variance directly to the Board of Adjustment, as
defined in Section 420.200.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Building Official in the enforcement or
administration of this Chapter.
A. In passing upon such applications for variances, the Board of
Adjustment shall consider all technical data and evaluations, all
relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this Chapter,
and the following criteria:
1. The danger to life and property due to flood damage;
2. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
Section
420.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.230
AO:987
Section 420.240. Conditions for Approving Floodplain Management
Variances [Ord. No. 6348, 12-9-2014]
6. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flood
damage, for the proposed use;
7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
8. The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters, if applicable, expected at the site; and
11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems; streets;
and bridges.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that the
items in Subsections (B) through (F) below have been fully considered.
As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places, or a local inventory of
historic places upon determination that the proposed activity will not
preclude the structure's continued historic designation.
C. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
D. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon:
1. A showing of good and sufficient cause;
2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
3. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
Section
420.230
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
420.240
AO:988
Section 420.250. Conditions for Approving Variances for Accessory
Structures [Ord. No. 6348, 12-9-2014]
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
F. A community shall notify the applicant in writing, over the signature of
a community official, that: (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars
($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and
(2) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life
and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of
all variance actions as required by this Chapter.
A. Any variance granted for an accessory structure shall be decided
individually based on a case-by-case analysis of the building's unique
circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions
as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in Sections 420.230
and 420.240 of this Chapter.
B. In order to minimize flood damages during the one-hundred-year flood,
and the threat to public health and safety, the following conditions shall
be included for any variance issued for accessory structures that are
constructed at grade and wet-floodproofed:
1. Use of the accessory structures must be solely for parking and
limited storage purposes in Zone A only as identified on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
2. For any new or substantially damaged accessory structures, the
exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e.,
foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring,
etc.) below the base flood elevation must be built with floodresistant
materials in accordance with Section 420.150(D)(2) of
this Chapter.
3. The accessory structures must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure in
accordance with Section 420.150(A) of this Chapter. All of the
building's structural components must be capable of resisting
specific flood-related forces, including hydrostatic, buoyancy, and
hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.
4. Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that it is
contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is
capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance
with Section 420.150(D)(4) of this Chapter.
5. The accessory structures must meet all National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP) opening requirements. The NFIP requires that
Section
420.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.250
AO:989
enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the one-hundred-year
flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters in accordance with Section 420.160(A)(3) of this
Chapter.
6. The accessory structures must comply with the floodplain
management floodway encroachment provisions of Section
420.180(A)(2) of this Chapter. No variances may be issued for
accessory structures within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels would result during the one-hundred-year
flood.
7. Equipment, machinery, or other contents must be protected from
any flood damage.
8. No disaster relief assistance under any program administered by
any Federal agency shall be paid for any repair or restoration costs
of the accessory structures.
9. A community shall notify the applicant in writing, over the
signature of a community official, that (1) the issuance of a variance
to construct a structure below base flood level will result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high
as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
insurance coverage and (2) such construction below the base flood
level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be
maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by
this Chapter.
10. Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and
approved by the community and registered professional engineer
or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development
permit for construction.
Section
420.250
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
420.250
AO:990
ARTICLE VI
Penalties for Violation
Section 420.260. Violations and Penalties [Ord. No. 6348,
12-9-2014]
Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with granting of variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor.
Any person who violates this Chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and in addition, shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
City of Clayton or other appropriate authority from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Section
420.260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.260
AO:991

ARTICLE VII
Amendments
Section 420.270. Amendments [Ord. No. 6348, 12-9-2014]
The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this Chapter may
from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or appealed to
reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act
of 1973; provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a
public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties of interest and citizens
shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City
of Clayton, and at least twenty (20) days shall elapse between the date of
this publication and the public hearing. A copy of such amendments will be
provided to the Region VII office of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA). The regulations of this Chapter are in compliance with the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) regulations.
Section
420.270
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.270
AO:993

ARTICLE VIII
Definitions
Section 420.280. Definitions [Ord. No. 6348, 12-9-2014]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meanings they have in
common usage and to give this Chapter its most reasonable application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Means the same as "appurtenant structure."
ACTUARIAL RATES — See "risk premium rates."
ADMINISTRATOR — The Federal Insurance Administrator.
AGENCY — The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
AGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES — Agricultural products and livestock.
AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURE — Any structure used exclusively in
connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of
agricultural commodities.
APPEAL — A request for review of the floodplain administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this Chapter or a request for a variance.
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE — A structure that is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the structure having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER or CHIEF ELECTED OFFICIAL — The official
of the community who is charged with the authority to implement and
administer laws, ordinances, and regulations for that community.
COMMUNITY — Any State or area or political subdivision thereof, which
has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for
the areas within its jurisdiction.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, levees,
levee systems, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — For insurance purposes, a non-basement building
which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation
walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Section
420.280
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.280
AO:995
ELIGIBLE COMMUNITY or PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY — A community
for which the Administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance under
the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION — For the purposes of determining rates,
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the
effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective
before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing
structures."
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of
a community on which the Administrator has delineated both special flood
hazard areas and the designated regulatory floodway.
FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION — A determination by the
Administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the
flood level that has a one-percent or greater chance of occurrence in any
given year.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards.
FLOOD FRINGE — The area outside the floodway encroachment lines but
still subject to inundation by the regulatory flood.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Administrator, where the boundaries of the flood
areas having special flood hazards have been designated as (unnumbered
or numbered) A Zones.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community,
on which the Administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of inland waters; and/or
Section
420.280
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
420.280
AO:996
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood-control works, and
floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special-purpose
ordinances (such as floodplain and grading ordinances) and other
applications of police power. The term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, that provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, or structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES — The lines marking the limits of
floodways on Federal, State and local floodplain maps.
FLOODWAY or REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one (1) foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above a flood
level, for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as bridge openings and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use that cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water. This term includes only docking facilities and facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, but does
not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
2.
Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
1.
Section
420.280
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.280
AO:997
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable floodproofing design requirements of this Chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one (1) or more
sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MAP — The Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM), Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM), or the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) for a
community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
MARKET VALUE or FAIR MARKET VALUE — An estimate of what is fair,
economic, just and equitable value under normal local market conditions.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP), the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or
other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
2.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
3.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
a.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
b.
4.
Section
420.280
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
420.280
AO:998
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
NFIP — The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — See "base flood."
PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY — Also known as an "eligible community,"
means a community in which the Administrator has authorized the sale of
flood insurance.
PERSON — Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, or any other entity, including Federal, State, and
local governments and agencies.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least fifty-one percent (51%) of the
actual cash value of the structure, less land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REMEDY A VIOLATION — To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with Federal, State, or local floodplain management regulations
or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two (2) separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event equals or exceeds twentyfive
percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
RISK PREMIUM RATES — Those rates established by the Administrator
pursuant to individual community studies and investigations which are
undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with Section 1307
of the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 and the accepted
actuarial principles. "Risk premium rates" include provisions for operating
costs and allowances.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — See "area of special flood hazard."
1. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
2.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
3.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
4.
Section
420.280
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.280
AO:999
SPECIAL HAZARD AREA — An area having special flood hazards and shown
on an FHBM, FIRM or FBFM as Zones (unnumbered or numbered) A and
AE.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvements and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
other improvements was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit
date. The "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, any work
beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home
on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling, the installation of streets and/or
walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the
erection of temporary forms, nor installation on the property of accessory
structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual
start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STATE COORDINATING AGENCY — That agency of the State government
or other office designated by the Governor of the State or by State statute
at the request of the Administrator to assist in the implementation of the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) in that state.
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home. "Structure," for insurance
purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent
site, as well as a manufactured home on a permanent foundation. For
the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of
construction, alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or
supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless
such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE —
Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred. The term includes repetitive loss buildings (see
definition).
1.
For the purposes of this definition, "repair" is considered to occur when
the first repair or reconstruction of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of the building commences.
2.
3. The term does not apply to:
Section
420.280
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
420.280
AO:1000
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
OR SUBDIVISIONS — Where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair,
reconstruction or improvement commenced.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by the community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation. Flood insurance requirements remain
in place for any varied use or structure and cannot be varied by the
community.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with
existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are
solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
a.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure; or
b.
c. Any improvement to a building.
Any combination of reconstruction, alteration, or improvement to a
building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative
percentage of improvement equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
current market value of the building. For the purposes of this definition,
an improvement occurs when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
This term includes structures which have incurred "repetitive loss" or
"substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work done.
1.
The term does not apply to:
Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with
existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are
solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
a.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure; or
b.
Any building that has been damaged from any source or is
categorized as repetitive loss.
** Recommend development of written and adopted policy and
procedure.
c.
2.
Section
420.280
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.280
AO:1001
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this Chapter
is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum where specified),
of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplain.
Section
420.280
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
420.280
AO:1002
Chapter 425
SIGN REGULATIONS
Editor's Note: Pilot Program in effect regarding temporary signage during
special retail events. Anything in Chapter 425 of Title IV of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Clayton to the contrary notwithstanding, the
City Manager or his/her designee is hereby authorized to temporarily and
selectively suspend strict enforcement of and required adherence to the
temporary sign regulations of the City and permit the display of otherwise
prohibited temporary signs, banners, advertising and other temporary
attention-getting devices in association with special events conducted by
retail merchants in the City of Clayton. The purpose of this pilot program
is to assess the impact of such relaxed regulations and enlarged signage
options on businesses, City revenue, traffic and pedestrian safety,
commercial and residential property values, and the urban aesthetic of the
City. For additional information see Ord. No. 6531 on file in the City offices.
Section 425.010. General Intent and Purpose [CC 1970 §5-30; Ord.
No. 5029 §1, 1-11-1994; Ord. No. 5504 §1, 5-25-1999]
It is the intent of the City of Clayton to regulate signage in a manner
which is effective for the operation of business while compatible with the
image of Clayton. The provisions of this Chapter are designed to encourage
excellence in the design of signage, to promote compatibility with the
immediate surrounding areas and to project Clayton as a premier business
environment. To accomplish the above stated goal, the provisions of this
Chapter shall apply to the display, construction, erection, alteration, use,
location, size, type and maintenance of all signs within the City. A sign
permit shall be secured and all requirements of this Chapter and the
Building Code shall be complied with before approval for the installation of
any sign will be granted. All signs shall be constructed of materials which
are weather-resistant and consistent with the manufacturing of quality
signs.
Section 425.020. Definitions [CC 1970 §5-30.1; Ord. No. 5029 §1,
1-11-1994; Ord. No. 5504 §1, 5-25-1999]
As used in this Chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them by this Section:
ACCESSORY SIGN — A sign relating to an accessory use on a premise and
signs that are deemed beneficial by providing directional information to
pedestrians or motorists.
ADVERTISING DEVICE — Banners affixed on poles, wires, ropes,
streamers, pennants, wind-operated devices, flashing lighting, searchlights,
balloons, lights aligned on wires or other supports, objects attached to
buildings or placed in front yards or unusual colors applied to a building
facade or similar types of devices. Sculptures, fountains or any other
artwork approved by the Architectural Review Board are excluded from this
definition.
Section
420.280
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.020
AO:1003
CUSTOMARY USE — Use consistent with current City regulations or
consistent with the intent of current City regulations.
FREEWAY PRIMARY HIGHWAY — That portion of a primary highway
system which has been constructed as a divided, dual lane fully controlled
access facility with no access to the throughway except the established
interchanges.
GROUND SIGN — A detached sign with two (2) or more supports or erected
on a solid base or wall when landscaped and placed upon or affixed to the
ground.
INTERSTATE SYSTEM — That portion of the national system of interstate
highways located within the boundaries of Missouri as officially designated,
or may be hereafter designated by the State Highways and Transportation
Commission with the approval of the Secretary of Transportation pursuant
to Title 23, United States Code, as amended.
PRIMARY SYSTEM — That portion of the highways of this State officially
designated by the State Highways and Transportation Commission as being
in the primary highway system as authorized by the Constitution and laws
of Missouri.
SIGN — Any identification, description, illustration or device, illuminated
or non-illuminated, which is visible from any public place or is located on
private property and exposed to the public and which directs attention to a
product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation,
including any emblem, painting, numbers exceeding twelve (12) inches in
height, placard or temporary sign designed to advertise, identify or convey
information, with the exception of window displays and national flags. For
the purpose of removal, signs shall also include all sign structures.
SIGN AREA — The total area of the space to be used for advertising
purposes, including the spaces between open-type letters and figures,
including the background structure or other decoration or addition which is
an integral part of the sign. Sign supports shall be excluded in determining
the area of the sign.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign attached to the interior of or displayed in a
display window for a limited period, constructed of paper, cloth or similar
material in order to direct attention to persons outside the building to a
particular sale of merchandise or a change in the status of a business.
TEMPORARY WINDOW SIGNS — A temporary sign may be attached or
applied to the inside of a display window for each building or store, provided
the area of the sign does not exceed six (6) square feet. If the length
of a continuous display window on any one (1) building or store exceeds
thirty (30) lineal feet, two (2) such signs may be installed provided they are
remote from each other.
WALL SIGN — A sign attached or erected against the wall of a building with
the face in a parallel plane to the plane of the building wall.
Section
425.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
425.030
AO:1004
Section 425.030. General Regulations [CC 1970 §5-30.2; Ord. No.
5029 §1, 1-11-1994; Ord. No. 5504 §1, 5-25-1999; Ord. No. 6145 §1,
4-26-2011]
Section 425.040. Permitted Sign Areas [CC 1970 §5-30.3; Ord. No.
5029 §1, 1-11-1994; Ord. No. 5504 §1, 5-25-1999; Ord. No. 5854 §1,
12-14-2004]
A. The general requirement of this Chapter is that all wall signs shall be
attached to front walls at or near the first (1st) floor ceiling level as
determined by the Director of Housing, Planning and Development
Services and project no more than eighteen (18) inches and face a
fronting street, provided that a wall sign depicting the name of a
building may be attached to an architectural wall facing the street on a
portion of an underground garage structure that extends above grade
when such sign is installed in lieu of any permitted wall sign on the
building, subject to the approval of the Architectural Review Board of
the City. Accessory signs may be ground signs if authorized by the
Director of Housing, Planning and Development Services.
B. All signs shall be constructed of materials which are reasonably
weather resistant and consistent with materials normally used in the
manufacture of quality signs.
C. The design, shape and colors used shall be compatible with the building
to which the sign is attached, subject to the approval of the City
Manager of the City prior to the issuance of the sign permit by the
Director of Housing, Planning and Development Services of the City. At
his/her option, the City Manager may refer any proposed sign to the
Architectural Review Board for approval. Temporary signs shall be
designed, lettered and constructed in accordance with normally
accepted professional standards.
D. Except as provided for residential buildings, schools, religious
institutions and institutional buildings, all advertising signs, including
billboards, shall be located only in the "C-1", "C-2", "C-3", "C-4" or "S-1"
zoning districts.
E. An existing sign shall not be enlarged, altered or relocated except in
conformity to the provisions for new signs, nor until a proper permit has
been secured as required by the Building Code of the City.
F. Any signs not expressly permitted in this Chapter are prohibited.
A. This Section shall govern the wall signage allowed for various uses. The
regulations shall permit one (1) wall sign per ground floor tenant space
with street entrances, provided that space is separated from other
portions of the building with permanent walls. Multiple wall signs that
are permitted for certain office and hotel uses are also described in this
Section.
Section
425.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.040
AO:1005
1. One (1) wall sign fifteen (15) square feet or five percent (5%) of the
front wall area up to a maximum area of fifty (50) square feet shall
be permitted as follows:
a. Individual ground floor stores and tenant spaces with display
windows and separate street entrances.
b. Banks, savings and loan associations in separate buildings or
when appended to another building.
c. Hotels.
d. Corner lots. Buildings and stores as described above on corner
lots with a display window and/or a separate street entrance
may have a sign on the side street side of the building
conforming to the above requirements. Such signs shall be
centrally proportioned on each facade or located above display
windows but in no event shall such signs be located within four
(4) feet of the corner of the building.
2. One (1) wall sign fifteen (15) square feet or five percent (5%) of the
wall area up to a maximum of two hundred fifty (250) square feet
shall be allowed for single-tenant buildings with street frontage,
other than office, institutional or educational buildings.
3. One (1) wall sign twelve (12) square feet in area or five percent
(5%) of the front wall area up to a maximum of twenty-five (25)
square feet shall be permitted for the following:
a. Single-tenant office buildings installed at a building entrance.
b. Multi-tenant office buildings when no other signs are installed
and installed at a building entrance.
c. Ground floor multi-tenant arcades or malls and erected at the
entrance.
d. Parking garages.
e. The above buildings on corner lots with a building entrance
and parking garage may be permitted a sign on each street
side of the building.
4. Hotels.
a. In addition to a permitted wall sign, hotel shops, ticket offices
and restaurants with display windows or substantial glass
walls and with a separate entrance may have a wall sign twelve
(12) square feet in area or five percent (5%) of the front wall
area not to exceed twenty-five (25) square feet.
b. Hotels with restaurants that do not have a ground floor
entrance, but which feature live entertainment, are allowed
one (1) mechanical/moving letters sign advertising the
Section
425.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
425.040
AO:1006
entertainment venue only. The mechanical sign must provide
periodic civic messages to be agreed upon by the applicant and
the City Manager on an annual basis. Those establishments
within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential district must
turn the mechanical sign off by 11:00 P.M.
5. Office buildings (multi-tenant).
a. One (1) wall sign fifteen (15) square feet in area facing a street,
depicting the name of the building, installed near the entrance.
In addition, the following is permitted:
(1) Ground floor office tenants with a substantial glass wall or
window area and street frontage may erect a wall sign
twelve (12) square feet in area, but not more than two (2)
such signs shall be permitted for each building street
frontage.
(2) Ground floor banks, retail stores, restaurants or other
similar uses with thirty (30) or more feet of street frontage
are permitted one (1) wall sign twelve (12) square feet in
area or five percent (5%) of the front wall area, not to
exceed twenty-five (25) square feet except as provided for
in Section 425.040(1)(b). On corner lots, such signs may
be permitted on each street side of the building.
6. Multi-story buildings. In addition to signs for the first (1st) floor
tenants in Section 425.040(1)(a), a multi-story building with one (1)
or more tenants above the first (1st) floor may be permitted a sign
at the entrance to the second (2nd) floor, not exceeding six (6)
square feet for single entrance doors or twelve (12) square feet for
double doors, depicting the name of the building or tenant.
7. Signs for religious institutions, schools and other institutions. One
(1) sign shall be permitted for the following buildings as described:
a. Religious institutions may erect a ground sign or bulletin board
not to exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in area.
b. Schools and other institutions may erect a ground sign up to
twenty-five (25) square feet in area. In lieu of a ground sign, a
wall sign at the entrance to the school or institutional building
may be erected but such sign shall not exceed twelve (12)
square feet in area.
c. Multi-building school campuses or institutional complexes may
be permitted more than one (1) ground sign and may include
additional building accessory signs if the design, size and
location of all signs are approved by the Architectural Review
Board.
8. Other.
Section
425.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.040
AO:1007
Section 425.050. Second Story Display Window Signs [CC 1970
§5-30.4; Ord. No. 5029 §1, 1-11-1994; Ord. No. 5504 §1, 5-25-1999]
Second (2nd) floor tenant areas designed and occupied for retail purposes
with display windows consistent with first (1st) floor display windows may
be permitted a wall sign twelve (12) square feet in area or five percent (5%)
of the front wall area facing a public street, up to a maximum permitted sign
area of twenty-five (25) square feet. The design and location of all secondstory
signs require the approval of the Architectural Review Board prior to
installation.
Section 425.060. Alternate Ground Signs [CC 1970 §5-30.5; Ord.
No. 5029 §1, 1-11-1994; Ord. No. 5504 §1, 5-25-1999]
Section 425.070. Accessory Signs [CC 1970 §5-30.6; Ord. No. 5029
§1, 1-11-1994; Ord. No. 5504 §1, 5-25-1999]
a. Multiple signs will be permitted provided that their total area
is within the limits of the ordinance and are of the same
dimension as described in the provisions applying to their
particular building.
b. A tenant may have one (1) perpendicular sign with the name of
the business six (6) inches by twenty-four (24) inches.
c. A district or subdistrict may develop a uniform series of
coordinated signs but the plan must be approved by the
Architectural Review Board.
A. A ground sign not to exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in area
depicting the name of the building or names of not more than five (5)
major tenants, each of which occupies a significant portion of the
building, may be erected in lieu of any permitted wall sign, provided the
ground sign is designed as a compatible and integral part of a
landscaped area or plaza and the size, location, design and construction
materials are approved by the Architectural Review Board.
B. When a building has fewer signs or signs with less area than is
permitted under this Chapter, the Architectural Review Board shall
have authority to approve such alternate ground sign in addition to the
building sign.
A. In addition to the signs permitted herein, the Director of Housing,
Planning and Development Services shall have the authority to approve
accessory signs that may specifically benefit the public as hereinafter
provided:
1. Accessory wall or ground signs for auto dealers not exceeding
twelve (12) square feet.
2. Parking lot ground signs not exceeding six (6) square feet.
Section
425.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
425.070
AO:1008
Section 425.080. Residential Signs [CC 1970 §5-30.7; Ord. No. 5029
§1, 1-11-1994; Ord. No. 5504 §1, 5-25-1999]
3. Rear building entrance wall signs not exceeding eight (8) square
feet.
4. Directional traffic, parking or regulatory ground signs not
exceeding six (6) square feet. A pole sign not exceeding six (6)
square feet may be approved by the City Manager in lieu of a
permitted ground sign if the pole sign is aesthetically designed.
5. Advertising signs, logos or emblems may be applied to the surface
of an awning provided the total area of such advertising does not
exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the area of the awning parallel to
an adjacent street and the design is approved by the City Manager
or, at his/her discretion, the Architectural Review Board.
6. Menu box signs. Menu boxes may be erected with a dimension not
to exceed eighteen (18) inches by eighteen (18) inches. Menu box
must be professionally done and the contained menu professionally
printed.
7. A sidewalk identification sign not exceeding three (3) square feet in
area painted on or applied to the inside of a display window near
the entrance door providing consumer information.
8. Product identification or information cards may be used in
conjunction with products displayed and sold on the premises and
may be placed in ground floor display windows provided the area of
such cards does not exceed ten percent (10%) of each display
window facing a street.
9. Accessory signs may be approved for a specific block or district.
The height, design and material type must be approved by the City
Manager or the Architectural Review Board.
10. An accessory sign authorized by the Director of Housing, Planning
and Development Services and not listed above shall be
proportioned by the Director of Housing, Planning and
Development Services to the nearest listed above.
A. The following signs may be erected on residential buildings or premises
as indicated:
1. One (1) nameplate not exceeding one (1) square foot in area for
home occupations attached to the building entrance.
2. Residential buildings with twenty (20) or more units shall be
permitted one (1) on wall sign not exceeding eight (8) square feet in
area, except such buildings may be permitted an alternate ground
sign not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area if authorized by
the Architectural Review Board.
Section
425.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.080
AO:1009
Section 425.090. Off-Premises Billboards [CC 1970 §5-30.8; Ord.
No. 5029 §1, 1-11-1994; Ord. No. 5504 §1, 5-25-1999]
3. Garage sale signs in residential districts conforming to the
requirements of Section 605.330 of this Code.
4. Residential political signs. Temporary political signs may be
erected in residential yards appertaining to political issues or
candidates provided such signs do not exceed an aggregate total
area of six (6) square feet per yard. Such signs may only be
displayed thirty (30) days prior to an election within a ward and
shall be removed within seven (7) days following said election.
A. This Section pertaining to billboard signs is adopted under the
authority of the City in furtherance of the more general purposes set
forth in the sign ordinance. It is adopted and hereafter amended
pursuant to Section 71.288, RSMo. By enacting the revised sign
ordinance under the new Statute, the City may establish its own
"customary use" determinations specific to the City.
B. Billboards shall be allowed within six hundred sixty (660) feet of the
nearest edge of the right-of-way of Highway 170 in areas zoned "C-1",
"C-2", "C-3", "C-4" or "S-1" subject to the following regulations.
1. Application.
a. The City shall not accept a billboard application for
consideration and issuance unless it is accompanied by a valid
permit issued by the State of Missouri Highway and
Transportation Commission, site plan drawn to scale and plans
sealed by an engineer licensed and registered in the State of
Missouri.
b. Such plans shall include structural drawings, foundation
specifications, landscape plan, wind load calculations,
electrical/lighting specifications and a survey depicting the
distance:
(1) From the nearest billboards in both directions along the
same side of the highway;
(2) From areas zoned residential;
(3) From property lines and roofed structures;
(4) From the right-of-way, as of the date of application.
All plans must meet the specifications as
depicted in Subsections (B)(3) and (B)(7) of this
Section.
c. All billboards must be approved by the Architectural Review
Board.
Section
425.080
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
425.090
AO:1010
2. Fees.
a. Every billboard applicant, before being granted a permit
hereunder, shall pay to the City a fee of five hundred dollars
($500.00) for processing the application and initial inspection.
No fee shall be incurred for changing the display face or
performing routine maintenance.
b. Any application received for billboard sign intended to replace
an existing billboard sign shall be regulated by the provisions
of this Chapter and any other applicable regulations normally
applied to new signs.
3. Spacing.
a. Billboards shall be oriented toward traffic on the primary
highway.
b. No billboard along the primary highway shall be erected closer
than four thousand (4,000) feet from another billboard on
either side of the primary highway. The distance measured
shall be lateral.
c. No billboard shall be erected closer than five hundred (500)
feet from any residential zoned property, residential structure,
church, park or school.
d. No billboard shall be erected closer than two hundred (200)
feet from any on-premise sign located on a building or other
non-sign structure.
e. No billboard shall be erected within five hundred (500) feet of
an interchange or intersection at grade. Such five hundred
(500) feet shall be measured from the beginning or ending of
the pavement widening at the exit from and entrance to the
main traveled way.
4. Size.
a. No billboard sign shall exceed three hundred seventy-five
(375) square feet per sign face with a maximum sign face
height of fifteen (15) feet and a maximum width of twenty-five
(25) feet.
b. Only single-sided, back-to-back or "V" type construction
billboards with a single display per facing and a single pole
support structure design are allowed.
c. No portion of the billboard shall exceed the height
requirements for the zoning district in which it is located or the
approved height for existing buildings within the district.
5. Lighting.
Section
425.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.090
AO:1011
a. Revolving or rotating beam or beacon of light shall not be
permitted as part of any billboard.
b. Flashing or intermittent or moving light or lights shall not be
allowed.
c. External lighting, such as floodlights, thin line or gooseneck
reflectors may be permitted, provided the light source is
directed upon the face of the sign and is effectively shielded
from casting light on adjacent properties.
d. Lights shall not be of such intensity or placed in such a manner
so as to cause glare, impair the vision of the driver of a motor
vehicle or otherwise interfere with a driver's operation of a
motor vehicle.
e. No sign shall be so illuminated so as to interfere with the
effectiveness of, or obscure, an official traffic sign, device or
signal.
f. Applicant must obtain all necessary electrical permits before
any sign may be illuminated.
6. Landscaping.
a. All billboard applications shall have landscape plans approved
by the Architectural Review Board. The landscaping may
include, but is not limited to, broadleaf evergreens or
evergreen shrubs and ground cover and shall be designed to
ensure the structure will be aesthetically compatible with its
surroundings and the aesthetic standard of the community and
neighboring property, insofar as may be practicable, as well as
safe and secure from trespassers or vandals.
b. The determination of whether the landscaping plan is
reasonably suitable shall be made based upon a consideration
of the nature of the location, the impact on surrounding
properties, the safety and security of the proposed billboard, as
well as Clayton's aesthetic quality.
7. Disuse and removal.
a. If any billboard lacks a commercial advertisement or public
service message for a period exceeding sixty (60) days,
regardless of intent to resume use of same, it shall be
considered a discontinuance of use and shall be removed
within thirty (30) days of notice by the Director of Planning and
Development Services.
b. The Director of Planning and Development Services may, upon
forty-eight (48) hours' written notice, remove any sign
constructed for which an application has not been approved.
Section
425.090
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
425.090
AO:1012
Section 425.100. For Sale Signs [CC 1970 §5-30.9; Ord. No. 5029 §1,
1-11-1994; Ord. No. 5504 §1, 5-25-1999]
The costs of such removal shall be assessed to the billboard
owner.
A. A temporary sign for the advertisement of sale of property may be
erected in conformance with this Section.
1. For sale signs on non-residential buildings. One (1) for sale or lease
sign may be erected on each non-residential building or premise,
provided such sign conforms to the following requirements:
a. It shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area except for
newly completed office buildings in which a temporary sign not
exceeding twenty-five (25) square feet may be authorized for a
period not to exceed six (6) months after the issuance of the
first (1st) occupancy permit. Such signs shall be aesthetically
designed and approved by the Architectural Review Board.
b. The legend shall refer only to the sale or lease of the building
or premise and contain the name, address and telephone
number of the agent handling the sale. The sign may contain
the zoning district designation and the type of space available
if desired.
c. Upon sale or lease of the premises, the authorized sign may
remain for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, be modified
to state whether the premises were leased or sold and may
indicate the buyer or lessee and the type of future business to
occupy the premises.
2. Residential for sale signs. One (1) for sale or for lease sign shall be
permitted on each residential property, provided said sign
conforms to the following requirements:
a. It shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area except that newly
constructed residential buildings or developments with four (4)
or more dwelling units may be permitted a sign not to exceed
twelve (12) square feet for a period of six (6) months after the
issuance of the first (1st) tenancy permit or until all units are
occupied, whichever comes first (1st). Signs in excess of six (6)
square feet shall be aesthetically designed and approved by the
Architectural Review Board.
b. It shall be erected in the front yard at least ten (10) feet back
from the property line and not attached to any building.
c. The legend shall refer only to the sale or lease of the premises
with the name, address and telephone number of the agent.
The zoning district may be placed on the sign if desired.
Section
425.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.100
AO:1013
Section 425.110. Flags and Flagpoles [CC 1970 §5-30.10; Ord. No.
5029 §1, 1-11-1994; Ord. No. 5504 §1, 5-25-1999]
Flags and flagpoles may be erected in the front yard of commercial,
institutional or governmental buildings for the purpose of displaying the
American flag, flags of any City, County, State or Federal jurisdiction and
flags of civic or philanthropic organizations. A maximum of four (4) such
flagpoles and flags may be erected on any one (1) building site and shall be
uniform in height, size and arrangement. Such flagpoles shall not exceed
thirty (30) feet in height unless a greater height is authorized by the
Architectural Review Board. One (1) of the permitted flags may be a
corporate logo identifying a tenant in a building. The number of flagpoles
and the shape, size and design of such flags shall be subject to approval of
the Architectural Review Board. American flags, flags of any City, State or
Federal jurisdiction and flags of civic and philanthropic organizations may
also be displayed on residential properties either attached to the structure,
placed in the window or on a flagpole.
Section 425.120. Permitted Temporary Signs [CC 1970 §5-30.11;
Ord. No. 5029 §1, 1-11-1994; Ord. No. 5504 §1, 5-25-1999; Ord. No.
6275 §1, 6-25-2013]
Section 425.130. Miscellaneous Signs [CC 1970 §5-30.12; Ord. No.
5029 §1, 1-11-1994; Ord. No. 5504 §1, 5-25-1999]
The Director of Housing, Planning and Development Services may authorize
one (1) temporary sign for each building such as political headquarters
signs, signs announcing civic events or similar type signs, provided they are
d. For sale signs remaining after the property is sold or no longer
for sale shall be considered illegal signs.
A. A temporary sign may be erected in conformance with this Section:
1. Temporary window sign. A temporary sign may be attached or
applied to the inside of a display window for each building or store,
provided the area of the sign does not exceed nine (9) square feet.
If the length of a continuous display window on any one (1) building
or store exceeds thirty (30) lineal feet, two (2) such signs may be
installed provided they are remote from each other. Temporary
signs may be placed for a maximum of thirty (30) days in any sixty
(60) day period. Any temporary sign to be displayed in excess of
thirty (30) days in any sixty (60) day period must have the
permission of the Director of Planning and Development Services.
Sale announcements are limited to the doors and windows.
"Opening soon" announcement signs may be displayed no longer
than two (2) weeks. "Closing" or "Going Out of Business" signs may
be displayed for four (4) weeks. All temporary signs must be
professionally lettered and meet the standards set forth in the sign
regulations.
Section
425.100
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
425.130
AO:1014
mounted flat on the wall of the building and do not exceed twenty-five (25)
square feet in area. The Director of Housing, Planning and Development
Services shall provide appropriate time limits for such signs.
Section 425.140. Construction Signs [CC 1970 §5-30.13; Ord. No.
5029 §1, 1-11-1994; Ord. No. 5504 §1, 5-25-1999]
Section 425.150. Signs Permitted For Conditional Uses [CC 1970
§5-30.14; Ord. No. 5029 §1, 1-11-1994; Ord. No. 5504 §1, 5-25-1999]
A. A construction sign may be erected in commercial districts in
conjunction with a construction fence after issuance of a building
permit announcing the type of building or development under
construction. Such sign may include the names of those associated with
the project and leasing information. Such sign shall be attached to or be
located behind the construction fence and shall not exceed thirty-two
(32) square feet in area unless the construction fence adjacent to a
street exceeds fifty (50) feet in length, in which case said sign shall not
exceed fifty (50) square feet in area. Projects on lots with a street
frontage and a construction fence one hundred (100) feet or more in
length shall be permitted a sign one hundred (100) square feet in area.
Upon removal of the construction fence, the sign shall be removed.
Building alteration projects in which no construction fence is required
may have a temporary sign not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in
area erected behind the building line. Such signs shall be removed upon
completion of the work and prior to occupancy of the building.
B. A construction sign may be erected in residential districts after the
erection of a construction fence on the site. Such signs shall not exceed
thirty-two (32) square feet in area in multiple dwelling districts and
twelve (12) square feet in area in one- and two-family dwelling districts.
A. Signs permitted for conditional uses shall be specified as part of the
conditional use permit; provided however, that:
1. Advertising signs for gasoline and oil refining stations shall
conform to the following requirements in lieu of any other
requirements:
a. One (1) pole sign not exceeding thirty-six (36) square feet for
each face situated on private property and not projecting
beyond the property line.
b. A wall sign twelve (12) square feet in area or five percent (5%)
of the front wall area but not exceeding twenty-five (25) square
feet in area and projecting no more than twelve (12) inches
facing the street. Buildings on corner lots may have such a sign
on each street side of the building.
c. One (1) portable sign on private property not exceeding twelve
(12) square feet on each side.
Section
425.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.150
AO:1015
Section 425.155. Sidewalk Signs [Ord. No. 6145 §2, 4-26-2011]
2. Public interest signs containing information of interest to the
general public, such as weather and time information, provided the
size and the design of the sign is compatible with and properly
related to the size of the building.
A. Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the following terms shall mean
as follows:
PEDESTRIAN ACCESS ROUTE (PAR) — The PAR is an accessible
corridor for pedestrian use and functions as a path that provides a
continuous connection along a sidewalk and from the sidewalk to
building or property entry points, parking areas, public transportation,
and/or other destinations. The minimum width of a PAR is five (5) feet.
The PAR shall be free of obstacles and protrusions. See Figure 1 below.
Figure 1:
SIDEWALK SIGN — A temporary sign designed to be placed on the
ground or attached to an outdoor seating area pedestrian barrier which
may consist of one (1) or more sign faces in a base or frame, back-toback
or joined together to form an A shape or similar style. See Figure
2, below, for examples of acceptable sidewalk sign configurations.
Figure 2:
Section
425.150
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
425.155
AO:1016
B. Sidewalk signs may be erected in all commercial and commercial
Planned Unit Development (PUD) or commercial Special Development
District (SDD) zoning districts in accordance with the criteria set forth
in this Section if a valid permit for same has been issued as provided
herein. Sidewalk signs may be located on a sidewalk, hung from an
outdoor seating enclosure or adjacent to a sidewalk on private property.
Sidewalk sign permits shall be valid for one (1) year. The Planning and
Development Services Department may refuse to issue or renew
permits, and may revoke previously issued permits, if the proposed sign
and/or its location poses a health or safety risk or cannot meet or fails to
comply with applicable requirements.
C. All sidewalk signs shall comply with the following standards and
requirements at all times:
1. If located on a sidewalk, a minimum of a five (5) foot wide
unobstructed PAR must be maintained (see Figure 1).
2. If located on a sidewalk, a minimum of three (3) feet of separation
shall be maintained between: (a) the sign and the edge of
pavement; and (b) between the sign and a parking stall; and (c) the
sign and another sign; and (d) the sign and other fixtures (street
lights, street trees, parking meters, fire hydrants, Fire Department
connections, mailboxes, benches, etc.) (See Figure 1).
3. Signs shall not be placed in the PAR.
4. Except as expressly permitted herein, signs shall not be attached to
any sidewalk or public or private fixture.
5. The maximum allowable size of the sign is twenty-five (25) inches
wide and thirty-eight (38) inches high (overall frame dimensions).
6. Signs shall not be internally or externally illuminated, nor shall
they be equipped with moving parts, nor shall any device designed
to attract attention to the sign or business be attached to a sign.
7. If a sign is located on City property, the permit holder shall provide
and maintain, at his/her sole cost, liability insurance satisfying the
requirements set out in Section 350.230(I) of this Code of
Section
425.155
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.155
AO:1017
Ordinances covering any injury or damage said to be occasioned
by or in any way arising from or associated with the sign or its
presence in its location. The insurance shall name the City of
Clayton as an additional insured and must be maintained in full
force and effect so long as the permit is outstanding.
8. The sign shall be removed every day, no later than the close of
business for the enterprise referenced on the sign or 10:00 P.M.,
whichever is earlier.
9. No more than one (1) sign permit shall be issued for each storefront
having an entrance along a sidewalk. No permits will be issued, and
no sidewalk signs will be allowed, with respect to any enterprise
other than those having an entrance along the sidewalk where the
sign is to be located.
10. At no time shall the sign be displayed when the business enterprise
referenced on the sign is closed.
11. The sign may not unduly impede normal pedestrian use of a
sidewalk or block or impede a doorway, vehicular entrance,
crosswalks or otherwise pose a danger to pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
12. Signage shall not be affixed to or mounted on wheels.
13. Signage must be maintained in good structural and aesthetic
condition at all times, and shall not be so constructed or located as
to be likely to be moved by the wind.
14. The final location of the sign shall be determined by the City and
will be designated on the sign permit. Display of the sign shall only
be allowed in the area specifically designated on the sign permit.
The City at its discretion may refuse to allow a sign on a sidewalk if
one can reasonably be located on adjacent private property in
accord with the requirements contained herein.
15. Business enterprises having outdoor customer seating areas
located on a sidewalk and demarcated by pedestrian barriers shall
not be eligible for a freestanding sidewalk sign but may obtain a
permit for two (2) single sided sign panels no larger than eighteen
(18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches in size which shall be
attached to the pedestrian barrier in a manner that makes them
perpendicular to the sidewalk and otherwise shall meet the
requirements of this Section.
D. Design Criteria. All signage shall be constructed from durable materials
compatible with the design and materials of the building housing the
enterprise referenced on the sign and shall present a finished
appearance. Wood and metal and chalkboard are acceptable materials.
Plastic is not allowed. Signage shall not be reflective or fluorescent.
Section
425.155
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
425.155
AO:1018
Section 425.160. Illegal Signs and Devices [CC 1970 §5-30.15; Ord.
No. 5029 §1, 1-11-1994; Ord. No. 5504 §1, 5-25-1999; Ord. No. 5854
§2, 12-14-2004; Ord. No. 6145 §3, 4-26-2011]
Section 425.170. Vacant Ground Floor [CC 1970 §5-30.16; Ord. No.
5029 §1, 1-11-1994; Ord. No. 5504 §1, 5-25-1999; Ord. No. 6230 §1,
9-11-2012]
The windows in all ground level vacant spaces must be covered in a
workmanlike manner with white butcher paper or a window covering
provided by the City of Clayton. A temporary sign either advertising the
"Reader board" signs with removable slide-in letters and stenciled or
spray painted signs are not allowed.
A. It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any of the following signs or
devices in the City:
1. Advertising devices as defined in Section 425.020.
Exception: The City Manager shall have the authority to authorize
the use of advertising devices, including additional display window
signs or displays of special events, new product announcements
or special sales promotions for limited time periods. This authority
may also include the display of products or merchandise in the
front yard for limited periods, providing such approval is obtained
in writing prior to establishing such events or displays.
2. Paper posters applied directly to the wall of a building or pole or
other support and letters and pictures in the form of advertising,
printed or applied directly to the wall or surface of a building.
3. Signs painted directly on the walls of buildings.
4. Any sign or signs which are no longer applicable to the property or
building upon which such sign or signs are located shall be
considered unlawful signs and shall be immediately removed.
5. Mechanical contrivances. Mechanical or moving signage is
prohibited except as provided for in Section 425.040(4)(b) above.
6. Conflicting signs. Signs or devices which by color, location or
design resemble or conflict with traffic control signs or devices are
prohibited in the City.
7. Signs displayed in windows above the grade floor except for signs
installed in display windows as defined and conforming to Sections
425.050 and 425.120.
8. Any signs which project in the right-of-way (except as expressly
permitted in Section 425.155).
9. Roof signs.
Section
425.155
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.170
AO:1019
space or announcing a future tenant may be displayed provided it follows
the provisions governing that type of signage.
Section 425.180. Modifications [CC 1970 §5-30.17; Ord. No. 5029
§1, 1-11-1994; Ord. No. 5504 §1, 5-25-1999]
Where practical difficulties exist in the application of these provisions in
regard to the determination of the permitted sign area or locations of
permitted signs due to unusual conditions, such as facades that are angled
or curved to the front street or streets or land uses which involve
substantial accessory uses both inside and outside of buildings and
requiring identification or substantial open space or street frontage or a
similar unusual condition, the Architectural Review Board shall have the
authority to determine the appropriate location, size or number of signs,
provided the intent of these regulations is met. No individual sign shall be
approved that exceeds the area limits normally permitted a single tenant or
building. The Architectural Review Board shall also have authority to allow
signs for ground floor tenants to be located above the first (1st) floor ceiling
level when such ground floor tenant space is obstructed from view by a
transit shelter erected on a public right-of-way.
Chapter 430
STORM WATER CONTROL REQUIREMENTS
Section
425.170
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
425.180
AO:1020
ARTICLE I
Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control
Section 430.010. Introduction — Purpose [Ord. No. 5965 §1(15-1),
3-13-2007]
Section 430.020. Definitions [Ord. No. 5965 §1(15-2), 3-13-2007]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OR BMPs — Practices, procedures or a
schedule of activities to reduce the amount of sediment and other pollutants
in storm water discharges associated with construction and land
disturbance activities. For a list of acceptable BMPs, the City of Clayton will
utilize the St. Louis County Sediment and Erosion Control Manual.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
CONSTRUCTION OR LAND DISTURBANCE SITE OR SITE — A parcel of
land or a contiguous combination thereof where grading work is performed
as part of a single unified plan of development.
DRAINAGE WAY — Any channel that conveys surface runoff through a site.
EROSION — The wearing away of land surface through the action of wind
or water.
EROSION CONTROL — Any BMP that prevents or minimizes erosion.
GRADING — Reshaping the ground surface through excavation and/or fill of
material, including the resulting conditions.
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES — Any activity such as clearing, grading
or any other action which results in removal of the natural site vegetation
and destruction of the root zone or otherwise results in leaving the ground
surface exposed to soil erosion through the action of wind or water.
A. This Chapter is being enacted to comply with requirements of the
Metropolitan Sewer District (MSD) related to protection of property
during construction. During construction, soil is highly vulnerable to
erosion by wind and water. Eroded soil endangers water resources by
reducing water quality and causing siltation. In addition, clearing and
grading during construction causes the loss of vegetation necessary to
prevent erosion and sustain the flow of water. Finally, construction
activities strip the land and generate waste which causes a cleaning
nuisance on streets, sidewalks and/or adjacent properties.
B. This Chapter is designed to provide an adequate safeguard to assure
that construction activities do not cause damage to the environment
and to protect properties adjacent to the site and throughout the City of
Clayton.
Section
430.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.020
AO:1021
LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT — A permit issued by the municipality
authorizing disturbance of the land at a specific site subject to conditions
stated in the permit.
PERIMETER CONTROL — A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a
site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or
basin.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the
stabilization of each phase substantially completed before the clearing of
the next.
RUNOFF COEFFICIENT — The fraction of total rainfall that will appear at
the outfalls from a site.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Any BMP that prevents eroded sediment from
leaving a site.
STABILIZATION — The use of BMPs that prevent exposed soil from eroding
including improvements and structures for the control of erosion, runoff and
grading.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The first (1st) land-disturbing activity
associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing,
grading and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for
basements, footings, piers or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and
installation of accessory buildings such as garages.
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A
management plan, the purpose of which is to ensure the design,
implementation, management and maintenance of BMPs in order to reduce
the amount of sediment and other pollutants in storm water discharges
associated with land disturbance activities, comply with the standards of
the City of Clayton and ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of
the applicable State permits, including adherence to the land disturbance
program contained in the Missouri MS4 NPDES permit. This document can
be in the form of either a formal plan document for the development or on
one (1) plan sheet attached to the site plan.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel or body of water,
including, but not limited to, lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, ditches and other
open conveyances, that carry surface runoff water either continuously or
intermittently.
Section 430.030. Regulations For Sites Less Than One Acre (43,560
Square Feet) [Ord. No. 5965 §1(15-3), 3-13-2007]
A. Any entity or person who intends to disturb land of five thousand
(5,000) square feet or more but less than forty-three thousand five
hundred sixty (43,560) square feet (one (1) acre) must comply with site
disturbance regulations of the City of Clayton. Said land disturbance
mitigations must be included on the site plan submitted for review and
must be in place prior to the commencement of construction.
Section
430.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
430.030
AO:1022
Additionally, land disturbance mitigation must be maintained in
effective working order throughout the period of construction activities.
1. Application of regulations. Generally, all new single-family
residences and most large additions will be the subject of this
Section.
Exceptions: The following land disturbance activities are not
subject to the stipulations of this Section:
a. Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property or natural resources as determined
by the City.
b. Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a
permitted main or accessory use.
c. Excavation or fill of less than fifty (50) cubic yards, provided
the land disturbance activity is for the improvement of the
property. Erosion and sediment control measures shall be
provided, when necessary, until grass or other vegetation is
established or other approved means of ground cover means
are used.
d. Land disturbance activities less than five thousand (5,000)
square feet in area.
e. Removal of existing or dying grass or similar vegetation by
disturbing not more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet
and reseeding with new landscaping to include preparation of
the seedbed; provided erosion and sediment control measures
are provided until grass or other vegetation is established. Any
cut or fill in conjunction with the preparation of the seedbed
shall not exceed fifty (50) cubic yards.
f. Gardening or similar activities on property occupied by one-,
two- or multi-family dwellings.
g. Land disturbance activities by any public utility for the
installation, inspection, repair or replacement of any of its
equipment or for its collection or distribution lines or piping
systems; provided erosion and sediment control measures are
provided until grass or other vegetation is established or other
approved ground cover means are used. These exceptions do
not apply to any land disturbance activity associated with work
that requires a building permit.
2. Site plan review. Every applicant for a project which will disturb
five thousand (5,000) square feet or more must include the
following information to be considered the SWPPP in their site plan
for staff review. This information may also serve to fulfill
requirements of the post- construction provisions of this Chapter.
Section
430.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.030
AO:1023
As part of the site plan review process, the following information
must be provided on the site plan:
a. Existing and proposed contours;
b. Drainage facilities and methods for preserving the natural
watercourse and patterns of drainage;
c. Identify limits of any areas to be disturbed by the proposed
construction;
d. Amount of current impervious coverage and proposed
impervious coverage;
e. Methods to mitigate additional impervious coverage and/or
address drainage issues on the site;
f. Connection to storm sewer and/or method of controlling storm
water runoff on site;
g. Best management practices to reduce sediments and other
pollutants associated with construction activities;
h. Location of siltation fences, hay bales and other runoff
prevention methods (as well as other items as required by the
site plan review process) and plans for maintenance of these
installations during construction;
i. Schedule of street and sidewalk cleaning to alleviate mud and
dirt on public right-of-way;
j. Seal of a registered professional engineer in the State of
Missouri;
k. Bench mark information from the site survey;
l. Other information as required by the Director of Planning and
Development Services or the Director of Public Works.
The appropriate departments in the City of Clayton
will review the site plan for compliance with the
above requirements. The same or additional
information will be required on the construction
documents for building permit issuance.
3. Implementation during construction. The installation of all
required siltation fences and other required mitigation mechanisms
must be in place prior to construction activity. Inspections will be
conducted to assure compliance at the beginning of construction
and at intervals throughout the project. These inspections will be
completed by either staff of the Planning and Development
Services Department or an outside contractor at the developer's
expense, depending on the complexity of the mitigation required
and/or workload of the department.
Section
430.030
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
430.030
AO:1024
Section 430.040. Regulations For Sites One Acre or More [Ord. No.
5965 §1(15-4), 3-13-2007]
4. Costs for plan review and implementation. Any costs incurred by
the City to fulfill the intent of this Section shall be paid by the
applicant. The City shall secure the necessary professional services
and provide an estimate of cost and scope to the applicant. This
scope and cost will be approved by the applicant prior to the City
contracting for these services. The estimated costs will be
submitted by the applicant to the City prior to beginning any work
on the project.
A. All construction projects of one (1) acre or more will be subject to the
regulations of this Section.
1. Land disturbance permit. No person shall perform any land
disturbance on a site one (1) acre or greater without first obtaining
a land disturbance permit. The application for permit will be
submitted to, reviewed by and approved by the Clayton Public
Works Department, but will be issued by the Planning and
Development Services Department in coordination with the
building permit.
a. Each permit application shall bear the name(s) and address(es)
of the owner and developer of the site, together with the
principal contact and consulting firm.
b. Each land disturbance permit application shall includes a
separate erosion control plan that includes BMPs necessary for
the site conditions or include a formal Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Plan prepared for the specific site by or under the
direction and sealed by a qualified professional engineer
licensed in the State of Missouri. Either submittal shall include
a statement that any land clearing, construction or
development involving the movement of earth shall be in
accordance with the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan.
c. The permit applicant will be required to file with the City of
Clayton a performance bond, letter of credit or other
improvement security in an amount deemed sufficient by the
City of Clayton to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping,
maintenance of improvements for such period as specified by
the City of Clayton.
(1) Performance and maintenance bond. A bond in the City's
favor to ensure the restoration of the ROW shall be
submitted prior to the issuance of the ROW permit. The
bond shall continue in full force and effect for a period of
twelve (12) months following completion of the work. It is
the responsibility of the applicant to request the release of
the bond in writing. The bond shall be issued by a surety
Section
430.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.040
AO:1025
with an "A" or better rating of insurance in Best's Key
Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition, shall be subject
to the approval of the City Attorney and shall contain the
following endorsement:
"This bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until
sixty (60) days after receipt by the City, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, of a written notice from the
issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew."
(2) Certificate of insurance. All ROW users shall maintain for
the duration of any ROW permit the following minimum
liability insurance coverage: Workers' Compensation and
employer liability insurance to meet all requirements of
Missouri law and commercial general liability insurance
with respect to the construction, operation and
maintenance of the facilities and the conduct of the ROW
user's business in the City in the minimum amounts of:
(a) Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for property
damage resulting from any one (1) accident;
(b) Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for personal
bodily injury or death resulting from any one (1)
accident;
(c) Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for all other types
of liability.
All insurance policies shall be with sureties qualified
to do business in the State of Missouri with an "A"
or better rating of insurance by Best's Key Rating
Guide, Property/Casualty Edition. All general liability
insurance policies shall name the City, its officers,
boards, board members, commissions,
commissioners, agents and employees as additional
insureds and shall further provide that any
cancellation or reduction in coverage shall not be
effective unless thirty (30) days' prior written notice
thereof has been given to the City Clerk.
d. The permit applicant may also be required to obtain a land
disturbance permit issued by the Missouri Department of
Natural Resources for any site where one (1) acre or more of
land will be disturbed before beginning any site work
authorized by a City permit. This requirement also applies to
sites of less than one (1) acre that are part of a larger common
plan that will ultimately disturb one (1) acre or more.
2. Design requirements. The following are guidelines that shall be
followed in the design and/or must be depicted on the plans:
Section
430.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
430.040
AO:1026
a. Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices
and watercourse crossings shall be adequate to prevent
transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of
the Department of Public Works.
b. Cut and fill slopes shall be no greater than three to one (3:1),
except as approved by the Department of Public Works to meet
other community or environmental objectives.
c. Clearing and grading of natural resources, such as forests and
wetlands, shall not be permitted, except when in compliance
with all other Chapters of the City Code of Ordinances.
d. Clearing techniques that retain existing vegetation to the
maximum extent practicable shall be used and the time period
for disturbed areas to be without vegetative cover shall be
minimized to the extent practical to the satisfaction of the
Department of Public Works.
e. Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control
devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have
been installed and have been stabilized.
f. Phasing shall be required on all sites deemed appropriate at
plan review and as approved by the Department of Public
Works.
g. Erosion control requirements shall include the following:
(1) Soil stabilization shall be completed within five (5) days of
clearing or inactivity in construction.
(2) If seeding or another vegetative erosion control method is
used, it shall become established within two (2) weeks or
the Department of Public Works may require the site to be
reseeded or a non-vegetative option employed.
(3) Techniques shall be employed to ensure stabilization on
steep slopes and in drainage ways.
(4) Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered at the end of
each workday.
(5) The entire site must be stabilized, using a heavy mulch
layer or another method that does not require germination
to control erosion, at the close of the construction season.
(6) Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of
dust or sediment from the site.
(7) Techniques shall be employed to divert upland runoff past
disturbed slopes.
h. Sediment control requirements shall include:
Section
430.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.040
AO:1027
(1) Settling basins, sediment traps or tanks and perimeter
controls.
(2) Settling basins shall be provided for each drainage area
with ten (10) or more acres disturbed at one time and shall
be sized to contain 0.5 inch of sediment from the drainage
area and be able to contain a 2-year, 24-hour storm. If the
provision of a basin of this size is impractical, other
similarly effective BMPs, as evaluated and specified the
SWPPP, shall be provided.
(3) Settling basins shall be designed in a manner that allows
adaptation to provide long-term storm water management
as required by the Department of Public Works.
(4) Settling basins shall have stabilized spillways to minimize
the potential for erosion of the spillway or basin
embankment.
(5) Protection for adjacent properties by the use of a
vegetated buffer strip in combination with perimeter
controls.
i. Watercourse protection requirements shall include:
(1) Encroachment into or crossings of active watercourses/
riparian areas and wetlands shall be avoided to the
maximum extent practicable. Where applicable, all local,
State and Federal permits and approvals shall be provided
to the Department of Public Works prior to the issuance of
a site disturbance permit.
(2) Stabilization of any watercourse channels before, during
and after any in-channel work.
(3) If a defined watercourse is to be realigned or reconfigured,
clearing and grubbing activities within fifty (50) feet of the
watercourse shall not begin until all materials and
equipment necessary to protect the watercourse and
complete the work are on site. Once started, work shall be
completed as soon as possible. Areas within fifty (50) feet
of the watercourse shall be recontoured and revegetated,
seeded or otherwise protected within five (5) working days
after grading has ceased.
(4) All storm water conveyances shall be designed according
to the criteria of the Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District
(MSD) and the necessary MSD permits obtained.
(5) Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion shall be provided
at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels.
j. Construction site access requirements shall include:
Section
430.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
430.040
AO:1028
(1) A temporary access road provided at all sites including a
wash-down area supporting all active sites,
(2) Other measures required by Department of Public Works
in order to ensure that sediment is not tracked onto public
streets by construction vehicles or washed with wash
effluent channeled directly into storm drains.
k. Control requirements for construction materials, construction
wastes and other wastes generated on site shall include
provisions, satisfactory to the Department of Public Works, for:
(1) Spill prevention and control facilities for materials such as
paint, solvents, petroleum products, chemicals, toxic or
hazardous substances, substances regulated under the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) or the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation
and Liability Act (CERCLA) and any wastes generated
from the use of such materials and substances, including
their containers. Any containment systems employed to
meet this requirement shall be constructed of materials
compatible with the substances contained and shall be
adequate to protect both surface and ground water.
(2) Collection and disposal of discarded building materials
and other construction site wastes, including those listed
in Subsection (2)(k)(1) above.
(3) Litter control.
(4) Control of concrete truck washouts.
(5) Assurance that on-site fueling facilities will adhere to
applicable Federal and State regulations concerning
storage and dispensers.
(6) Provision of sufficient temporary toilet facilities to serve
the number of workers on site.
3. Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP).
a. The design requirements in Subsection (2) shall be taken into
consideration when developing the Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Plan. The SWPPP shall be integrated into the
required site plan and will be reviewed as part of that
submission. The site plan shall include the following:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the site owner
and the name, address and telephone number of the
individual who will be in overall responsible charge of
construction/development activities at the site.
(2) Site address or location description.
Section
430.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.040
AO:1029
(3) A site map showing the outlines of the total project area,
the areas to be disturbed, existing land uses, locations and
names of surface water bodies, locations of temporary and
permanent BMPs and such other information as the
Department of Public Works may require.
(4) Existing contours of the site and adjoining strips of off-site
property and proposed contours after completion of the
proposed grading and development, based on United
States Geological Survey datum, with established
elevations at buildings, walks, drives, street and roads;
and information on necessary clearing and grubbing,
removal of existing structures, excavating, filling,
spreading and compacting.
(5) A natural resources map identifying soils, forest cover and
resources protected by the State of Missouri or St. Louis
County.
(6) An estimate of the runoff coefficient of the site prior to
disturbance and the runoff coefficient after the
construction addressed in the permit application is
completed.
(7) Estimated grading quantity.
(8) Details of the site drainage pattern both before and after
major grading activities.
(9) Construction access to site.
(10) Description of BMPs to be utilized to control erosion and
sedimentation during the period of land disturbance.
(11) Description of BMPs to be utilized to prevent other
potential pollutants such as construction wastes, toxic or
hazardous substances, petroleum products, pesticides,
herbicides, site litter, sanitary wastes and other pollutants
from entering the natural drainage ways during the period
of construction and land disturbance.
(12) Description of BMPs that will be installed during land
disturbance to control pollutants in storm water
discharges that will occur after land disturbance activity
has been completed.
(13) Location of temporary off-street parking and wash down
area for related vehicles.
(14) Sources of off-site borrow material or spoil sites and all
information relative to haul routes, trucks and equipment.
Section
430.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
430.040
AO:1030
(15) The anticipated sequence of construction and land
disturbance activities, including installation of BMPs,
removal of temporary BMPs, stripping and clearing; rough
grading; construction of utilities, infrastructure and
buildings; and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing
shall identify the expected date(s) on which clearing will
begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas,
areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and
sediment control measures and establishment of
permanent vegetation.
(16) All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to
meet the objectives of this Chapter throughout all phases
of construction and after completion of site development.
Depending upon the complexity of the project, the drafting
of intermediate plans may be required at the close of each
season.
(17) Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of
seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and
rate of lime and fertilizer application, and kind and
quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent
vegetative control measures.
(18) Provisions for maintenance of control facilities.
(19) Plans for responding to any loss of contained sediment to
include the immediate actions the permittee will take in
case of a containment failure. This plan must include a
plan for documentation of actions and reporting to the
Department of Public Works during the project.
(20) Schedules and procedures for routine inspections of any
structures provided to prevent pollution of storm water or
to remove pollutants from storm water and of the site in
general to ensure all BMPs are continually implemented
and are effective.
b. Amendment of plan. The permittee shall amend the Storm
Water Pollution Prevention Plan whenever:
(1) Design, operation or maintenance of BMPs is changed;
(2) Design of the construction project is changed that could
significantly affect the quality of the storm water
discharges;
(3) Site operator's inspections indicate deficiencies in the
SWPPP or any BMP;
Section
430.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.040
AO:1031
(4) Inspections by the City or by the Missouri Department of
Natural Resources indicate deficiencies in the SWPPP or
any BMP;
(5) The SWPPP is determined to be ineffective in significantly
minimizing or controlling erosion or excessive sediment
deposits in streams or lakes;
(6) The SWPPP is determined to be ineffective in preventing
pollution of waterways from construction wastes,
chemicals, fueling facilities, concrete truck washouts,
toxic or hazardous materials, site litter or other substances
or wastes likely to have an adverse impact on water
quality;
(7) Total settleable solids from a storm water outfall exceeds
0.5 ml/L/hr if the discharge is within the prescribed
proximity of a "valuable resource water" as defined by the
MDNR;
(8) Total settleable solids from a storm water outfall exceeds
2.5 ml/L/hr for any other outfall; or
(9) The City of Clayton or the Missouri Department of Natural
Resources determines violations of water quality
standards may occur or have occurred.
c. Construction responsibilities.
(1) Notify all contractors and other entities (including utility
crews, City employees or their agents) who will perform
work at the site of the existence of the SWPPP and what
actions or precautions shall be taken while on site to
minimize the potential for erosion and the potential for
damaging any BMP;
(2) Determine the need for and establish training programs to
ensure that all site workers have been trained, as a
minimum, in erosion control, material handling and
storage, and housekeeping; and
(3) Provide copies of the SWPPP to all parties who are
responsible for installation, operation or maintenance of
any BMP.
(4) Maintain a current copy of the SWPPP on the site at all
times.
4. Inspections during construction.
a. The Department of Public Works shall make inspections as
needed and shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to
comply with the grading, erosion and sediment control plan as
Section
430.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
430.040
AO:1032
approved. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating and filling
work bearing the stamp of approval of the Department of
Public Works shall be maintained at the site during the
progress of the work. Inspections may be made at random
times or upon permittee notification to the Department of
Public Works at least two (2) working days before the
following:
(1) Start of construction.
(2) Installation of sediment and erosion measures.
(3) Completion of site clearing.
(4) Completion of rough grading.
(5) Completion of final grading.
(6) Close of the construction season.
(7) Completion of final landscaping.
b. The permittee or his/her agent shall make regular inspections
of the land disturbance site, including all erosion and sediment
and other pollutant control measures, outfalls and off-site
receiving waters, in accordance with the inspection schedule
outlined in the approved SWPPP. Inspections must be
scheduled at least once every two (2) weeks and no later than
seventy-two (72) hours after heavy rain. The purpose of such
inspections will be to ensure proper installation, operation and
maintenance of BMPs and to determine the overall
effectiveness of the SWPPP and the need for additional control
measures. All inspections shall be documented in written form
on biweekly reports with copies submitted to the Department
of Public Works at the time interval specified in the permit. The
inspection reports are to include the following minimum
information:
(1) Inspector's name and signature;
(2) Date of inspection;
(3) Observations relative to the effectiveness of the BMPs;
(4) Actions taken or necessary to correct deficiencies; and
(5) A listing of areas where land disturbance operations have
permanently or temporarily stopped.
In addition, the permittee shall notify the site
contractor(s) responsible for any deficiencies
identified so that deficiencies can be corrected
within seven (7) calendar days of the weekly
inspection report.
Section
430.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.040
AO:1033
Section 430.050. Enforcement [Ord. No. 5965 §1(15-5), 3-13-2007]
c. The Department of Public Works shall make inspections as
deemed necessary to ensure the validity of the reports filed
under Subsection (4)(b) above or to otherwise ensure proper
installation, operation and maintenance of storm water BMPs
and to determine the overall effectiveness of the SWPPP and
the need for additional control measures.
5. Costs for plan review and implementation. Any costs incurred by
the City to fulfill the intent of this Section shall be paid by the
applicant. The City shall secure the necessary professional services
and provide an estimate of cost and scope to the applicant. This
scope and cost will be approved by the applicant prior to the City
contracting for these services. The estimated costs will be
submitted by the applicant to the City prior to beginning any work
on the project.
A. Stop Work Order—Revocation Of Permit. In the event that any person
holding a site disturbance permit violates the terms of the permit or
implements site development in such a manner as to materially
adversely affect the health, welfare or safety of persons residing or
working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or
improvements in the neighborhood, the Department of Planning and
Development or Department of Public Works may suspend or revoke the
building permit or land disturbance permit.
B. Violation And Penalties. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair
or maintain any grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be
done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this Chapter. Any person
violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and each day during which any violation of any of the
provisions of this Chapter is committed, continued or permitted shall
constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such violation,
such person, partnership or corporation shall be punished by a fine of
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. In
addition to any other penalty authorized by this Section, any person,
partnership or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions
of this Chapter shall be required to bear the expense of such
restoration.
C. Project Closure Requirements. Any site development escrows or bonds
will not be fully released to the site operator or permittee until all of the
following have been completed:
1. All temporary storm water control BMPs have been removed and
the site has been fully stabilized.
2. All permanent storm water control BMPs have been completed.
Section
430.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
430.050
AO:1034
3. All final inspections/certifications have been completed by each of
the government jurisdictions involved in authorizing the project.
Section
430.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.050
AO:1035

ARTICLE II
Post Construction Storm Water Control
Section 430.060. Findings of Fact [Ord. No. 5965 §1(15-100),
3-13-2007]
Section 430.070. Purpose [Ord. No. 5965 §1(15-101), 3-13-2007]
A. Land development projects and associated increases in impervious
cover alter the hydrologics of local watersheds and increase storm
water runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion, and
sediment transport and deposition. This storm water runoff contributes
to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants, and storm water
runoff, soil erosion and non-point source pollution can be controlled and
minimized through the regulation of storm water runoff from
development sites.
B. The Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District (MSD) has established a set
of water quality and quantity policies applicable to all development in
the MSD service area, including the City of Clayton, to provide
reasonable guidance for the regulation of storm water runoff for the
purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It has
been determined that the regulation of storm water runoff discharges
from land development projects and other construction activities in
order to control and minimize increases in storm water runoff rates and
volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion and non-point source
pollution associated with storm water runoff is in the public interest
and will prevent threats to public health and safety.
A. The purpose of this Article is to protect and safeguard the general
health, safety and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within
the City of Clayton which is included in the MSD service area. In
general, the City of Clayton seeks to meet that purpose through the
following objectives:
1. Minimize increases in storm water runoff from any development in
order to reduce flooding, siltation and erosion;
2. Minimize increases in non-point source pollution caused by storm
water runoff from development which would otherwise degrade
local water quality; and
3. Reduce storm water runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution, wherever possible, through storm water
management controls and to ensure that these management
controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public
safety or adjacent properties.
Section
430.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.080
AO:1037
Section 430.080. Applicability [Ord. No. 5965 §1(15-102),
3-13-2007]
This Article shall be applicable to all site plan applications where a MSD
permit is required and a City permit is needed for the construction.
Section 430.090. Storm Water Design [Ord. No. 5965 §1(15-103),
3-13-2007]
A. The City of Clayton specifies the MSD Rules and Regulations and
Engineering Design Requirements for Sanitary and Storm Water
Drainage Facilities as originally adopted February 2006, or latest
version, as the applicable document for the proper implementation of
the requirements of this Article. In addition, the City of Clayton's City-
Wide Storm Water Study, dated August 2006, includes details of several
BMPs for addressing specific needs in the City of Clayton such as rain
gardens, bioswales, pervious concrete, pervious paver systems and
storm water planters.
B. The MSD regulations include a list of acceptable storm water treatment
practices, including the specific design criteria for each storm water
practice. The manual may be updated and expanded from time to time,
at the discretion of MSD, based on improvements in engineering,
science, monitoring and local maintenance experience. Storm water
treatment practices that are designed and constructed in accordance
with these design and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet the
minimum water quality performance standards.
C. Developers shall include storm water control measures on the site plan
submitted for the Department of Planning and Development review of
proposed construction in addition to submittal to MSD for appropriate
permits.
Section
430.080
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
430.090
AO:1038
ARTICLE III
Permit Procedures and Requirements
Section 430.100. Permit Required [Ord. No. 5965 §1(15-200),
3-13-2007]
No land owner or land operator shall receive a building, demolition, grading
or right-of-way permit governed by these regulations without first securing
the necessary approvals of MSD prior to commencing the proposed activity.
Verification of this approval will be a set of plans approved by MSD
including a valid MSD project number.
Section
430.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.100
AO:1039

ARTICLE IV
Inspections of Storm Water Facilities
Section 430.110. Inspection of Storm Water Facilities [Ord. No.
5965 §1(15-300), 3-13-2007]
Inspection of facilities may be made on a reasonable basis including, but not
limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon
complaints or other notice of possible violations or inspection of drainage
features. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing
maintenance records; sampling discharges, surface water, ground water
and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the
condition of drainage control facilities and other storm water treatment
practices.
Section 430.120. Right-Of-Entry For Inspection [Ord. No. 5965
§1(15-301), 3-13-2007]
When any new drainage control facility is installed on private property, or
when any new connection is made between private property and a public
drainage control system, sanitary sewer or combined sewer, the property
owner shall grant to the City of Clayton's Public Works and/or Planning
Department and/or MSD the right to enter the property at reasonable times
and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the
right to enter a property when there is a reasonable basis to believe that
a violation of this Chapter is occurring or has occurred and to enter when
necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of
this Chapter.
Section 430.130. Failure To Maintain Practices [Ord. No. 5965
§1(15-302), 3-13-2007]
If the property owner fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the
maintenance covenant, the City of Clayton, after reasonable notice, may
issue violation notices per the (property code does not cover construction).
In the event that the storm water management facility becomes a danger
to public safety or public health, MSD and/or City of Clayton Public Works
or Planning Department (dependent on jurisdiction described in Article III
or Article IV) legal shall notify the party responsible for maintenance of the
storm water management facility in writing. Upon receipt of that notice,
the responsible person shall have thirty (30) days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner acceptable to the City or legal action may
be pursued (property code has nothing to do with construction).
Section 430.140. Storm Water Management Plan Components To
The Site Plan [Ord. No. 5965 §1(15-303), 3-13-2007]
Example (Use items below that are applicable to the site proposed)
____ Applicant information
____ Name, legal address and telephone number
Section
430.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.140
AO:1041
____ Common address and legal description of site
____ Vicinity map
Existing and proposed mapping and plans (recommended scale of 1" = 50')
which illustrate at a minimum:
____ Site plan sealed by a registered professional engineer in the
State of Missouri
____ Existing and proposed topography (minimum of two (2) foot
contours recommended)
____ Perennial and intermittent streams
____ Mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys
____ Boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed
limits of clearing
____ Location and boundaries of resource protection areas such as
wetlands, lakes, ponds and other setbacks
____ Location of existing and proposed roads, buildings and other
structures
____ Existing and proposed utilities (e.g., water, sewer, gas, electric)
and easements
____ Location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as
grass channels, swales and storm drains
____ Flow paths
____ Location of floodplain/floodway limits and relationship of site
to upstream and downstream properties and drainages (if
applicable)
____ Location and dimensions of proposed channel modifications,
such as bridge or culvert crossings (if applicable)
____ Location, size and limits of disturbance of proposed structural
storm water management practices
Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis including:
____ Existing condition analysis for runoff rates, volumes and
velocities presented showing methodologies used and
supporting calculations
____ Proposed condition analysis for runoff rates, volumes and
velocities showing the methodologies used and supporting
calculations
____ Analysis of potential downstream impact/effects of project,
where necessary
____ Selection and rationale for structural or non-structural storm
water facilities and best management practices
____ Sizing calculations for structural or non-structural storm water
facilities and best management practices including contributing
drainage area, storage and outlet configuration
Section
430.140
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
430.140
AO:1042
____ Landscaping plans for structural or non-structural storm water
facilities and best management practices and any site
reforestation or revegetation
____ Erosion and sediment control plan.
Section
430.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.140
AO:1043
Chapter 500
BUILDING CODES AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
430.140
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
430.140
AO:1044
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Building Codes117
Section 500.010. Building Code Adoption. [Ord. No. 6128 § 1,
12-14-2010; Ord. No. 6395 § 1, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 6409 §1,
1-26-2016]
The Building Code of the City shall consist of Part I, the 2015 International
Building Code, Part II, the 2015 International Mechanical Code, Part III,
the 2015 International Plumbing Code, Part IV, the 2015 International
Residential Code, Part V, the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code, Part VI,
the 2015 International Energy Conservation Code, Part VII, the 2015
International Existing Building Code and Part VIII, the International
Swimming Pool and Spa Code and all appendices to each Code. Additions,
insertions, deletions and changes to Codes are set out in Section 500.020.
Section 500.020. Additions, Insertions, Deletions and
Changes—Building, Mechanical, Plumbing, Residential, Fuel Gas,
Energy Conservation, Existing Building and Swimming Pool and Spa
Codes. [Ord. No. 6128 § 1, 12-14-2010; Ord. No. 6395 §1,
10-13-2015]
A. Part I. 2015 International Building Code. The following numbered
Sections and Subsections are hereby amended by addition, insertions,
deletions and changes. Each Section or Subsection contained herein is
part of Chapter 500 and should be considered as such. The amended
Sections and Subsections shall read as follows:
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section 101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the Building
Code of the City of Clayton, Missouri, hereinafter referred to as "this
code."
Section 105.1.1 Deleted without substitution.
Section 105.1.2 Deleted without substitution.
Section 105.2 is amended to read as follows:
Section 105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit
requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization
for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of
117. Editor's Note—Ord. no. 6128 § 1, adopted December 14, 2010, repealed sections 500.010
"building code adoption", 500.020 "adoption of county electrical code" and 500.030
"additions, insertions, deletions and changes—building, mechanical, plumbing, residential
and fuel gas codes" and enacted the provisions set out herein. Former sections
500.010—500.030 derived from CC 1970 §§ 5-1—5-2; ord. no. 5431 § 1, 5-26-98; ord. no.
5441 § 1, 7-28-09; ord. no. 5563 § 1, 5-23-00; ord. no. 5586 § 1, 9-12-00; ord. no. 5655 § 1,
10-9-01; ord. no. 5806 § 1, 1-13-04; ord. no. 5815 § 1, 4-27-04; ord. no. 5927 § 1, 4-25-06;
ord. no. 5975 § 1, 6-12-07; ord. no. 6004 § 1, 12-18-07. The electrical code can now be
found at section 500.030.
Section
500.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.020
AO:1045
this code, the zoning ordinance, or any other laws or ordinances of this
jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following:
Building:
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage
sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the gross floor area does
not exceed fifty (50) square feet.
2. Retaining walls which are not over four (4) feet (1219 mm) in height
measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless
supporting a surcharge.
3. Sidewalks and driveways that are not within the public right-of-way
and are not more than thirty (30) inches (762 mm) above grade and
not over any basement or story below and which are not part of an
accessible route.
4. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops and
similar finish work.
5. Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and
scenery.
6. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy,
as applicable in Section 101.2, which are less than twenty-four (24)
inches (610 mm) deep, do not exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons
(18925 L) and are installed entirely above ground.
7. Swings and other playground equipment located in the rear yard and
that are accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings.
8. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project
more than fifty-four (54) inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and
do not require additional support of Group R-3, as applicable in Section
101.2, and Group U occupancies.
9. Non-fixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions
not over five (5) feet, nine (9) inches (1753 mm) in height.
Electrical:
1. Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, including the
replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical
equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles.
2. Radio and television transmitting stations: The provisions of
this code shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and
television transmissions, but does apply to equipment and wiring for
power supply, the installation of towers and antennas.
3. Temporary testing systems: A permit shall not be required for
the installation of any temporary system required for the testing or
servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus.
Section
500.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
500.020
AO:1046
Gas:
1. Portable heating appliance.
2. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of
equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
Mechanical:
1. Portable heating appliance.
2. Portable ventilation equipment.
3. Portable cooling unit.
4. Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling
equipment regulated by this code.
5. Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it
unsafe.
6. Portable evaporative cooler.
7. Self-contained refrigeration system containing ten (10) pounds (4.54
kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one (1) horsepower
(746 W) or less.
Plumbing:
1. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe;
provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil,
waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to
remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be
considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection
made as provided in this code.
2. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves
or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided
such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or
rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.
Section 109.4 is amended to read as follows:
Section 109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any
person who commences any work before obtaining the necessary
permits shall be subject to one hundred percent (100%) of the usual
total permit fee in addition to the required permit fees.
Section 113 through Section 113.3 is amended as follows:
SECTION 113 BOARD OF APPEALS
Section 113.1 Application for appeal. Any person shall have the
right to appeal to the Board of Appeals from a decision of the Code
Official. An application and fee must be filed with the City Clerk.
Section
500.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.020
AO:1047
An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true
intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or
an equivalent form of construction is to be used. Decision of the Board
of Appeals shall be binding on the Code or other Official involved in the
appeal.
Section 113.2.1 Qualification. The Board of Appeals shall consist of
five (5) individuals from the following professions or disciplines listed
below. One (1) member should be from each of the professions or
disciplines.
1. Registered design professional who is a registered architect, or a
builder or a superintendent of building construction with at least ten
(10) years' experience, five (5) of which shall have been in responsible
charge of work.
2. Registered design professional with structural engineering or
architectural experience.
3. Registered design professional with mechanical or plumbing
engineering experience; or a mechanical or plumbing contractor with
at least ten (10) years' experience, five (5) of which shall have been in
responsible charge of work.
4. Registered design professional with electrical engineering
experience; or an electrical contractor with at least ten (10) years'
experience, five (5) of which shall have been in responsible charge of
work.
5. Registered design professional with fire protection engineering
experience; or a fire protection contractor with at least ten (10) years'
experience, five (5) of which shall have been in responsible charge of
work.
Section 114.4 is amended to read as follows:
Section 114.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm, corporation,
limited liability company or other business entity who shall violate
any provision of this code, or any owner or tenant of the building or
premises or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any
violation of this code or maintains any building, structure or premises in
which such violation shall exist shall be guilty of an ordinance violation
and subject to punishment by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90)
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. This provision shall not
apply to any section of this code or to any ordinance in which there
is expressly provided a penalty for its violation, or for any offense the
penalty for the violation of which is fixed by statute.
Table 508.4 is amended to read as follows:
Section
500.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
500.020
AO:1048
Editor's Note: Table 508.4 is included as an attachment to this Chapter.
Section [F] 903.3.1.1.3 is added to read as follows:
[F] 903.3.1.1.3 Sprinklers required. Clean agent, halogenated or
carbon dioxide extinguishing systems shall not be considered as an
alternative to an automatic sprinkler system in computer rooms, vaults
or other rooms where an automatic sprinkler system is required.
Section 1015.9 is added to read as follows:
Section 1015.9 Retaining walls. Guards shall be provided where
retaining walls with differences in grade level on either side of the wall
in excess of thirty (30) inches are located closer than two (2) feet to
a walk, path, parking lot or driveway on the high side of the retaining
wall.
Section 1612.3 is amended to read as follows:
Section 1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas. To establish
flood hazard areas, the governing body shall adopt a flood hazard
map and supporting data. The flood hazard map shall include, at a
minimum, areas of special flood hazard as identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency in an engineering report entitled "The
Flood Insurance Study for the City of Clayton" dated August 2, 1995, as
amended or revised with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) and related
supporting data along with any revisions thereto. The adopted flood
hazard map and supporting data are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this Section.
Section 2703.1 is added to read as follows:
Section 2703.1 Underground electric service. The following shall
be supplied electricity by means of underground service from the utility
distribution system to the premises wiring system:
1. Where an existing service lateral provides underground electrical
service to the building or structure.
2. All buildings and structures hereafter erected.
3. Any building or structure where an addition and/or alteration would
interfere with the existing service and would require any part of the
electric service including the service point or service entrance
conductors be relocated.
4. Any building or structure to which a new electrical service is added.
5. All buildings and structures that are provided electricity by means of
an underground electrical distribution system.
Exceptions:
Section
500.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.020
AO:1049
1. An existing overhead service may be repaired, upgraded or replaced
if the service point and/or service entrance conductors are not moved
from their present location on the building or structure.
2. When, in the opinion of the Code Official, a modification is necessary
to abate a safety hazard and there is no other related construction
activity involved, the Code Official may deem such a modification as
minor in nature and allow said service to be modified and remain
overhead.
Section 3107.2 through 3107.2.1 is added to read as follows:
Section 3107.2 Permits required. A sign shall not be erected,
constructed or altered except as herein provided and not until any
applicable fees are paid by the applicant and the sign permit has been
issued by the Code Official.
Section 3107.2.1. Exempt signs. The following signs are exempt from
permit requirements and fees:
(1) For-sale or for-lease signs not exceeding six (6) square feet.
(2) Temporary display window signs.
(3) Temporary signs announcing civic events approved by the Director
of Housing and Planning.
(4) Product identification cards used in conjunction with window
displays.
(5) Construction regulatory signs required for public safety.
(6) Temporary political signs in residential areas.
FENCES, WALLS AND SCREENS
Section 3112 and Section 3112.1 is added to read as follows:
Section 3112 Fences, walls and screens. It shall be unlawful to erect
any division, fence or screen, in whole or in part, of cloth, canvas or
similar material, nor shall any solid division fence or screen of approved
material exceeding six (6) feet be erected except a solid fence of up
to eight (8) feet may be erected in a residential rear yard which is
immediately adjacent to a commercial district; provided, however, a
wooden or metal fence or screen not exceeding ten (10) feet in height
may be erected in non-residential areas and eight (8) feet in residential
areas if such fence or screen is penetrated with openings at regular
intervals or latticed so that the combined area of the openings shall
be at least fifty percent (50%) of the actual surface of such fence or
screen. No division fence, fence wall or screen, no matter how built or
of what material constructed, shall exceed ten (10) feet in height unless
approved by the Architectural Review Board.
Section
500.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
500.020
AO:1050
Section 3112.1 Fences general. The finished side of fences shall face
all neighboring properties including streets and alleys so as to prohibit
the view of fence posts and support rails from adjoining properties,
unless written approval from all affected property owners is submitted
waiving this requirement.
SITE WORK, DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION
Section 3301.3 is added to read as follows:
Section 3301.3 Regulation of Construction Dumpster(s)
Section 3301.3.1 As used in this Section, the following term shall
mean as follows:
Construction Dumpster — a large container designed to receive,
transport and dump construction debris.
Section 3301.3.2 No dumpster or construction storage unit may be
placed on any street or alley in Clayton or public right-of-way without
first receiving a right-of-way permit from the City's Public Works
Department.
Section 3301.3.3 A dumpster or construction storage unit may be
placed upon a property in a residentially zoned district if said dumpster
is part of a redevelopment project, including, but not limited to, new
construction of a residential or mixed-use project, major addition to
an existing structure or other project as approved by the City's Plan
Commission/Architectural Review Board. The placement of such
dumpster shall be approved by the Building Official or his/her designee
and must be placed behind the proscribed construction fence. The
dumpster(s) may remain on the construction site for the duration of the
permit, provided that it is contained behind the construction fence, is
emptied regularly and is covered at the conclusion of each workday.
Section 3301.3.4 Except as stated above, no dumpster may be placed
in the driveway or upon any property in a residentially zoned district
without first securing a dumpster permit from the Planning and
Development Services Department. Said permit shall be in effect for a
period not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) days. Dumpsters must
be emptied so as to not overflow and must be covered at the end of
each workday and/or when not in use. The City reserves the right to
cancel a permit if these regulations are not adhered to. Any extension
beyond one hundred twenty (120) days will require a review to assure
satisfactory progress toward completion of the project. Extensions to
the one hundred twenty (120) day period are subject to a daily fee and
may be denied for cause. A denial may be appealed to the City Manager.
Section 3301.3.5 Cost of the permit and any extensions shall be in
accordance with the fee schedule approved by the Board of Aldermen.
Section 3303.1.1 is added to read as follows:
Section
500.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.020
AO:1051
Section 3303.1.1 Notice of Intent. The person intending to cause a
demolition or an excavation shall deliver written notice of such intent
to the owner of each potentially affected adjoining lot, building or
structure and the owner(s) of each property located within the Clayton
City limits within two hundred (200) feet of a proposed residential
demolition, calculated by measuring a distance of two hundred (200)
feet from the property lines around the entire perimeter of the subject
property, at least one (1) week prior to the commencement of work.
The notice to adjoining property owners shall request license to enter
the potentially affected lot, building or structure prior to the
commencement of work and at reasonable intervals during the work
to inspect and preserve the lot, building or structure from damage.
The notice to owners of property located within the Clayton City limits
within two hundred (200) feet of a residential demolition will identify
the property to be demolished and approximate date of demolition.
Section 3303.6.1 and Section 3303.6.2 is added to read as
follows:
Section 3303.6.1 Water and Sewer. All abandoned sewers, or parts
thereof, shall be capped or plugged within five (5) feet of the property
line, and all abandoned building (house) water services shall be
disconnected at the corporation cock adjacent to the water main.
Section 3303.6.2 Permit requirement. An excavation and plumbing
permit, as provided in the Code of Ordinances of the City, shall be
required to disconnect any abandoned sewer or water service, and
no excavation shall be backfilled until all work is inspected by the
Plumbing Inspector.
Permits for this work shall be issued only to a master plumber licensed
by the City.
SECTION 3306.0 PROTECTION OF PUBLIC
Section 3306.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section 3306.1 Temporary Construction Fences. No construction
fence may be erected until the Code Official approves a site plan
depicting the materials, location and access gates.
All buildings undergoing construction, substantial rehabilitation,
removal or demolition or any and all excavations (except sewer and
utility trenches) exceeding five (5) feet in depth, shall be enclosed on all
sides with a solid wood construction fence and pedestrian protection as
required in Table 3306.1.
All building materials, sheds, equipment, trailers, dumpsters and
portable toilets shall be located and stored within the boundaries of the
fence at all times.
Section 3306.1.1 is added to read as follows:
Section
500.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
500.020
AO:1052
Section 3306.1.1 Duration and Removal of Temporary
Construction Fences. Construction fences may not be erected more
than ten (10) calendar days prior to demolition or the commencement
of construction and must be approved by the Code Official prior to
the construction of the fence. If demolition or construction does not
commence within ten (10) days of installation, the fence must be
removed and the site restored as required by the International Property
Maintenance Code. Construction fences must be maintained
throughout the project.
Section 3306.5 is amended to read as follows:
Section 3306.5 Barriers. Barriers shall be a minimum of six (6) feet
in height and shall be placed on the side of the walkway nearest the
construction. Barriers shall extend the entire length of the construction
site. Openings in such barriers shall be protected by doors or gates
which are normally kept closed. Doors and gates must be kept locked
at time of construction inactivity on the site.
Section 3306.6 is amended to read as follows:
Section 3306.6 Fence Construction. Required temporary
construction fences shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Temporary construction fence panels shall be no less than six (6)
feet in height and constructed with approved pre-manufactured fence
panels that are no less than one-half (1/2) inches thick finished boards.
Site constructed fence panels using other materials may be permitted
when the design, materials and finishes are approved by the Code
Official.
2. Fence posts shall be a minimum of four (4) inches by four (4) inches
treated lumber and spaced no more than eight (8) feet on center. Posts
shall be set with at least one-third (1/3) of their length below grade and
set in concrete.
3. Gates must be of metal chain link material with approved vision
panels to obscure sight. Gates must be chained and locked with a lock
substantial enough to ensure closure and security. The space between
gates, posts or hardware shall be no greater than four (4) inches.
4. No temporary construction fence may encroach beyond the subject
property line. Furthermore, no fence may encroach upon the public
right-of-way without the written approval of the Public Works
Department.
Section 3306.10 is added to read as follows:
Section 3306.10 Failure to Comply. Failure to comply with the
regulations of this Section can result in the issuance of a stop work
order and/or legal action which could result in court imposed fines.
B. B. Part II. 2015 International Mechanical Code.
Section
500.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.020
AO:1053
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the
Mechanical Code of the City of Clayton, Missouri, hereinafter referred
to as "this code."
Section 106.5.2 is amended to read as follows:
Section 106.5.2 Permit fees. The permit fees for the installation,
extension, repair or alteration of heating and refrigeration equipment
shall be in accordance with the fee schedule as established by the City
of Clayton, Missouri.
Section 106.5.3 Deleted without substitution.
Section 108.4 is amended to read as follows:
Section 108.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm, corporation,
limited liability company or other business entity who shall violate
any provision of this code, or any owner or tenant of the building or
premises or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any
violation of this code or maintains any building, structure or premises in
which such violation shall exist shall be guilty of an ordinance violation
and subject to punishment by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90)
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. This provision shall not
apply to any Section of this code or to any ordinance in which there
is expressly provided a penalty for its violation, or for any offense the
penalty for the violation of which is fixed by statute.
Section 108.5 is amended to read as follows:
Section 108.5 Stop work order. Any person who shall continue any
work in or about the building after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as is directed by the Code Official to remove a
violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to punishment as provided
in Section 100.110 of the Code of Ordinances as defined in Section
108.4.
SECTION 109 MEANS OF APPEAL
Section 109.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section 109.1 Application for appeal. The owner of a building or
structure or any other person may appeal from a decision of the
Mechanical Official to the Board of Appeals provided for in the Building
Code.
Application for appeal may be made when it is claimed that the true
content of this code has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions
of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of
installation or construction can be used.
Section
500.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
500.020
AO:1054
Sections 109.2 through 109.7 are deleted without substitution.
Section 303.6.1 is added to read as follows:
Section 303.6.1 Location. Mechanical equipment, air conditioning
condensing units, pool pumps, geothermal borings and/or piping and
other mechanical appliances and equipment located outdoors shall be
a minimum of five (5) feet zero (0) inch from any side or rear yard
property line. Equipment shall be properly screened as required by the
Architectural Review Board or the Code Official.
Section 405.1 is amended to read as follows:
405.1 Enclosed parking garages. Mechanical ventilation systems for
enclosed parking garages shall be permitted to operate intermittently
where the system is arranged to operate automatically upon detection
of vehicle operation or the presence of occupants by approved
automatic detection devices. The mechanical ventilation system shall
have means to operate manually for a remote device. The location and
installation shall be approved by the Code Official.
Section 507.2 is amended to add exception 2 to read as follows:
Exception 2. The installation of a domestic cooking appliance in a
commercial building that is capable of producing grease or smoke,
and the appliance is primarily intended for warming and the Building
Official and the Fire Official believes the use to be minimal, said
installation must comply with Section 505 and be protected by a listed
automatic range top fire suppression system or comply with Section
509. This exception does not apply to Use Group or Occupancy Types
A, E and I for their primary cooking operations.
SECTION 805 FACTORY-BUILT CHIMNEYS
Section 805.6.1 is added to read as follows:
Section 805.6.1 Enclosure. Every factory-built chimney or vent
installed on the exterior of a building shall be enclosed with brick or
other architectural material compatible with the design of the exterior
of the building or in a manner approved by the Architectural Review
Board.
TESTS
Section 1011.3 is added to read as follows:
Section 1011.3 Periodic inspections. Periodic inspections of boilers
and pressure vessels will be conducted by the State of Missouri,
Department of Public Safety as provided for in Chapter 650 Revised
Statutes of the State of Missouri 1986.
C. C. Part III. 2015 International Plumbing Code.
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section
500.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.020
AO:1055
Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the
Plumbing Code of the City of Clayton, Missouri, hereinafter referred to
as "this code."
Sections 101.5 is added to read as follows:
Section 101.5 Licenses required. No person who is not a licensed by
St. Louis County Department of Public Works as a Master Plumber or a
licensed Journeyman Plumber or a Registered Plumber or a Registered
Plumber Apprentice working under the direction of a licensed Master
Plumber shall engage in or perform the work of installing, altering or
repairing facilities in a building for the supply and distribution of water
for ordinary drinking, culinary and domestic purposes of facilities or
for the removal therefrom of waterborne wastes. No person who is
not a licensed by St. Louis County Department of Public Works as a
Master or Journeyman Drainlayer shall engage in or perform the work
of installing sanitary or storm sewer.
SECTION 106 PERMITS
Section 106.6.2 is amended to read as follows:
Section 106.6.2 The fees for all plumbing work shall be paid in
accordance with the fee schedule as established by the City of Clayton,
Missouri.
Section 106.6.3 Deleted without substitution.
SECTION 108 VIOLATIONS
Section 108.4 is amended to read as follows:
Section 108.4 Violation Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation,
limited liability company or other business entity who shall violate
any provision of this code, or any owner or tenant of the building or
premises or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any
violation of this code or maintains any building, structure or premises in
which such violation shall exist shall be guilty of an ordinance violation
and subject to punishment by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90)
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. This provision shall not
apply to any Section of this code or to any ordinance in which there
is expressly provided a penalty for its violation, or for any offense the
penalty for the violation of which is fixed by statute.
Section 108.5 is amended to read as follows:
Section 108.5 Stop Work Order. Any person who shall continue any
work in or about the building after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as is directed by the Code Official to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to punishment as provided
Section
500.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
500.020
AO:1056
in Section 100.110 of the Code of Ordinances as defined in Section
108.4.
SECTION 109 MEANS OF APPEAL
Section 109.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section 109.1 Application for Appeal. The owner of a building or
structure or any other person may appeal from a decision of the Code
Official to the Board of Appeals provided for in the Building Code.
Application for appeal may be made when it is claimed that the true
content of this code has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions
of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of
installation or construction can be used.
Sections 109.2 through 109.7 are deleted without substitution.
SECTION 904 VENTS
Section 904.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section 904.1 Roof extension. All open vent pipes that extend
through a roof shall be terminated at least twelve (12) inches above the
roof, except that where a roof is to be used for any other purpose other
than weather protection, the vent extensions shall be run at least seven
(7) feet (2134 mm) above the roof.
D. D. Part IV. 2015 International Residential Code.
Section R101.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the
Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings of the City of
Clayton and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this
code."
Section R102.2.1 is added to read as follows:
Section R102.2.1 Amendments to International Building Code.
The following Sections of the 2015 International Building Code, as
amended by the City of Clayton, shall be considered part of this code:
Sections 2703.1, 3301.3, 3303.1.1 and 3306.0.
Section R105.2 is amended to read as follows:
Section R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit
requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization
for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of
this code, the zoning ordinance, or any other laws or ordinances of this
jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following:
Building:
Section
500.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.020
AO:1057
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage
sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the gross floor area does
not exceed fifty (50) square feet.
2. Retaining walls which are not over four (4) feet (1219 mm) in height
measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless
supporting a surcharge. All front yard retaining walls are required to
be approved by the City's Architectural Review Board.
3. Sidewalks and driveways that are not within the public right-of-way
and are not more than thirty (30) inches (762 mm) above grade and
not over any basement or story below and which are not part of an
accessible route.
4. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops and
similar finish work.
5. Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and
scenery.
6. Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than twenty-four (24)
inches (610 mml) deep.
7. Swings and other playground equipment located in the rear yard and
that are accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings.
8. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project
more than fifty-four (54) inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and
do not require additional support of Group R-3, as applicable in Section
101.2, and Group U occupancies.
Electrical:
1. Repairs and maintenance. A permit shall not be required for minor
repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection
of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently
installed receptacles.
Gas:
1. Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances.
2. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of
equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
3. Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping
system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
Mechanical:
1. Portable heating appliances.
2. Portable ventilation appliances.
3. Portable cooling units.
Section
500.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
500.020
AO:1058
4. Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling
equipment regulated by this code.
5. Replacement of any part which does not alter approval of equipment
or make such equipment unsafe.
6. Portable evaporative cooler.
7. Self-contained refrigeration system containing ten (10) pounds (4.54
kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one (1) horsepower
(746 W) or less.
8. Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping
system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
Plumbing:
1. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe;
provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil,
waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to
remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be
considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection
made as provided in this code.
2. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or
fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided
such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or
rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.
SECTION R112 MEANS OF APPEAL
Section R112.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section R112.1 Application for Appeal. The owner of a building or
structure or any other person may appeal from a decision of the Code
Official to the Board of Appeals provided for in the Building Code.
Application for appeal may be made when it is claimed that the true
content of this code has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions
of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of
installation or construction can be used.
Sections R112.2 through R112.4 are deleted without
substitution.
Section R113.4 is amended to read as follows:
Section R113.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm, corporation,
limited liability company or other business entity who shall violate
any provision of this code, or any owner or tenant of the building or
premises or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any
violation of this code or maintains any building, structure or premises in
which such violation shall exist shall be guilty of an ordinance violation
and subject to punishment by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
Section
500.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.020
AO:1059
($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90)
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. This provision shall not
apply to any Section of this code or to any ordinance in which there
is expressly provided a penalty for its violation, or for any offense the
penalty for the violation of which is fixed by statute.
Table R301.2(1) is amended to read as follows:
Editor's Note: Table R301.2(1) is included as an attachment to this
Chapter.
Section R312.1.1.1 is added to read as follows:
Section R312.1.1.1 Retaining walls. Guards shall be provided where
retaining walls with differences in grade level on either side of the wall
in excess of thirty (30) inches are located closer than two (2) feet to
a walk, path, parking lot or driveway on the high side of the retaining
wall.
Section R313.2 is amended to read as follows:
R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems.
Any builder of one- and two-family dwellings or townhouses shall offer
to any purchaser the option to install or equip such dwellings or
residences with a fire sprinkler system at the purchaser's cost in accord
with the requirements of Section 67.281.1, RSMo., Supp 2009.
FENCES, WALLS AND SCREENS
Section R327 and Section R327.1 is added to read as follows:
Section R327 Fences, walls and screens. It shall be unlawful to
erect any division, fence or screen, in whole or in part, of cloth, canvas
or similar material, nor shall any solid division fence or screen of
approved material exceeding six (6) feet be erected except a solid fence
of up to eight (8) feet may be erected in a residential rear yard which
is immediately adjacent to a commercial district; provided, however, a
wooden or metal fence or screen not exceeding ten (10) feet in height
may be erected in non-residential areas and eight (8) feet in residential
areas if such fence or screen is penetrated with openings at regular
intervals or latticed so that the combined area of the openings shall
be at least fifty percent (50%) of the actual surface of such fence or
screen. No division fence, fence wall or screen, no matter how built or
of what material constructed, shall exceed ten (10) feet in height unless
approved by the Architectural Review Board.
Section R327.1 Fences general. The finished side of fences shall face
all neighboring properties including streets and alleys so as to prohibit
the view of fence posts and support rails from adjoining properties,
unless written approval from all affected property owners is submitted
waiving this requirement.
Section
500.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
500.020
AO:1060
RESIDENTIAL MECHANICAL
Section M1503.4 is amended to read as follows:
M1503.4 Makeup air required. Exhaust hood systems capable of
exhausting in excess of six hundred (600) cubic feet per minute shall be
provided with makeup air at a rate approximately equal to the exhaust
air rate. Such makeup air systems shall be equipped with a means
of closure and shall be automatically controlled to start and operate
simultaneously with the exhaust system.
RESIDENTIAL PLUMBING
Section P2603.5.1 is deleted without substitution.
E. E. PART V. 2015 INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE.
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fuel Gas
Code of the City of Clayton, Missouri, hereinafter referred to as "this
code."
Section 106.6.2 is amended to read as follows:
Section 106.6.2 Permit fees. The permit fees for the installation,
extension, repair or alteration of heating and refrigeration equipment
shall be in accordance with the fee schedule as established by the City
of Clayton, Missouri.
Section 106.6.3 is deleted with substitution.
SECTION 108 VIOLATIONS
Section 108.4 is amended to read as follows:
Section 108.4 Violation Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation,
limited liability company or other business entity who shall violate
any provision of this code, or any owner or tenant of the building or
premises or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any
violation of this code or maintains any building, structure or premises in
which such violation shall exist shall be guilty of an ordinance violation
and subject to punishment by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90)
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. This provision shall not
apply to any Section of this code or to any ordinance in which there
is expressly provided a penalty for its violation, or for any offense the
penalty for the violation of which is fixed by statute.
Section 108.5 is amended to read as follows:
Section 108.5 Stop work order. Any person who shall continue any
work in or about the building after having been served with a stop work
Section
500.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.020
AO:1061
order, except such work as is directed by the Code Official to remove a
violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to punishment as provided
in Section 100.110 of the Code of Ordinances as defined in Section
108.4.
SECTION 109 MEANS OF APPEAL
Section 109.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section 109.1 General. The owner of a building or structure or any
other person may appeal from a decision of the Code Official to the
Board of Appeals provided for in Section 113 of the Building Code.
Application for appeal may be made when it is claimed that the true
content of this code has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions
of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of
installation or construction can be used.
Section 109.2 through 109.7 are deleted without substitution.
F. F. Part VI. 2015 International Energy Conservation Code.
Section C101.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section C101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the International
Energy Conservation Code of the City of Clayton, Missouri, and shall be
cited as such. It is referred to herein as "this code."
SECTION 109 BOARD OF APPEALS
Section 109.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section 109.1 General. The owner of a building or structure or any
other person may appeal from a decision of the Code Official to the
Board of Appeals provided for in Section 113 of the Building Code.
Application for appeal may be made when it is claimed that the true
content of this code has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions
of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of
installation or construction can be used.
Section 109.2 and 109.3 deleted without substitution.
Sections C110 through C110.4 are added to read as follows:
SECTION 110 VIOLATIONS
Section C110.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm, or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move,
remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment
regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in
violation of any of the provisions of this code.
Section C110.2 Notice of violation. The building official is
authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person
responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair,
Section
500.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
500.020
AO:1062
moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in
violation of the provisions of this code, or in violation of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code. Such order shall
direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the
abatement of the violation.
Section C110.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation
is not complied with promptly, the building official is authorized to
request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate
proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such
violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of
this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
Section C110.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm, corporation,
limited liability company or other business entity who shall violate
any provision of this code, or any owner or tenant of the building or
premises or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any
violation of this code or maintains any building, structure or premises in
which such violation shall exist shall be guilty of an ordinance violation
and subject to punishment by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90)
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. This provision shall not
apply to any Section of this code or to any ordinance in which there
is expressly provided a penalty for its violation, or for any offense the
penalty for the violation of which is fixed by statute.
G. Part VII. 2015 International Existing Building Code.
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section 101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the International
Existing Building Code of the City of Clayton, Missouri, and shall be
cited as such. It is referred to herein as "this code."
SECTION 112 BOARD OF APPEALS
Section 112.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section 112.1 General. The owner of a building or structure or any
other person may appeal from a decision of the Code Official to the
Board of Appeals provided for in Section 113 of the Building Code.
Application for appeal may be made when it is claimed that the true
content of this code has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions
of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of
installation or construction can be used.
Section 112.2 and 112.3 deleted without substitution.
SECTION 113 VIOLATIONS
Section 113.4 is amended to read as follows:
Section
500.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.020
AO:1063
Section 113.4 Violation Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation,
limited liability company or other business entity who shall violate
any provision of this code, or any owner or tenant of the building or
premises or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any
violation of this code or maintains any building, structure or premises in
which such violation shall exist shall be guilty of an ordinance violation
and subject to punishment by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90)
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. This provision shall not
apply to any Section of this code or to any ordinance in which there
is expressly provided a penalty for its violation, or for any offense the
penalty for the violation of which is fixed by statute.
Section 1401.2 is amended to read as follows:
Section 1401.2 Applicability. Structures existing prior to the
effective date of this ordinance, in which there is work involving
additions, alterations or changes in occupancy shall be made to
conform to the requirements of this Chapter or the provisions of
Chapter 5 through 13. The provisions of Sections 1401.2.1 through
1401.2.5 shall apply to existing occupancies that will continue to be, or
are proposed to be, Groups A, B, E, F, I-2, M, R and S. These provisions
shall not apply to buildings with occupancies in Group H, or I-1, I-3 or
I-4.
H. Part VIII International Swimming Pool and Spa Code. The
following numbered Sections and Subsections are hereby amended by
addition, insertions, deletions and changes. Each Section or Subsection
contained herein is part of Chapter 500 and should be considered as
such. The amended Sections and Subsections shall read as follows:
[Ord. No. 6409 §2, 1-26-2016]
Section 101.1 Amended to read as follows:
Section 101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the
Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the City of Clayton, Missouri,
hereinafter referred to as "this code."
Section 105.6.1 Amended to read as follows:
Section 105.6.1 Work Commencing before permit issuance. Any
person who commences any work before obtaining the necessary
permits shall be subject to one hundred percent (100%) of the usual
total permit fee in addition to the required permit fees.
Section 105.6.2 Amended to read as follows:
Section 105.6.2 Fee Schedule. The fees for all work or permits
governed by this code shall be per the fee schedule found within the
City of Clayton Missouri Municipal Code.
Section 105.6.3 Deleted without substitution
Section 107.4 Amended to read as follows:
Section
500.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
500.020
AO:1064
Section 500.030. Electrical Code Adoption. [Ord. No. 6131 § 1,
12-14-2010]
Section 107.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm, corporation,
limited liability company or other business entity who shall violate
any provision of this code, or any owner or tenant of the building or
premises or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any
violation of this code or maintains any building, structure or premises
in which such violation shall exist shall be guilty of an ordinance
violation and subject to punishment by a fine not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each
day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. This
provision shall not apply to any Section of this code or to any ordinance
in which there is expressly provided a penalty for its violation, or for
any offense the penalty for the violation of which is fixed by statute.
Section 107.5 Amended to read as follows:
Section 107.5 Stop work orders. Any person who shall continue any
work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop
work order, except such work as is directed by the Code Official to
remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to punishment
as provided in Section 100.110 of the Code of Ordinances as defined in
Section 108.4.
Section 108.1 Amended to read as follows:
Section 108.1 Application for appeal. Any person shall have the
right to appeal a decision of the Code Official to the Board of Appeals
provided for in the Building Code. Application for appeal may be
made when it is claimed that the true content of this code has been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply,
or an equally good or better form of installation or construction can be
used.
Section 108.2 through Section 108.7 Deleted without
substitution.
Section 202 Definitions. Add the following definition:
Manufactured Pool or Spa. A listed pool or spa that is manufactured
then transported to the installation site and installed or assembled.
Section 307.4 Amended to read as follows:
Section 307.4 Materials and structural design. Pools and spas
shall conform to one (1) or more of the standards indicated in Table
307.4. The structural design of pools shall be in accordance with the
International Building Code and shall be performed by a Missouri
licensed design professional.
A. The Saint Louis County Electrical Code as amended by the County of
Saint Louis, Missouri, through date of the last amendatory ordinances,
to wit: County Ordinance 24,439 approved on July 14, 2010, is hereby
Section
500.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.030
AO:1065
Section 500.040. Property Maintenance Code — Adoption —
Additions, Insertions, Deletions and Changes. [CC 1970
§§ 14-1—14-2; Ord. No. 5430 § 1, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 5656 § 1,
10-9-2001; Ord. No. 6031 § 1, 8-26-2008; Ord. No. 6137 § 1,
1-25-2011; Ord. No. 6308 §1, 3-11-2014; Ord. No. 6397 §1,
10-13-2015]
adopted as the Electrical Code of the City of Clayton, Missouri, as if
fully set out herein, with the exception of the first (1st) paragraph of
Section 80-17(C) regarding the penalty for violation.
B. The first (1st) paragraph of Section 80-17(C) is hereby amended to read
as follows: Any person, firm, corporation, limited liability company or
other business entity who shall violate any provision of this code, or any
owner or tenant of the building or premises or any other person who
commits, takes part or assists in any violation of this code or maintains
any building, structure or premises in which such violation shall exist
shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and subject to punishment by a
fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for
a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. This provision shall not apply to any Section of this
code or to any ordinance in which there is expressly provided a penalty
for its violation, or for any offense the penalty for the violation of which
is fixed by Statute.
A. Adoption. The 2015 International Property Maintenance Code, First
Edition, as published by the International Code Council, a copy of which
is on file in the office of the City Clerk, is hereby adopted as the
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Clayton, Missouri, for the
control of existing structures, premises and exterior property as herein
provided, and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions
and the terms of the International Property Maintenance Code, First
Edition, 2015, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof,
as if fully set out in this Section with the amendments, additions,
insertions and deletions prescribed in Subsection (B) of this Section.
B. Additions, Insertions, Deletions And Changes. The following numbered
Sections and Subsections of the International Property Maintenance
Code, First Edition, 2015, are hereby amended by additions, insertions,
deletions and changes so that such amended Sections and Subsections
shall read as follows:
Chapter 1. ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 101 GENERAL
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section
500.030
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
500.040
AO:1066
Section 101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the Property
Maintenance Code of the City of Clayton, Missouri, hereinafter referred
to as "this Code."
SECTION 103 DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
INSPECTION
Section 103.5 is amended to read as follows:
Section 103.5 Fees: The fees for activities and services performed by
the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall
be in accordance with the fee schedule as established by the City of
Clayton, Missouri.
SECTION 106 VIOLATIONS
Section 106.3 is amended to read as follows:
Section 106.3 Prosecution: In case of any unlawful acts or failure to
comply with a violation notice, the Code Official shall institute an
appropriate action or proceeding at law to exact the penalty provided
in Section 106.4. Also, the Code Official shall ask the jurisdiction's
legal representative to proceed at law or in equity against the person
responsible for the violation for the purpose of ordering that person:
1. To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any
further execution of work;
2. To restrain or correct the erection, installation, maintenance, repair
or alteration of such structure;
3. To require the removal of work in violation; or
4. To prevent the occupancy or use of the structure which is not in
compliance with the provisions of this code.
Section 106.4 is amended to read as follows:
Section 106.4 Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90)
days, or both, at the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served, in accordance with the
terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.
SECTION 107 NOTICES AND ORDERS
Section 107.2 is amended to read as follows:
Section 107.2 Form: Such notice prescribed in Section 107.1 shall:
1. Be in writing or by personal contact with the owner/operator;
2. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
Section
500.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.040
AO:1067
3. Include a statement of the violation(s) or reason(s) why the notice is
being issued; and
4. Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time for the repairs
and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into
compliance with the provisions of this Code.
Section 107.3 is amended to read as follows:
Section 107.3 Method of Service: Such notice shall be deemed to be
properly served if a copy thereof is:
1. Delivered to the owner personally by leaving the notice at the usual
place of abode in the presence of someone in the family of suitable age
and discretion who shall be informed of the contents thereof.
2. By certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the last
known address with return receipt requested. If the certified or
registered letter is returned by showing that the letter was not
delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or
about the structure affected by such notice.
Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner's agent
or upon the person responsible for the structure shall constitute service
of notice upon the owner.
Section 107.5 is amended to read as follows:
Section 107.5 Transfer of Ownership: It shall be unlawful for the owner
of any multi-family unit or rental structure containing three (3) or
more units to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of
to another unless the owner or designated representative has notified
the City of Clayton at least thirty (30) days in advance, received an
inspection report and compliance order or notice of violation and have
complied with the same or until such owner shall first furnish the
grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance
order or notice of violation issued by the Code Official and shall furnish
to the Code Official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee,
transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such
compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the
responsibility without condition including the responsibility to submit a
work schedule and receive approval from the City of Clayton for making
the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice
of violation.
It shall also be unlawful for the owner of any rental building containing
two (2) or more units to convert from a rental building to a
condominium unless the owner, or designated representative has
applied to the City of Clayton and provided all required documentation
for approval of the condominium conversion, received an inspection
and compliance order or notice of violation and has complied with the
same. Newly constructed condominium structures must apply to the
Section
500.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
500.040
AO:1068
City for condominium approval from the Board of Aldermen, provide
the required documentation, and secure the concurrence of the
Department of Planning and Development Services that the
construction is progressing according to all submitted plans and all
applicable codes.
SECTION 109 EMERGENCY MEASURES
Section 109.6 Hearing: Deleted without substitution
SECTION 110 DEMOLITION
Section 110.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section 110.1 General: Any structure which is found to be detrimental
to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Clayton,
Missouri, and which is declared to be a nuisance by the Code Official
shall be vacated and demolished or repaired in strict conformance with
this and all referenced codes in the time frame set forth in the notice or
as agreed upon by the Code Official.
Section 110.2.1 is added to read as follows:
Section 110.2.1 Service: The notice of declaration of nuisance shall be
served on the affected parties, consisting of owner, occupants, lessee,
mortgagee, agent and all persons having an interest in the property,
all as shown by the records of the St. Louis County Recorder of Deeds
Office. The notice shall be served personally or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, or if service cannot be had by either of these modes
of service, then by at least one (1) publication in the St. Louis Post
Dispatch. The affected parties shall have not less than thirty (30) days
from the date of service to complete demolition or to begin the repairs.
Section 110.2.2 is added to read as follows:
Section 110.2.2 Notice of Hearing: If the affected parties fail to
commence work on repairs or complete demolition within the time
specified, or fail to proceed continuously with the work without
unnecessary delay, the Director of the Department of Planning and
Development Services shall call a hearing upon the matter, giving the
affected parties twenty-one (21) days' written notice of the hearing.
Said notice must be served personally or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, or if service cannot be had by either of these modes
of service, then by at least one (1) publication in the St. Louis Post
Dispatch.
Section 110.3 is amended to read as follows:
Section 110.3 Hearing: The Director of Planning or his/her authorized
representative shall conduct a full and adequate hearing. Any affected
party may be represented by counsel and all affected parties shall have
an opportunity to be heard. After the hearing, if the evidence supports
a finding that the structure is a nuisance and detrimental to the health,
Section
500.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.040
AO:1069
safety or welfare of the residents of the City of Clayton, Missouri,
the Director of the Department of Planning and Development Services
shall issue a post-hearing order making specific findings of facts, based
on competent and substantial evidence and order the structure to be
demolished and removed, or repaired. The post-hearing order shall be
served in the same manner as the notice of declaration of nuisance and
pre-hearing order. The post-hearing order shall contain a date certain
for completion of the required action.
Section 110.3.4 is added to read as follows:
Section 110.3.4 Upon Failure to Obey Post-Hearing Order. If any posthearing
order of the Director of the Department of Planning is not
obeyed within thirty (30) days after its issuance, and if appeal of any
post-hearing order is not made to the Circuit Court as provided for in
this code within thirty (30) days after issuance of any such order, the
Director of the Department of Planning shall cause such structure to
be vacated and repaired or demolished as provided in the post-hearing
order. The Director of Planning shall certify the cost for such action,
including all administrative costs, to the Director of Finance, who shall
cause a special tax bill against the property to be prepared, filed and
collected. Said tax bill shall be a lien upon said property, said lien shall
bear interest at the rate set by the Missouri Division of Finance on the
date the lien is filed.
Section 110.4 is amended to read as follows:
Section 110.4 Salvage Materials: When any structure has been ordered
razed and removed, the governing body or other designated officer
under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to
sell the salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable.
The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such
razing and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such
sale of transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts
deducted, for the use of the person who is entitled thereto, subject to
any order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned
over, the report shall so state.
SECTION 111 MEANS OF APPEAL
Section 111.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a
decision of the Code Official or a notice or order issued under this code
shall have the right to appeal within thirty (30) days to the Director
of Planning and Development Services. Every effort will be made by
the Director, to give the matter a proper airing utilizing appropriate
inspection staff. An appeal shall be based on a claim that the true
intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or
the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means.
Sections 111.2 through 111.8 are deleted without substitution.
Section
500.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
500.040
AO:1070
SECTION 112 STOP WORK ORDER
Section 112.4 is amended to read as follows:
Section 112.4 Failure to Comply: Penalties for non-compliance with the
stop work order shall be as set forth in Section 106.4.
SECTION 113 OCCUPANCY PERMITS
Section 113.1 is added to read as follows:
Section 113.1 Occupancy Permits and Transfer of Ownership: It shall be
unlawful for any owner or operator of a, (a) two-family dwelling, or (b)
multi-family rental building, or (c) multi-family condominium building
or unit, or (d) single family dwellings to let to another for occupancy
or for any person to occupy any dwelling unit subject to the Occupancy
Permit Program unless the exterior, common areas and dwelling unit of
the building have been inspected by the Code Official and it has been
determined that it is in compliance with all the provisions of this code,
and a permit has been issued to said owner or operator for the dwelling
unit which will allow the prospective tenant family to legally occupy
said dwelling unit. No tenant shall move in or occupy any dwelling
unit without the knowledge or approval of the owner and the receipt
of an occupancy permit for the unit. Occupancy permits shall remain
valid until the occupancy of the unit(s) changes or the permit otherwise
expires.
Any occupancy permit properly issued will terminate:
1. Upon vacation of the dwelling unit by a tenant.
2. After five (5) years from the date of issuance of an occupancy permit,
at which time the unit must be reinspected and deficiencies corrected.
Section 113.2 is added to read as follows:
Section 113.2 Conditions for Issuance of Occupancy Permit:
1. Upon request of the owner or operator of a building subject to the
Occupancy Permit Program and payment of the inspection fee, the Code
Official shall inspect the exterior, common areas and dwelling unit(s)
at a time agreed upon between the Code Official and the owner or
operator.
If such inspection establishes that the building and dwelling unit(s) is in
compliance with the code, the Code Official shall authorize the issuance
of an occupancy permit.
2. If the exterior, common areas and dwelling unit(s) are not in full
compliance with this code, the Code Official shall furnish the owner/
operator with a written list of violations that must be corrected before
an occupancy permit can be issued and the dwelling unit occupied.
When advised by the owner/operator that the violations are corrected
Section
500.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.040
AO:1071
and upon payment of any required reinspection fee, the exterior,
common areas and dwelling unit(s) shall be reinspected by the Code
Official and if found to be in full compliance with this code, the
occupancy permit shall be issued and the unit may be occupied.
3. Fees for occupancy permits and inspections shall be paid as provided
for in accordance with the fee schedule as established by the City of
Clayton, Missouri.
The provision for a higher fee does not release the owner from
responsibility to follow all the provisions of the code for compliance
related to the issuance of an occupancy permit.
Section 113.3 is added to read as follows:
Section 113.3 Occupancy Permits, Non-Residential Structures: It shall
be unlawful for any person, owner or operator to occupy or use or
to permit occupancy or use of any premises for any purpose until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Code Official.
No such certificate shall be issued unless said premises has been
inspected by the Code Official and the premises is in compliance with
this code and all zoning regulations.
Section 113.3.1 is added to read as follows:
Section 113.3.1 Fees: Fees for occupancy permits and inspections shall
be paid as provided for in accordance with the fee schedule as
established by the City of Clayton, Missouri.
Section 113.3.2 is added to read as follows:
Section 113.3.2 Revocation of Permit: Any occupancy permit issued
shall become invalid after ninety (90) days if the premises are not
occupied during that time by the authorized tenant, nor shall any
occupancy permit be issued for any premises if more than ninety (90)
days has elapsed since the date of inspection.
Chapter 2. DEFINITIONS
SECTION 201 GENERAL
Section 201.3 is amended to read as follows:
Section 201.3 Terms Defined In Other Codes: Where terms are not
defined in this Chapter and are defined in the City of Clayton Zoning
Ordinance and the International Codes listed in Chapter 8, they shall
have the same meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
SECTION 202 GENERAL DEFINITIONS
Definitions are added to read as follows:
Carriage House: Per City of Clayton Zoning Ordinance definition.
Section
500.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
500.040
AO:1072
One-family dwelling: A building containing one dwelling unit.
Two-family dwelling: A building containing two dwelling units.
Multi-family condominium building: A building containing three (3) or
more dwelling units that has been legally converted to condominium
according to Missouri State Law and where units are individually
owned and all land, property, structures, improvements contained
therein or thereon are for the mutual use and benefit of the unit owners.
Multi-family rental building: A building containing three (3) or more
dwelling units which are let for rent/lease or other consideration and
where the units are not owned individually or as part of a cooperative.
Family: Per City of Clayton Zoning Ordinance definition.
Graffiti: Markings, drawings or other visual depictions, either graphic
or written, placed upon any exterior surface, including, but not limited
to, building, window, retaining wall, fence, trash containers, accessory
building or driveway.
Chapter 3. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 302 EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS
Section 302.2 is amended to read as follows:
Section 302.3 Sidewalks and Driveways: The owner is responsible to
keep all sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and
similar areas in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from
hazardous conditions. Stairs shall also comply with the requirements of
Section 304.10.
Section 302.4 is amended to read as follows:
Section 302.4 Weeds: All premises and exterior property shall be
maintained free from weeds in excess of six (6) inches (152.4mm).
All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all
grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs;
provided, however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and
gardens.
Section 302.4.1 is added to read as follows:
Section 302.4.1 Landscaping: Lawn areas and landscaping shall be
properly maintained by the owner. Plants and grass that have
deteriorated or died shall be replaced and additional planting shall
be provided if required by the Code Official. Screening or additional
planting around refuse containers may also be required to assure the
desirable residential character of the premises. The premises and
exterior property shall be maintained free from grass and weeds in
excess of six (6) inches.
Section 302.4.2 is added to read as follows:
Section
500.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.040
AO:1073
Section 302.4.2 Tree Maintenance and Removal: The maintenance,
upon private property, of dead or dying trees or tree limbs or branches
which, by reason of their location, size or state of deterioration,
constitute a danger to the public health, safety or welfare, or the
maintenance upon private property of trees which are infected with
Dutch Elm or other contagious disease or blight, dangerous to persons,
animals, other trees or plant life, is declared to be a nuisance and
must be removed. Tree stumps shall be removed to grade level and
completely ground to blend into the surrounding yard.
Section 302.7 is amended to read as follows:
Section 302.7 Accessory Structures and Parking Areas: All accessory
structures, including detached garages, underground garages, fences
and walls shall be maintained in structurally sound condition and in
good repair. All parking areas and portions of yards of multiple
dwellings used for parking permitted by the Zoning Ordinance shall be
surfaced with two (2) inches of asphaltic concrete over a six (6) inch
rock base or not less than five (5) inches of concrete.
Section 302.7.1 is added to read as follows:
Section 302.7.1 Underground Garages: Underground garages should
be waterproof so as to prevent deterioration of structural member and/
or a nuisance to parked vehicles.
Section 302.8 is amended to read as follows:
Section 302.8 Motor Vehicles and Parking Areas: Parking areas and
garages shall be used only for the parking of private tenant automobiles
which have current license plates and are in working condition. No
vehicle(s) shall be stored in a garage, carport or other parking area in
excess of thirty (30) days unless unusual circumstances warrant such
storage and written permission is given by the Code Official for a longer
period.
Section 302.9 is amended to read as follows:
Section 302.9 Graffiti and Defacement of Property: No person shall
willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of
any structure or building on any private or public property by placing
thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of
the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenance
and repair.
SECTION 304 EXTERIOR STRUCTURE
Section 304.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section 304.1 General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained
in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat
to the public health, safety or welfare. General repairs shall be made
Section
500.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
500.040
AO:1074
in a workmanlike manner using identical or, if not available, similar
material as the original installation.
Section 304.3.1 is added to read as follows:
Section 304.3.1 Buildings with Rear Alleys: Buildings shall have
approved numbers placed at the rear of the property so as to be visible
from the alley.
Section 304.10 is amended to read as follows:
Section 304.10 Stairways, Decks, Porches, Balconies and other Walking
Surfaces: Every stair, ramp, balcony, porch, deck or other walking
surface, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained
structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable
of supporting the imposed loads. Every stair shall have uniform risers
and treads with nonskid surfaces. Every stair, porch, or fire escape shall
be maintained free of hazardous conditions such as snow, ice, mud and
debris. No stairs or fire escape shall be blocked by any material at any
time.
Section 304.13 is amended to read as follows:
Section 304.13 Windows, Skylights, Doors and Door Frames: Every
window, skylight, door and door frame shall be kept in sound condition,
good repair and weather tight. Window frames must be solid without
evidence of rust, rot or decay and must be capable of tightly securing
the window. Every operable window must be supplied with window
hardware including locks. If more than sixty percent (60%) of the
windows in a unit or structure are in violation of the code and, in the
opinion of the Code Official, must be replaced due to age or condition,
then the owner shall replace all windows within that unit/structure.
Section 304.13.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section 304.13.1 Window Glazing: Window glazing shall be maintained
free of cracks or holes and must also be clean and kept free of mud, dirt
and other matter that reduces visibility.
Section 304.14 is amended to read as follows:
Section 304.14 Insect Screens: Every door, window (other than
windows designed to be fixed) and other outside opening serving any
building containing habitable dwelling units or rooms, food preparation
areas, or any areas where products used in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall
be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than sixteen
(16) mesh per inch and every swinging door shall have a self-closing
device in good working condition.
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means,
such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
Section
500.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.040
AO:1075
Section 304.16 is amended to read as follows:
Section 304.16 Basements Hatchways: Every basement hatchway shall
be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface
drainage water. No water is to remain standing. Water must be drained
completely.
SECTION 305 INTERIOR STRUCTURE
Section 305.4 is amended to read as follows:
Section 305.4 Walking Surfaces: All interior stairs and railings shall
be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary
condition. No interior stairway or landing may be blocked by any
material at any time.
Section 305.7 is added to read as follows:
Section 305.7 Hallways and Common Areas: The interior hallways,
stairwells, laundry rooms, basements and other common areas in all
multi-family buildings must be kept in a clean and sanitary manner.
Circulars, newspapers and like materials must not litter the hallways.
Chipped, peeling or feded flooring must be repaired or replaced.
Section 305.7.1 is added to read as follows:
Section 305.7.1 Owner/Operator Contact: Every multi-family rental
building containing three (3) or more units shall have posted in a
conspicuous location in the common area of the building, the name and
telephone number of the owner, operator, or maintenance personnel
who can be reached in case of emergency or in the event of building
related problems. Such information must be valid for weekends, after
hours and holidays as well as regular working hours. All owners/
operators residing outside St. Louis County must register with the City
of Clayton a local agent who has been designated, in writing, by the
owner to receive service of legal action.
Section 305.8 is added to read as follows:
Section 305.8 Basement and Storage Facilities: The basement and
storage facility of any multi-family building must be kept clean, sanitary
and free of debris; storage must be contained in the bins or like facility
designated for that use, where such storage facilities exist. If no such
storage facilities exist, storage must be neatly stacked at least three
(3) feet from any mechanical equipment for non-combustible items and
at least ten (10) feet from any mechanical equipment for combustible
items. At least a ten (10) foot clear passage to the door(s) must be
provided. No volatile materials should be stored in the basement or
other common areas.
SECTION 307 HANDRAILS AND GUARDRAILS
Section 307.1.1 is added to read as follows:
Section
500.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
500.040
AO:1076
Section 307.1.1 Returns: During building alterations or the
modification of existing handrails, said handrails shall be modified to
return into the wall in such a way that an article of clothing or items
cannot be caught on a protruding handrail.
SECTION 308 RUBBISH AND GARBAGE
Section 308.3.3 is added to read as follows:
Section 308.3.3 Recycling Container: The owner of every occupied
premise(s) shall provide adequate City of Clayton approved recycling
containers for the use by the occupants.
Chapter 4. LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY
LIMITATIONS
SECTION 402 LIGHT
Section 402.2 is amended to read as follows:
Section 402.2 Common Halls, Stairways and Entrance Doors: Every
common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than oneand
two-family dwellings, shall be illuminated at all times with at least a
sixty-watt standard incandescent light bulb for each two hundred (200)
square feet (19m2) of floor area or equivalent illumination, provided
that the spacing between lights shall not be greater than thirty (30)
feet (9144mm). Every exterior entrance door to a multi-family building
must be lighted with a minimum sixty-watt standard incandescent light
bulb over the entrance doorway. In other than residential occupancies,
means of egress, including exterior means of egress, stairways shall
be illuminated at all times the building space server by the means of
egress is occupied with a minimum of one (1) foot-candle (11 lux) at
floors, landings and treads.
SECTION 404 OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS
Section 404.5 is amended to read as follows:
Section 404.5 Overcrowding: Dwelling units shall not be occupied by
more occupants than permitted by the minimum occupancy
requirements of Table 404.5 nor more than maximum number of
occupants per bedroom(s) as provided for in Section 404.4.1. No
dwelling unit shall be occupied by more than one (1) family as defined
in the Zoning Ordinance.
Chapter 6. MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 602 HEATING FACILITIES
Section 602.2 is amended to read as follows:
Section 602.2 Residential Buildings: Every dwelling unit shall be
provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room
temperature of sixty-eight degrees Fahrenheit (68° F) at a level of three
Section
500.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.040
AO:1077
(3) feet (914 mm) above the floor and a distance of three (3) feet (914
mm) from the exterior walls in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet
rooms.
Section 602.3 is amended to read as follows:
Section 602.3 Heating Supply: Every owner and operator of any
building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming
unit, dormitory or guest room on terms, either express or implied, to
furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply sufficient heat during
the period from October 1 to April 30 to maintain a room temperature
of not less than sixty-eight degrees Fahrenheit (68° F) in all habitable
rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms during the hours between 6:30
A.M. and 10:30 P.M. of each day and not less than sixty-five degrees
Fahrenheit (65° F) during other hours.
Section 602.4 is amended to read as follows:
Section 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces: Every enclosed occupied work
space shall be supplied with sufficient heat during the period from
October 1 to April 30 to maintain a temperature of not less than sixtyeight
degrees Fahrenheit (68° F) during working hours.
Exceptions:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activity.
SECTION 603 MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT
Section 603.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section 603.1 Mechanical Appliances: All mechanical appliances,
fireplaces, solid fuel burning appliances, cooking appliances and water
heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe
working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended
function. Window air conditioners shall be installed with proper air
conditioner brackets.
SECTION 604 ELECTRICAL FACILITIES
Section 604.2 is amended to read as follows:
Section 604.2 Service: Every dwelling unit shall be served by a main
service that is not less than sixty (60) ampere, three (3) wires. Fuse
protection shall be circuit breaker or type "S" safety fusing.
SECTION 605 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
Section 605.2 is amended to read as follows:
Section
500.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
500.040
AO:1078
Section 500.050. Mechanical Code Adoption. [Ord. No. 6132 § 1,
12-14-2010]
Section 605.2 Receptacles: Every habitable space in a dwelling unit
shall contain at least two (2) separate and remote receptacle outlets.
Every laundry, basement, crawl space, wet bar sink and garage that
contains a receptacle(s), that/those outlet(s) must be grounded. New
outlet installations must be ground fault interrupter units. Every
bathroom and kitchen shall contain at least one (1) receptacle and such
outlet or outlets shall be approved ground fault interrupter units.
Chapter 7. FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 702 MEANS OF EGRESS
Section 702.5 is added to read as follows:
Section 702.5 Corridor Enclosure: All corridors serving an occupant
load of greater than thirty (30) and openings therein shall provide
an effective barrier to resist the movement of smoke. All transoms,
louvers, doors and other openings shall be closed or shall be selfclosing.
Exceptions:
1. Louvers or grills for the movement of conditioned air shall be
permitted in exit access corridor enclosure walls or doors provided
an approved smoke detection system is installed in the corridor. The
smoke detection system shall sound an audible alarm in the building
and automatically shut off all mechanical air handling equipment. This
exception shall not apply to openings into shaft or exit stairway
enclosures.
SECTION 703 FIRE RESISTANCE RATINGS
Section 703.2 is amended to read as follows:
Section 703.2 Opening Protectives: All required fire doors and smoke
barriers shall be maintained in good working order, including all
hardware necessary for the proper operation thereof. Fire doors shall
not be held open by door stops, wedges and other unapproved holdopen
devices. Fire doors shall include an attached door closer so that
the door cannot be left in an open position. Fire and smoke barriers
shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.
A. The Saint Louis County Mechanical Code as amended by the County of
Saint Louis, Missouri, through date of the last amendatory ordinances,
to wit: County Ordinance 24,438 approved on July 14, 2010, is hereby
adopted as the Mechanical Code of the City of Clayton, Missouri, as it
applies to amusement devices, as if fully set out herein, with the
exception of the first (1st) paragraph of Section 108.4 regarding the
penalty for violation.
Section
500.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.050
AO:1079
Section 500.060. Methamphetamine Contamination Abatement.
[Ord. No. 6246 § 1, 11-27-2012]
B. Section 108.4 is hereby amended to read as follows: Any person, firm,
corporation, limited liability company or other business entity who shall
violate any provision of this code, or who shall fail to comply with any of
the requirements thereof, or who shall install, erect, construct, alter or
repair mechanical equipment or systems in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, or shall start any
work requiring a permit without first obtaining a permit therefore, or
who shall continue any work in or about a structure after having been
served a stop work order, except for such work which that person, firm
or corporation has been directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe conditions, or any owner or tenant of a building or premises or
any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any violation of
this code or maintains any building, structure or premises in which
such violation shall exist shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and
subject to punishment by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90)
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. This provision shall not
apply to any Section of this code or to any ordinance in which there is
expressly provided a penalty for its violation, or for any offense the
penalty for the violation of which is fixed by Statute.
A. Title. This Section is entitled and may be known as "The
Methamphetamine Contamination Abatement Protocol".
B. Purpose. The purposes of this Section are:
1. To adopt standards for identifying dangerous levels of toxic
chemicals and residue associated with the presence or production
of methamphetamine; and
2. To establish protocols whereby the building safety personnel may
cooperate with and rely on law enforcement and emergency
agencies when applying property maintenance and safety
standards to order or cause the abatement of contamination in
structures due to the presence or production of methamphetamine.
C. Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the words or terms listed
below are defined as follows:
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Planning and Development
Services of the City of Clayton.
METHAMPHETAMINE — Dextro methamphetamine, levo
methamphetamine, and unidentified isomers of the same, any racemic
mixture of dextro/levo methamphetamine, or any mixture of
unidentified isomers of methamphetamine. The term includes
derivatives, conjugates, oxides and reduced forms of the basic structure
Section
500.050
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
500.060
AO:1080
associated with the formation of methamphetamine. For the purposes
of this protocol, this term includes amphetamine, ephedrine and
pseudoephedrine.
QUALIFIED COMPANY OR QUALIFIED CONTRACTOR — A company
or contractor that tests structures for the presence of unsafe
contamination and/or abates such unsafe contamination and that:
UNSAFE CONTAMINATION — The presence of chemicals in a structure
at levels exceeding the levels for such chemicals as provided in
Subsection (D) below.
Complies with the guidelines of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency Voluntary Guidelines for Methamphetamine Laboratory
Cleanup (August 2009);
1.
Complies with the regulations of the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration of the United States Department of Labor
relating to hazardous waste operations and emergency response,
including 29 Code of Federal Regulations Section 1910.120;
2.
Requires that at least one (1) employee or supervisor assigned
to and on duty at any work site shall have completed the forty
(40) hour Hazardous Waste Operations and Emergency Response
(HASWOPER) training [Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) 29 CFR 1910]; and
3.
Requires its personnel to complete a clandestine drug lab
assessment and decontamination course offered by a sponsor
acceptable to a regional drug task force and/or the department.
4.
D. Unsafe Contamination. A structure will be considered unsafe for
purposes of the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Clayton if it is
found to contain any of the chemicals listed below at exposure limits
above the levels listed below established by the National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH):
1. Red Phosphorus—any amount.
2. Iodine Crystals C0.1 ppm (1 mg/m3).
3. Sulfuric Acid TWA 1 mg/m3.
4. Hydrogen Chloride C 5 ppm (7 mg/m3).
5. Hydrochloric Acid (Hcl gas) - C 5 ppm (7 mg/m3).
6. Methamphetamine—in a concentration equal to or greater than 1.5
µgram/100 cm2.
7. Lead and Mercury—If it is determined that the phenyl-2-propanone
(P2P) method of methamphetamine manufacturing was used,
surface levels for lead in excess of 20 µ/ft2 and vapor samples for
Mercury in excess of 50 ng/m3.
Section
500.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.060
AO:1081
E. Closure And Abatement Orders Upon Report And Investigation By Law
Enforcement or Emergency Agencies.
1. When a law enforcement or emergency agency reports to the
department that a structure in the City has been used for the
production of methamphetamine or as a storage facility for
methamphetamine or chemicals used in the manufacturing of
methamphetamine, the department may order that structure
closed pursuant to the emergency measures provided in the City's
property maintenance and/or safety codes. The department shall
rescind such an order if the law enforcement or emergency agency
later reports that after testing and investigation it has not found
unsafe contamination in that structure.
2. When a law enforcement or emergency agency reports to the
department that it has found unsafe contamination in a structure in
the City that has been used for the production of
methamphetamine or as a storage facility for methamphetamine or
chemicals used in the manufacturing of methamphetamine, the
department shall order that structure closed pursuant to the
emergency measures provided in the City's property maintenance
and/or safety codes.
F. Supplementary Notice And Instructions.
1. While closure and abatement orders pursuant to the emergency
measures provided in the City's property maintenance and/or
safety codes may be posted, the department shall also attempt to
contact the owner of record of the affected property, or the owner's
agent, by personal service, first class mail or by posting on the
property or publication if mail is returned as undelivered.
2. Such notice shall direct the owner to contact the department within
twenty (20) calendar days to establish a schedule for
decontaminating the structure, and further advise the owner that
failure to contact the department within that time specified may
result in a request to disconnect utility services in order to ensure
that the structure is not re-occupied until it is decontaminated.
3. Such notice shall also inform the owner that if the owner contacts
the department within the time specified in the notice, the owner
may request to have the structure retested, but such retesting must
be performed as follows.
a. The owner must employ the services of a qualified company or
contractor to perform sampling and to analyze the samples.
b. An inspector for the department must be present when the
qualified company or contractor takes samples and the owner
shall pay an inspection fee of forty dollars ($40.00), payment of
which must be made prior to the appointment for taking
samples.
Section
500.060
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
500.060
AO:1082
c. Sampling and testing shall be performed in accordance with
the appropriate sections of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency Voluntary Guidelines for Methamphetamine
Laboratory Cleanup (August 2009).
d. The qualified company or contractor engaged by the owners
must report the results of its analysis of the samples taken to
the department.
G. Decontamination.
1. If unsafe contamination exists in a structure, the owner shall hire a
qualified contractor or company to decontaminate the structure
and advise the department of the schedule for decontamination.
2. The schedule for the work and evidence that the qualified
contractor or company meets the requirements of this Section must
be submitted for approval to the department within twenty (20)
calendar days of the receipt of notice. Approval will be based solely
on the timeliness of the schedule and the qualifications of the
contractor. Approval or rejection of the schedule will be provided
within a reasonable time of submission. If rejected the owner will
be informed, in writing, of specific reasons for the rejection and will
be required to amend the schedule or the proposed qualified
contractor or company. Decontamination shall be performed in
accordance with the appropriate sections of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency Voluntary Guidelines for Methamphetamine
Laboratory Cleanup (August 2009).
3. If the owner of property determined to have unsafe contamination
fails to voluntarily abate that contamination, the department may
serve a notice of violation and proceed in accordance with
provisions for abatement of unsafe conditions or structures in the
City's property maintenance and/or safety codes. The department
may request disconnection of the utility services until the
decontamination is complete.
4. Post decontamination sampling. Following the completion of the
work, the owner shall notify the department that work is complete
and the owner must provide written test results as evidence that
the property is compliant with this regulation. The post
remediation sampling and testing must be performed by a qualified
contractor or company other than and independent of the
contractor or company that performed the decontamination, and
that sampling and testing must be done in accordance with the
appropriate sections of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Voluntary Guidelines for Methamphetamine Laboratory Cleanup
(August 2009).
H. Final Action. After the property has been decontaminated and the
department is in possession of evidence that the pertinent chemical
levels are below unsafe contamination levels, the structure will be
Section
500.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.060
AO:1083
Section 500.070. through Section 500.190. Reserved.
considered safe and suitable for performance of a full inspection for
an occupancy permit. If utility services have been disconnected, the
department will notify the utilities that the unsafe condition has been
mitigated and service can be restored. The property owner shall be
responsible for any reconnection fees.
Section
500.060
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
500.070
AO:1084
ARTICLE II
Penalty
Section 500.200. Violations — General Penalty — Limits —
Continuing Violations — Exceptions.
A. Whenever in any Section of the various technical codes adopted in this
Chapter or in any ordinance the doing of any act is required or is
prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor and no
specific fine or penalty is provided for a violation thereof, any person
who shall be convicted of a violation of any such provision of these
technical codes adopted in this Chapter or of any such ordinance shall,
for each offense, be fined not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or be punished by imprisonment in jail not to exceed ninety
(90) days or be punished by both fine and imprisonment.
B. Each days violation of or failure, refusal or neglect to comply with any
provision of any of the technical codes adopted herein or of any
ordinance shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
C. This Section shall not apply to any Section of these Codes or to any
ordinance in which there is expressly provided a penalty for its violation
or for any offense the penalty for the violation of which is fixed by
Statute.
Section
500.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.200
AO:1085
Chapter 505
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
Cross References—As to rights-of-way usage, ch. 510; as to trees and
shrubbery, ch. 515; as to posting bills on public property, §215.370.
Section
500.200
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
500.200
AO:1086
ARTICLE I
In General
Section 505.010. Cleanliness of Public Ways — Litter, Rank Growth,
Ice, Snow. [CC 1970 §20-10; CC 1947 §7-18; Ord. No. 3862 §1,
1-25-1977]
The streets, alleys, public ways and public places in the City shall at all
times be kept neat and clean and reasonably free from dirt, litter and
rank growth in all public areas, so that the City may at all times present
an orderly and attractive appearance. It shall be the responsibility of the
Director of Public Works to sweep, clean and wash the streets within the
City and to take such other action as required to maintain said streets in
an orderly and attractive condition. The owners of all property or agents
in control thereof and the tenants or occupants of all premises shall keep
the sidewalks in front of and adjoining the property owned, controlled or
occupied by them swept and clear of paper, dirt, mud, filth, animal or
vegetable matter or any substance or article. After any fall of snow or sleet
or formation of ice thereon, said owners, agents, occupants or tenants shall
cause the same to be immediately removed from the sidewalk fronting or
adjoining the property owned, managed or occupied by them; except that
in cases of multi-family buildings with three (3) or more dwelling units, it
shall be the responsibility of the owner or agent in control to comply with
the requirements of this Section. The owners of all property or agents in
control thereof or the tenants or occupants of all premises shall keep all
grass, whether in the public right-of-way or not, mowed as required by the
provisions of Chapter 220 hereof.
Section 505.020. Cleanliness of Public Ways — Spilling of Harmful
Liquid or Material. [CC 1970 §20-11; CC 1947 §7-19]
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit to be placed, thrown
or to leak or spill from a vehicle or otherwise upon any pavement or
surface of any street, sidewalk, alley or public place any liquid asphalt,
substance or material which might thereby be calculated to endanger,
impede or inconvenience the movement of vehicles or pedestrians or render
the surface of such street, sidewalk, alley or public place rough or uneven.
Section 505.030. Use of Closed Street — Removal of Protective
Device. [CC 1970 §20-12; CC 1947 §7-21]
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street or highway or part
thereof which has been withdrawn from use by the public or to drive or
attempt to drive any vehicle thereon or to remove or destroy any barricade,
warning light or sign placed upon said street or highway or around or upon
any obstruction or defect thereon as a protection or warning to the public.
Section
505.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.040
AO:1087
Section 505.040. Driving or Hauling Across Sidewalk, Etc. —
Permit, Deposit, Restoration, Inspection Fee. [CC 1970 §20-13; CC
1947 §7-29; Ord. No. 4144 §1, 10-31-1980]
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul any materials or to drive any
vehicle across any sidewalk, tree lawn, parkway, curb or gutter in the
City without a permit therefor from the Director of Public Works. No such
permit shall be issued unless the applicant therefor shall make deposit
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) with the Director of Public Works to
insure that no damage shall be caused to the sidewalk, curb, gutter, tree
lawn, parkway or to any tree, pole, sign or property thereon in connection
with such hauling or driving. The Director shall inspect the location where
such hauling is to be done and after the work is completed shall repair,
restore and replace any damage or loss caused thereby, the cost therefor
together with an inspection and permit fee of ten dollars ($10.00) to be
deducted from the deposit and the balance returned to the person making
said deposit. The Director shall at once report said deposit and deductions
to the Director of Finance and pay over to the City any deposits or monies
so received and shall keep a permanent record of the transactions in a book
kept by him/her for such purpose.
Section 505.050. Parking Meter Removal. [CC 1970 §20-14; CC
1947 §7-16.1; Ord. No. 4143 §1, 10-31-1980; Ord. No. 5217 §1,
2-13-1996; Ord. No. 5218 §1, 2-13-1996; Ord. No. 6121 §1,
9-28-2010]
Whenever in connection with the construction, alteration or repair of any
building or structure within the City, it shall be necessary that any
temporary sidewalks occupy any street on which parking meters have been
lawfully installed or where parking is necessary to gain access to the
building site, the Director of Public Works may authorize the removal of the
affected meters. The person(s) requesting such removal shall pay to the City
an amount equal to the daily parking meter rental rate set forth in Section
350.180 of this Code.
Section
505.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
505.050
AO:1088
ARTICLE II
Obstructions
Section 505.060. General Prohibition. [CC 1970 §20-25; CC 1947
§7-14; Ord. No. 4259 §1, 8-24-1982]
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to remain on
any highway, street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, tree lawn, gutter, drain or
public place, except as permitted in this Article, any building material or
equipment, rubbish, coal, debris, dirt piles, materials of any kind, chattels
or property which might obstruct the free passage thereof or hinder traffic
or persons or vehicles or which might obstruct the free passage of water in
such gutter or drain. Except that items of public use may be placed upon
public sidewalks in the City of Clayton under the supervision of and by
direction of the Director of Public Works of the City of Clayton.
Section 505.070. Construction Operation — Permitted Exception.
[CC 1970 §20-26; CC 1947 §7-15]
The Director of Public Works may, in his/her discretion, permit an
obstruction mentioned in Section 505.060 of such materials to the extent
of one-half (½) of any sidewalk and eight (8) feet of any public roadway,
highway or alley if such encroachment is necessary for the proper conduct
of a building operation and does not substantially inconvenience the public
in the use of said sidewalks, public roadways, highways or alleys and
provided that adequate temporary walkways be furnished.
Section 505.080. Construction Operation — Indemnification
Deposit and Bond. [CC 1970 §20-27; CC 1947 §7-16]
Each applicant for a building permit for the construction, alteration or
repair of any building or structure shall be required by the Director of
Public Works, before such permit is issued, to make a cash deposit with the
City with respect to the proposed work to insure that all building materials
and debris occupying any sidewalk, tree lawn or public place in connection
with the work will be safeguarded as required by this Article and promptly
removed, that all damages will be compensated for, the provisions of this
Article complied with and conditions restored equal to that existing prior
to the commencement of the work. Said deposit shall be refunded after full
compliance herewith subject to the deductions authorized in this Article and
the inspection fees as provided in this Article. The amount of said deposit
shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). In addition, each applicant shall
furnish a surety bond for the sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) to
extend for a period of two (2) years to guarantee full compliance herewith.
Section
505.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.090
AO:1089
Section 505.090. Construction Operation — Inspection of
Construction Location — Notice To Restore — Restoration By City —
Deductions From Deposit. [CC 1970 §20-28; CC 1947 §7-17]
The Director of Public Works shall inspect the street, alley, sidewalk,
parkway, tree lawn or public place abutting the premises and location
mentioned in the application for a building permit before the work is
commenced and after it is completed and shall open and clean out any
gutter, drain, street, inlet or manhole that may become obstructed by the
aforesaid building materials, debris, articles or materials of any kind and
shall repair any damage to said street, alley, sidewalk, curbing, gutter,
drive, tree lawn, parkway or public place arising out of said work and
restore the same to a condition equal to that existing prior to
commencement of the work, if the contractor or person responsible does
not within twenty-four (24) hours after being notified remove such
obstructions and make said repairs and restoration. The Director shall
report the cost of such repairs and restoration made by the City and the
cost thereof shall be deducted from the deposit, together with an inspection
fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each inspection required to effect the above
provisions.
Section 505.100. Sale or Display of Merchandise — On Highway,
Street or Alley. [CC 1970 §20-29; CC 1947 §7-30.1; Ord. No. 6158 §1,
8-23-2011; Ord. No. 6224 §1, 8-28-2012]
Except as provided in Section 505.125, below, or in association with civic
events sponsored or authorized by the City, it shall be unlawful for any
person to place for display and sale or to sell on any public highway,
street or alley in the City any groceries, provisions, magazines, newspapers,
commodities, vegetables, fruit, produce, goods, wares or merchandise.
Section 505.110. Sale or Display of Merchandise — On Sidewalk.
[CC 1970 §20-30; CC 1947 §7-20; Ord. No. 4821 §1, 8-27-1991; Ord.
No. 6158 §1, 8-23-2011; Ord. No. 6224 §1, 8-28-2012]
Except as provided in Section 505.125, below, or in association with civic
events sponsored or authorized by the City, it shall be unlawful to place
for display and sale or to sell upon any public sidewalk in the City any
groceries, provisions, magazines, commodities, vegetables, fruit, produce,
goods, wares or merchandise, except that it shall be lawful to sell
newspapers upon any public sidewalk within the City and to place for
display and storage such newspapers only in boxes as provided in Section
505.140 except further, that it shall be lawful to provide food service or
customer seating areas pursuant to an outdoor dining permit.
Section
505.090
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
505.120
AO:1090
Section 505.120. Sale or Display of Merchandise — From Store
Directly Onto Sidewalk. [CC 1970 §20-31; CC 1947 §7-20.1; Ord. No.
6224 §1, 8-28-2012]
Except as provided in Section 505.125, below, it shall be unlawful to place
and display for sale in any storefront opening upon any public sidewalk in
the City any groceries, provisions, magazines, newspapers, commodities,
vegetables, fruits, produce, goods, wares or merchandise in such a manner
that sales or removal of such groceries, provisions, magazines, newspapers,
commodities, vegetables, fruits, produce, goods, wares or merchandise may
be made directly from such storefront. Nothing contained in this Section
shall prevent proper display of merchandise in any covered showcase or
shop window.
Section 505.125. Private Mobile Food Vending. [Ord. No. 6224 §1,
8-28-2012; Ord. No. 6392 §1, 10-13-2015]
A. Except as permitted by Sections 505.100 and 505.110, above, operators
of food trucks, ice cream trucks, mobile barbecue or food smoking
equipment and similar motorized or transportable mobile food
preparation or vending equipment ("mobile food vending equipment"),
other than mobile or transportable barbecue or smoking equipment
used as outdoor accessory cooking equipment by and on the premises
of an establishment licensed by the City to prepare and sell food at
retail, may locate or operate such equipment on City rights-of-way, City
property and private property only in compliance with the following
requirements:
1. Except as otherwise permitted in this Section, mobile food vending
equipment must be used solely to serve a private event not open to
the general public. No operator of such equipment may sell, vend
or serve to members of the public or any person not participating in
the sponsoring private event. Payment for any goods provided by
the operator of mobile food vending equipment must be made to
the vendor by the sponsor of the event, as in the case of typical
catering services; no payments may be collected by or on behalf of
the vendor from consumers.
2. Established licensed restaurants, grocery stores, and food retailers
located within the Downtown Mobile Food Vending District shown
on the map below, may operate mobile food vending equipment and
sell, vend or serve members of the general public only on the
property on which they are located.
Section
505.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.125
AO:1091
Section 505.130. Open Signs On Public Right-Of-Way. [CC 1970
§20-32; Ord. No. 4829 §1, 9-24-1991]
Temporary directional signs indicating the location of an open house for
sale shall be restricted to a directional arrow and may include the word
"open". Such signs shall not exceed one and one-half (1½) square feet
Figure 1: Downtown Mobile Food Vending District
3. Any operator of mobile food vending equipment may sell, vend or
serve members of the general public within a City park only with
the permission of the Department of Parks and Recreation.
4. A mobile food vendor shall not vend before 8:00 A.M. or after 11:00
P.M.
5. Appropriate licensing shall be obtained from the Department of
Finance for the operation of all mobile food vending equipment.
Appropriate permits must be obtained from the Department of
Public Works for any mobile food vending equipment located on any
street or sidewalk and from the Department of Parks and
Recreation for any mobile food vending equipment located in any
City park. Any permit may specify the exact location permitted and
may impose reasonable conditions to protect City property and
public health and safety.
6. Any mobile food vending equipment must be approved by the
appropriate public health agency and be configured and operated
in compliance with all requirements of the Fire Safety Code of the
City.
Section
505.125
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
505.130
AO:1092
in area and shall be of professional quality and appearance and shall be
displayed only on Sundays from 12:00 P.M. until 5:00 P.M. There shall be a
maximum of two (2) such separately located directional signs for each open
location. The directional signs shall be located only on the public right-ofway
between the sidewalk and the street curb and only with the consent
of the adjacent property owner. One (1) such sign may be located at the
intersection of a major street and the street leading to the location of the
open house and the other such sign shall be reasonably located to indicate
the location of the open house. No such sign shall be located on any public
street median, public park or other open public areas including, but not
limited to, street islands. All such signs must bear the name or address of
the party responsible for said signs in letters not to exceed two (2) inches in
height.
Section 505.140. Newspaper Boxes Permitted On Sidewalk. [CC
1970 §20-33; CC 1947 §7-14; Ord. No. 4296 §1, 6-14-1983]
Any person may, without a permit, maintain on any sidewalk in the City a
box for the sale or display of newspapers if such box does not exceed in
outside dimensions four (4) feet in height, two (2) feet in depth and five (5)
feet in width, provided not more than two (2) of such boxes shall be placed
within one hundred (100) feet of any other such box and, provided further,
that the location, size and appearance of any such box shall be subject to the
provisions of Article III of Chapter 400 of this Code, Architectural Review
Board, of the Municipal Code of the City.
Section 505.150. Portable On Demand Storage Units (Pods). [Ord.
No. 5828 §1(20-40), 6-23-2004; Ord. No. 5898 §1(20-40), 9-13-2005]
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall mean as
follows:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate building customarily
incidental to and located on the same lot occupied by a main building,
subordinate in area, extent or purposes to the main building, limited
to and contributing to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the
occupants of the main building. For purposes of this Section, an
accessory building differs from a temporary storage device, portable on
demand storage unit and storage shed in that it is constructed pursuant
to a building permit and is permanently affixed to realty.
PODS — An acronym and common name for portable on demand
storage units.
PORTABLE ON DEMAND STORAGE UNIT — A container designed,
constructed and commonly used for non-permanent placement on
property for the purpose of temporary storage of personal property.
STORAGE SHED — A prefabricated structure designed, intended and
installed on property primarily for the long-term storage of yard, pool
and garden equipment and similar personal property.
Section
505.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.150
AO:1093
Section 505.160. Abatement — Submission To Board — Declaration
of Nuisance. [CC 1970 §20-34; CC 1947 §7-22]
Whenever it shall come to the attention of the Director of Public Works
that any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, tree lawn, parkway or public
place which has been dedicated or established according to law is in any
manner obstructed or encroached upon, he/she shall present the matter
to the Board of Aldermen and accompany such notice by a plat showing
the location and extent of such obstruction and encroachment. Any such
encroachment or obstruction is declared to be a nuisance.
Section 505.170. Abatement — Issuance of Order. [CC 1970 §20-35;
CC 1947 §7-23]
The Board of Aldermen upon receiving notice that any such encroachment
or obstruction exists may order the same removed and may instruct the City
Attorney to prepare a written order for the removal of same which order
shall be signed by the Mayor and the City Attorney and directed to the Chief
of Police who shall at once proceed to execute said order.
STORAGE TRAILERS — Includes trucks, trailers, and other vehicles or
parts of vehicles designed to be hitched or attached to trucks, tractors
or other vehicles for movement from place to place used as a temporary
storage device.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place or suffer placement of
a storage trailer, PODS or similar device in or upon any street, highway,
roadway, designated fire lane or sidewalk in the City of Clayton.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place or suffer placement of
a storage trailer, PODS or similar device upon any lot or property in the
City of Clayton other than on a concrete, asphalt or other improved
surface.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place or suffer placement of
a storage trailer, PODS or similar device upon any lot or property in the
City of Clayton used for commercial purposes or containing three (3) or
more dwelling units in such a way as to block or interfere with access to
a garage or off-street parking areas.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place or suffer placement of
a storage trailer, PODS or similar device upon any lot or property in the
City of Clayton for more than seven (7) consecutive days or on more
than three (3) occasions in any twelve (12) month period.
F. This Section shall not apply to the use or placement of construction
trailers and equipment on property in association with ongoing
construction activities carried out pursuant to a valid building permit,
nor to the placement of accessory buildings or storage sheds.
Section
505.150
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
505.180
AO:1094
Section 505.180. Abatement — Personal Service of Notice. [CC 1970
§20-36; CC 1947 §7-24]
Upon receipt of any order so signed, the Chief of Police shall give to the
record owner of the property fronting or abutting upon such encroachment
or obstruction (and also to the occupant, if any be found thereon) at least
five (5) days' notice in writing to the effect that if said encroachment or
obstruction is not removed by the time mentioned in said notice, the same
will be removed by him/her at the cost and expense of said owner and that
a special tax bill will be issued therefor.
Section 505.190. Abatement — Serving Notice On Absent Owners.
[CC 1970 §20-37; CC 1947 §7-25]
If after diligent search and inquiry the Chief of Police is unable to find the
record owner of said property, he/she shall immediately serve such notice
by publication in at least one (1) issue of some newspaper published in
the City and the notice when so published shall be directed to all owners
of said property who are known to the Chief of Police and shall contain
a description of the property belonging to owners who are absent or
unknown.
Section 505.200. Abatement — Performance By City. [CC 1970
§20-38; CC 1947 §7-26]
If upon the expiration of the time mentioned in the notice the obstructions
or encroachments are not removed, the Chief of Police shall proceed to
remove the same and the expense of such removal shall be advanced from
the general revenue of the City.
Section 505.210. Abatement — Collection of Cost. [CC 1970 §20-39;
CC 1947 §7-27]
As soon as the entire expense incident to such notice and removal has been
ascertained, an itemized account of the same shall be filed by the Chief
of Police with the City Clerk and the entire cost thereof shall be assessed
by the Board of Aldermen by ordinance in favor of the City and against
the property fronting or abutting upon such encroachment or obstruction,
pro rata, and special tax bills shall be issued therefor for collection in all
respects as in this Chapter provided in case of sidewalk construction.
Section
505.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.210
AO:1095
Chapter 510
RIGHTS-OF-WAY USAGE CODE
Cross Reference: As to video service providers regulations, ch. 630.
Editor's Note: With the inclusion of Ord. No. 6571, set out in Article II of this
Chapter, the City designated Sections 510.005 through 510.120 as Article I.
Section
505.210
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
505.210
AO:1096
ARTICLE I
Rights-Of-Way Usage Code
Section 510.005. Authority To Charge Certain Fees Retained. [Ord.
No. 6003 §3(A), 12-11-2007]
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the City of Clayton retains
its authority to charge degradation, rental and other fees relating to the
public rights-of-way as such authority existed prior to May 1, 2001 and as
permitted by Section 67.1846, RSMo.
Section 510.010. Title. [CC 1970 §20-50; Ord. No. 5672 §1,
1-22-2002]
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Rights-of-Way Usage
Code.
Section 510.020. Definitions and Word Usage. [CC 1970 §20-51;
Ord. No. 5672 §1, 1-22-2002; Ord. No. 6003 §3(B)(1), 12-11-2007]
Definitions and usage—general. For the purposes of this code, the following
terms, phrases, words and abbreviations shall have the meanings given
herein, unless otherwise expressly stated. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense and vice
versa, words in the plural number include the singular number and vice
versa and the masculine gender includes the feminine gender and vice
versa. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive.
For convenience, the first (1st) letter of terms, phrases, words and
abbreviations defined in this Code or by Federal law have been capitalized,
but an inadvertent failure to capitalize such letter shall not affect meaning.
ANTENNA — A facility consisting of any device, array or antenna of any
kind, including, but not limited to, whip antennas, panel antennas and
satellite antennas, that transmits or receives electromagnetic signals to
deliver microwave, cellular, digital, broadcast or other non-wire voice, data
or video communications services through the airwaves above the rightsof-
way and which attach to either pre-existing or subsequently approved
facilities or structures.
ANTENNA FEE — A compensation fee approved by the Board of Aldermen
and established in the City's pertinent schedule of fees from time to time
for the rent of a portion of the rights-of-way by a person having facilities
within the rights-of-way. The antenna fee shall be calculated on the number
of antennas located within the ROW and shall not include any linear foot
fee, but a ROW user may be subject to both an antenna fee and a linear foot
fee.
APPLICANT — The person applying for and receiving a ROW permit for
ROW work.
APPLICATION — That form which an applicant must use to obtain a ROW
permit to conduct ROW work.
Section
510.005
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.020
AO:1097
BOARD OF ALDERMEN OR BOARD — The Governing Body of the City.
CITY — The City of Clayton, Missouri, and its agencies, departments, agents
and employees acting within their respective areas of authority.
CITY FACILITIES — Any facilities, street light poles, lighting fixtures,
electroliers or other structures or equipment located within the public
rights-of-way and owned by the City.
CITY MANAGER — The Manager of the City or such other person
designated by the City to hear appeals as provided in Section 510.100(B)
hereof.
DEGRADATION — The accelerated depreciation of a portion of the rightsof-
way caused by excavation in or disturbance of any paved portion of
the rights-of-way resulting in the need to repair or maintain such portion
of the rights-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation or
disturbance had not occurred (excluding concrete slabs or curbs which shall
be replaced rather than restored).
DEGRADATION FEE — The fee charged by the City to recover the costs
associated with a decrease in the useful life of any paved rights-of-way
caused by excavation or other disturbance. The degradation fee shall not
apply to concrete slabs or curbs which shall be replaced rather than
restored.
DIRECTOR — The City's Public Works Director or such other person
designated to administer and enforce this code.
EMERGENCY RIGHTS-OF-WAY (OR "ROW") WORK — Includes, but is not
limited to, ROW work made necessary by exigent circumstances to repair,
control, stabilize, rectify or correct an unexpected or unplanned outage, cut,
rupture, leak or any other failure of a facility when such failure results or
could result in danger to the public or a material delay or hindrance to the
provision of service.
FACILITIES — A network or system or any part thereof used for providing or
delivering a service and consisting of one (1) or more lines, pipes, irrigation
systems, wires, cables, fibers, conduit facilities, poles, vaults, pedestals,
boxes, appliances, antennas, transmitters, radios, towers, gates, meters,
appurtenances or other equipment.
GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY — Any County, Township, City, Town, Village,
school district, library district, road district, drainage or levee district,
sewer district, water district, fire district or other municipal corporation,
quasi-municipal corporation or political subdivision of the State or any other
State, any agency or instrumentality of the State or any other State or
the United States and any cooperative district allowed by law acting in a
governmental rather than a proprietary capacity.
LINEAR FOOT FEE — A compensation fee approved by the Board of
Aldermen and established in the City's pertinent schedule of fees from time
to time for the rent of a portion of the rights-of-way by a person having
facilities within the rights-of-way. The linear foot fee shall be calculated on
the length, in linear feet, of the rights-of-way in or on which facilities are
Section
510.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.020
AO:1098
located and shall not include any antenna fee, but a ROW user may be
subject to both a linear foot fee and an antenna fee.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, limited liability corporation or
partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, organization,
corporation or other entity or any lawful successor thereto or transferee
thereof.
PERSON(S) HAVING FACILITIES WITHIN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY — Any
person having ownership or control of facilities located within the rights-ofway.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY OR ROW — Unless otherwise restricted herein, the
surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface
of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive,
bridge, tunnel, parkway, waterway, public easement or sidewalk in which
the City now or hereafter holds any interest, which, consistent with the
purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purpose of
installing and maintaining facilities. "Rights-of-way" shall not include:
RIGHTS-OF-WAY (OR "ROW") PERMIT — A permit granted by the City to a
ROW user for ROW work.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY (OR "ROW") USER — A person performing ROW work
within the rights-of-way. A ROW user shall not include ordinary vehicular or
pedestrian use.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY (OR "ROW") WORK — Action by a ROW user to:
City facilities or the City's property other than ROW, such as City-owned
or operated buildings, parks or other similar property,
1.
Airwaves used for cellular, non-wire telecommunications or broadcast
services,
2.
3. Easements obtained by ROW users on private property,
Railroad rights-of-way or ground used or acquired for railroads, or
facilities owned and used by the City for the transmission of one (1) or
more services.
No reference herein to "rights-of-way" shall be deemed to be a
representation or guarantee by the City that its interest or other right
to control the use of such property is sufficient to permit its use for the
delivery of service.
4.
Install, change, replace, relocate, remove, maintain or repair facilities
within the rights-of-way; or
1.
To conduct work of any kind within or adjacent to the rights-of-way that
results in an excavation, obstruction, disruption, damage or physical
invasion or impact of any kind to the rights-of-way or the use thereof.
2.
Section
510.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.020
AO:1099
SERVICE — Providing or delivering an economic good or an article of
commerce including, but not limited to, gas, telephone, cable television,
Internet, open video systems, video services, alarm systems, steam,
electricity, water, telegraph, data transmission, petroleum pipelines,
sanitary or storm water sewerage or any similar or related service, to one
(1) or more persons located within or outside of the City by use of facilities
located within the rights-of-way.
WIRELESS TRANSMISSION PROVIDER — A person having facilities within
the rights-of-way, which such facilities consist primarily of antennas,
transmitters, towers or other appliances or equipment used to deliver
cellular, broadcast, data transmission or other non-wire communications
service through the airwaves above the rights-of-way and which attach to
either pre-existing or subsequently approved facilities or structures.
WITHIN RIGHTS-OF-WAY — In, along, under, over or across rights-of-way.
Section 510.030. Registration of Person(s) Having Facilities Within
The Row. [CC 1970 §20-52; Ord. No. 5672 §1, 1-22-2002]
The routine inspection of facilities shall not be considered ROW work
unless the inspection requires the conduct of any of the activities or
actions noted herein.
A. Registration Required.
1. Any person desiring to become a person having facilities within the
ROW and any person having facilities within the ROW must register
with the City.
2. Any person having or applying for a cable franchise from the City
under the Cable Communications Regulatory Code must register
hereunder. Such a person maintains all rights, privileges and
obligations established by its cable franchise And shall also remain
subject to the Cable Communications Regulatory Code. To the
extent that any term of such person's cable franchise conflicts with
the Rights-of-Way Usage Code, the terms of the cable franchise
shall prevail. To the extent that the Cable Communications
Regulatory Code conflicts with the Rights-Of-Way Usage Code, the
more stringent shall prevail.
3. Any person that provides or intends to provide video programming
by means of an open video system pursuant to certification
approved by the Federal Communications Commission must
register hereunder but shall also remain subject to the applicable
provisions of the Cable Communications Regulatory Code. To the
extent that the Cable Communications Regulatory Code conflicts
with the Rights-Of-Way Usage Code, the more stringent shall
prevail.
4. As of the effective date of this code, any person having facilities
within the ROW pursuant to a duly-issued, lawful and applicable
Section
510.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.030
AO:1100
license or franchise shall register hereunder. Such person
maintains all rights, privileges and obligations established by its
license or franchise. To the extent that any terms of such person's
license or franchise conflicts with the Rights-of-Way Usage Code,
the terms of the license or franchise shall prevail.
B. Effectiveness Of Registration. Registration hereunder by an eligible
person shall remain effective for so long as that person remains eligible,
unless terminated by the person or the City hereunder. Any registration
of an ineligible person shall be void from the date of ineligibility.
C. Registration Characteristics.
1. A valid registration hereunder authorizes the issuance of ROW
permits to the registered person in accordance with this code. It
does not expressly or implicitly authorize ROW work without a
ROW permit or work on private property without owner consent
through eminent domain or otherwise (except for use of compatible
easements pursuant to Federal law) or to use publicly or privately
owned facilities without a separate agreement with the owners.
2. A valid registration hereunder shall not eliminate the need to
obtain any franchise, license or permit for the privilege of
transacting and carrying on a business within the City as may be
generally required by the ordinances and laws of the City other
than this code or for attaching devices to poles or other structures,
whether owned by the City or other person.
3. A valid registration grants no exclusive or vested rights to
occupancy within the rights-of-way other than those granted by this
code or the administration thereof.
4. The right to obtain ROW permits shall be subordinate to any prior
lawful occupancy of the rights-of-way and the City reserves the
right to designate where facilities are to be placed within the
rights-of-way as provided herein to the extent allowed by law.
D. Registered Person Subject To Other Laws.
1. A person required to register shall at all times be subject to and
shall comply with all applicable Federal, State and local laws and
shall at all times be subject to all lawful exercise of the Police
power of the City including, but not limited to, all powers regarding
zoning, supervision of construction, assurance of equal
employment opportunities, control of rights-of-way and consumer
protection.
2. Registration hereunder shall not deprive any person of any rights
or obligations imposed by any previously existing franchise, license
or contract, nor shall it impose any obligations on any such person
additional to those included in any previously existing franchise,
license or contract, except to the extent allowed by law.
Section
510.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.030
AO:1101
Section 510.040. Registration Procedures. [CC 1970 §20-53; Ord.
No. 5672 §1, 1-22-2002]
3. Nothing in this code shall be construed to prohibit the grant or
renewal of any franchise by the City as may be allowed or required
by State or Federal law.
4. Nothing in this code shall be construed or deemed to supersede any
applicable State or Federal law or any applicable regulation issued
by a State or Federal agency including, but not limited to, the State
Public Service Commission and the Federal Communications
Commission. In the event of any conflict between such laws or
regulations and this code, the applicable State or Federal law or
regulation shall apply.
E. Failure To Register. Any person who has not registered within ninety
(90) days of the effective date of this code shall nonetheless be subject
to all requirements of this code, including, but not limited to, its
provisions regarding ROW permits, construction and technical
standards and fees, except as otherwise provided herein. In its
discretion and to the extent allowed by law, the City at any time may:
1. Require such person to register within thirty (30) days of receipt of
a written notice to such person from the City that registration is
required;
2. Require such person to remove its facilities from the rights-of-way
and restore the affected area to a condition satisfactory to the City
within a specific time period;
3. Direct municipal personnel to remove the facilities from the rightsof-
way and restore the affected area to a condition satisfactory to
the City and charge the person the costs therefor, including by
placing a lien on the person's property as provided in connection
with abating nuisances; or
4. Take any other action it is entitled to take under applicable law.
Additionally, such person may also be subject to the imposition of
penalties as provided herein.
F. Registration Exemption. Governmental entities having facilities within
the ROW need not register hereunder, but such entities shall be subject
to Sections 510.050 and 510.060 of this code and such other Sections or
provisions as may be appropriate to their presence in the ROW.
A. Requirements And Processing.
1. Registration shall be accomplished in the form of a letter to the City
filed with the Director.
2. To be valid, the registration letter must be signed by an authorized
representative of the registering person, contain all required
Section
510.030
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.040
AO:1102
information and be accompanied by a filing fee approved by the
Board of Aldermen and established in the City's pertinent schedule
of fees.
3. At any time the City determines a registration letter does not
comply with this code, the City may return it to a point of contact
identified therein with a written explanation of the reason(s) for
such return. Filing fees shall not be refunded. Failure to return a
registration letter shall not validate an incomplete or otherwise
invalid or void registration letter.
B. Contents Of Registration Letter. A registration letter shall contain or be
accompanied by the information required herein. All such information
received by the City shall remain confidential insofar as permitted by
the State Open Meetings Law and other applicable State and Federal
law. The information required shall include:
1. Name, address and legal status of the registering person;
2. Name, title, address, telephone number, e-mail address and fax
number of individual(s) authorized to serve as the point of contact
between the City and the registering person so as to make contact
possible at any time (i.e., twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7)
days per week);
3. Description of the general uses made or to be made of the facilities
located within the rights-of-way by the registering person, e.g.,
provision of service(s) within or outside of the City, transfer or lease
of facilities (or portion thereof, including bandwidth) to another
person, use of the facilities to transverse the City, construction of
facilities to be used at a later date, etc.;
4. Description of all services provided or to be provided by the
registering person to any person located in the City through
facilities located within the rights-of-way and an explanation of the
registering person's legal qualifications to provide such services,
including copies of supporting documentation such as relevant
certificates or orders from the Federal Communications
Commission, State Secretary of State and/or State Public Service
Commission or pertinent rules or Statutes;
5. Name and address of any and all other persons providing service(s)
to any person located in the City through the registering person's
facilities located within the rights-of-way and a general description
of such service(s); and
6. Current certificates of insurance in accordance with this code.
C. Notice Of Change. Within thirty (30) days of any changes in the
information set forth in or accompanying its registration letter, a
registered person shall notify the City of any such change. Such notices
shall be submitted and processed in the same manner as an initial
Section
510.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.040
AO:1103
Section 510.050. Rights-Of-Way ("ROW") Permits. [CC 1970 §20-54;
Ord. No. 5672 §1, 1-22-2002; Ord. No. 6003 §3(B)(2—4),
12-11-2007]
registration, except the filing fee established in Section 510.040(A)(2)
shall not be required.
D. Registration Index. The Director shall maintain an index of all
registered persons and their point(s) of contact.
E. Termination Of Registration.
1. The City shall have the right to terminate a registration for a
substantial and ongoing failure to comply with this code or other
applicable law or for defrauding or attempting to defraud the City.
To invoke the provisions of this Section, the City Manager shall give
the person written notice of such intent. If, within thirty (30)
calendar days following such written notice from the City, the
person has not completed corrective action or corrective action is
not being actively and expeditiously pursued to the satisfaction of
the City Manager, the City Manager may commence a proceeding
to consider terminating the person's registration giving written
notice of the reasons therefor.
2. Prior to terminating a registration, the City Manager shall hold a
hearing, after giving at least ten (10) calendar days' notice to the
person, at which time the person shall be given an opportunity to
be heard. Following the hearing, the City Manager may determine
whether to terminate the registration based on the information
presented at the hearing and other information of record. If the
City Manager determines to terminate a registration, the decision
shall be in writing setting forth the reasons therefor. The City
Manager may make such decision conditional on a person's failure
to resolve outstanding problems or take appropriate steps to
resolve such problems within a specific period of time. A copy of
such decision shall be provided to the person.
3. Once a registration has been terminated by the City Manager, the
person may not register again except upon express written
approval by the City Manager, which approval shall be withheld
absent clear and convincing evidence that the person has remedied
all previous violations and is in full compliance with all laws and
will not in the future violate this code or defraud the City.
A. ROW Permit Requirements.
1. Any person desiring to perform ROW work must first apply for and
obtain a ROW permit in addition to any other building permit,
license, easement, franchise or authorization required by law. In
the event of a need for emergency ROW work, the person
conducting the work shall as soon as practicable notify the City of
Section
510.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.050
AO:1104
the location of the work and shall apply for the required ROW
permit as soon as practicable following the commencement of the
work, not to exceed the third (3rd) business day thereafter. The
Director may design and issue general permits for emergency ROW
work for several different locations or throughout the City.
2. No person desiring to become a person having facilities within the
ROW and no person having facilities within the ROW, who has
failed to register with the City, shall be granted a ROW permit,
except as otherwise provided or allowed by ordinance, franchise,
license or written contract with the City.
3. All applications for ROW permits shall be submitted to the Director.
The Director may design and make available standard forms for
such applications, requiring such information as allowed by law
and as the Director determines in his/her discretion to be necessary
and consistent with the provisions of this code and to accomplish
the purposes of this code. Each application shall at minimum
contain the following information for the proposed ROW work,
unless otherwise waived by the Director:
a. The name, address and telephone number of a representative
whom the City may notify or contact at any time (i.e., twentyfour
(24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week) concerning
the work;
b. If different from the applicant, the name of the person on
whose behalf the proposed work is to be performed;
c. A description of the proposed work, including a conceptual
master plan and, when applicable, an engineering site plan or
other technical drawing showing the nature, dimensions and
location of the applicant's proposed work and facilities, their
proximity to other facilities that may be affected by the
proposed work and the number of street crossings and their
locations and dimensions, if applicable;
d. Projected commencement and termination dates and
anticipated duration of the work or, if such dates are unknown,
a representation that the applicant shall provide the Director
with reasonable advance notice of such dates once they are
determined;
e. If the applicant is, or is acting on behalf of, a person having
facilities within the ROW or a person desiring to become a
person having facilities within the ROW, verification that the
applicant or such person has registered with the City and that
the information included in that registration is accurate as of
the date of the application;
f. Copies of any required certificates of insurance or
performance/maintenance bonds; and
Section
510.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.050
AO:1105
g. For wireless transmission providers:
(1) Technical information, including:
(a) A detailed description of the physical dimensions and
appearance of the proposed facilities;
(b) The chemical composition of any battery contained
within the proposed facilities;
(c) Any hazardous material contained within the proposed
facilities;
(d) The potential for interference with the facilities of
other wireless transmission providers;
(e) The potential for exposure to electromagnetic fields;
and
(f) Such other information as may be reasonably required
by the Director and consistent with Section
510.050(B)(4) hereof.
(2) Certification, by a duly authorized representative of any
person owning a facility, utility pole or other structure
within the ROW upon which the applicant's facility is to be
attached or secured, that:
(a) The applicant has permission from such person to
install the facility;
(b) The person is not in default of any franchise, license or
other agreement with the City; and
(c) The person is not in substantial violation of any
provision of this code.
4. The information required by the application may be submitted in
the form maintained by the applicant, provided it is responsive to
the application's requirements and the applicant shall be allowed a
reasonable amount of time to complete the application based on
the amount of data or information requested or required.
5. Each such application shall be accompanied by the following
payments:
a. An application fee, as approved by the Board of Aldermen and
established in the City's pertinent schedule of fees, to cover the
cost of processing the application;
b. Any applicable degradation fee, as approved by the Board of
Aldermen and established in the City's pertinent schedule of
fees, but the Director may waive the degradation fee for any
excavation in the rights-of-way undertaken within twelve (12)
Section
510.050
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.050
AO:1106
calendar months immediately preceding the scheduled
improvement or reconstruction of such rights-of-way; and
c. Any other amounts otherwise due to the City from the
applicant including, but not limited to, prior delinquent permit
fees and costs, delinquent rental fees and any loss, damage or
expense suffered by the City because of the applicant's prior
excavations of the rights-of-way or for any emergency actions
taken by the City, but the Director may modify this requirement
to the extent the Director determines any such fees to be in
good faith dispute or beyond the ability of the applicant to
control.
B. ROW Permit Application Review And Determination.
1. The Director shall promptly review each completed application for
a ROW permit and shall grant or deny all such applications as
provided herein within thirty-one (31) days of receipt of a
completed application. Unless the application is denied pursuant to
paragraph (B)(8) hereof, the Director shall issue a ROW permit
upon determining that the applicant:
a. Has submitted all necessary information;
b. Has paid the appropriate fees; and
c. Is in full compliance with this code and all other City
ordinances.
In order to avoid excessive processing and accounting
costs to either the City or the applicant, the Director
shall have authority to establish procedures for bulk
processing of applications and periodic payment of
fees.
2. It is the intention of the City that interference with, damage to,
excavation or disruption of, or the placement of facilities within the
City's rights-of-way should be minimized and limited in scope to the
extent allowed by law to achieve the purposes of this code. When
reasonable and necessary to accomplish such purposes, the
Director may require as alternatives to the proposed ROW work
either less disruptive methods or different locations for facilities,
provided that any required alternative:
a. Shall not increase expenses by more than ten percent (10%) of
the applicant's costs for the work as proposed,
b. Shall not result in a decline of service quality, and
c. Shall be competitively neutral and non-discriminatory.
The Director shall justify to the applicant that the
required alternative is reasonable and necessary.
Section
510.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.050
AO:1107
3. Upon receipt of an application, the Director shall determine
whether any portion of the rights-of-way will be affected by the
proposed work and whether the interference, disruption, or
placement of facilities will be more than minor in nature. In
determining whether the proposed work is more than minor in
nature, the Director shall consider the nature and scope of the
work, its location and duration, and its effect on the rights-of-way,
the use thereof, and neighboring properties.
a. If the applicant can show to the Director's reasonable
satisfaction that the work involves no interference, disruption,
excavation or damage to, or only minor interference with, the
rights-of-way, or that the work does not involve the placement
of facilities or involves time-sensitive maintenance, then the
Director shall promptly grant the ROW permit.
b. If the Director determines that the effect on the rights-of-way
will be more than minor in nature and no exemption under the
above Subsection (B)(3)(a) or any other provision of this code
applies, the Director shall schedule and coordinate the work
and grant the ROW permit accordingly. When reasonable and
necessary to accomplish the purposes of this code, the Director
may postpone issuance of a ROW permit and may give public
notice of the application in an attempt to identify whether
other person(s) intend to do work in the same area within a
reasonable period of time, so that all ROW work in the area can
be coordinated. Due regard shall be accorded applicants that
are required by any law, rule, regulation, license or franchise
to provide service to the area defined in the application. The
Director shall not impose any coordination or scheduling
requirements that prevent or unreasonably delay an
applicant's access to the ROW or that create a barrier to entry.
c. Applicants shall participate in any joint planning, construction
and advance notification of such work, including coordination
and consolidation of any excavation of or disturbance to the
rights-of-way as directed by the Director. When deemed
necessary to accomplish the goals of this Section and to the
extent permitted by law, the City reserves the right, when
feasible and reasonable, to require the sharing of facilities by
ROW users. Applicants shall cooperate with each other and
other ROW users and the City for the best, most efficient, least
intrusive, most aesthetic, and least obtrusive use of the rightsof-
way.
d. The Director shall establish procedures allowing applicants to
ascertain whether existing capacity may be available from
other persons utilizing the rights-of-way along the intended
path of any proposed work. The Director shall also maintain
indexes of all ROW permits issued, both by the ROW user and
by the affected rights-of-way.
Section
510.050
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.050
AO:1108
4. In addition to the foregoing and in addition to any other standards
or requirements imposed by this code with regard to an application
filed by a wireless transmission provider, the Director shall ensure
compliance with the following provisions:
a. The design, location and nature of all facilities shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Director as provided herein.
Such review shall be non-discriminatory and competitively
neutral and approvals shall not be unreasonably withheld.
b. Facilities shall be a neutral color and shall not be bright,
reflective or metallic. Black, gray and tan shall be considered
neutral colors, as shall any color that blends with the
surrounding dominant color and helps to camouflage the
proposed equipment. Facilities shall be located in such a
manner as to reduce or eliminate their visibility. Screening may
be appropriate and any screening materials shall be
maintained and replaced as needed.
c. Facilities shall comply with the regulations established in
Article XXVI of Chapter 405 of the Municipal Code, being the
City's zoning ordinance, to the extent such regulations
reasonably apply. If the facilities consist of or require a tower,
otherwise defined as an antenna support structure in said
Article XXVI of Chapter 405, then the applicant shall obtain a
special antenna permit as provided in Sections 405.3730 of
said Article.
d. The Director may designate certain locations or facilities in the
ROW to be excluded from use by the applicant for its facilities
including, but not limited to:
(1) Ornamental or similar specially designed street lights,
(2) Designated historic areas,
(3) Facilities, equipment, structures or locations that do not
have electrical service adequate or appropriate for the
proposed facilities or cannot safely bear the weight or
wind loading thereof,
(4) Facilities, equipment, structures or locations that in the
reasonable judgment of the Director are incompatible with
the proposed facilities or would be rendered unsafe or
unstable by the installation, and
(5) Facilities, equipment, structures or locations that have
been designated or planned for other use or are not
otherwise available for use by the applicant due to
engineering, technological, proprietary, legal or other
limitations or restrictions.
Section
510.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.050
AO:1109
e. If the application of this Section 510.050(B)(4) excludes
locations for facilities to the extent that the exclusion conflicts
with the reasonable requirements of the applicant, the
Director shall cooperate in good faith with the applicant to
attempt to find suitable alternatives, but such alternatives may
exceed the cost increase limitation established by Section
510.050(B)(2) and the City shall not be required to incur any
financial cost or to acquire new locations for the applicant.
f. The grant of a ROW permit shall not eliminate the need of a
wireless transmission provider to have obtained a license,
permit or other agreement for attaching facilities to other
facilities, poles or other structures, whether owned by the City
or other person.
g. Nothing in this code shall be construed to require that the City
grant wireless transmission providers access to any City
facilities or the City's proprietary property, but the City may
enter into separate agreements with wireless transmission
providers to allow such access. Such agreements may include
the payment of reasonable attachment fees for use of City
facilities or other City property. All such agreements shall be
non-discriminatory and competitively neutral among wireless
transmission providers.
5. Each ROW permit shall include:
a. Projected commencement and termination dates or, if such
dates are unknown at the time the ROW permit is issued, a
provision requiring the ROW user to provide the Director with
reasonable advance notice of such dates once they are
determined;
b. Length of affected rights-of-way, number of road crossings and
identification and description of any pavement or curb cuts
included in the work, if applicable;
c. Information regarding scheduling and coordination of work, if
necessary;
d. The location of any of the applicant's facilities, both those
proposed and existing, and the location of any known facilities
owned by another person that may be affected by the proposed
work;
e. An acknowledgement and representation by the applicant to
comply with the terms and conditions of the ROW permit and
this code; and
f. Such conditions and requirements as are deemed reasonably
necessary by the Director:
Section
510.050
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.050
AO:1110
(1) To protect structures and other facilities in the rights-ofway
from damage;
(2) For the proper restoration of such rights-of-way, structures
and facilities;
(3) For the protection of the public and the continuity of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and
(4) For the protection of the public health, safety and welfare,
including any conditions or requirements resulting from
the application of Section 510.050(B)(4) hereof.
6. An applicant receiving a ROW permit shall promptly notify the
Director of any material changes in the information submitted in
the application. The Director may issue a revised ROW permit or
require that the ROW user reapply for a ROW permit in accordance
with all requirements of this code.
7. ROW permits inure to the benefit of the applicant and the rights
granted thereunder may not be assigned or transferred to any
other person without the written consent of the Director.
8. The Director may deny an application, if denial is deemed to be in
the public interest, for the following reasons:
a. Delinquent fees, costs or expenses owed by the applicant;
b. Failure to provide information required by the application or
this code;
c. The applicant being in violation of the provisions of this code or
other pertinent and applicable City ordinances;
d. Failure to return the ROW to its previous condition under
previously issued ROW permits or after prior excavations by
the applicant;
e. For reasons of environmental, historic or cultural sensitivity, as
defined by applicable Federal, State or local law, of land within
the scope of the application;
f. For an applicant's refusal to comply with alternative ROW work
methods or locations required by the Director pursuant to
Section 510.050(B)(2) hereof; and
g. For any other reason to protect the public health, safety and
welfare, provided that:
(1) Such denial does not fall within the exclusive authority of
the State Public Service Commission;
(2) Such denial does not interfere with a ROW user's right of
eminent domain of private property; and
Section
510.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.050
AO:1111
(3) Such denial shall be imposed on a competitively neutral
and non-discriminatory basis.
9. For the purposes of Section 510.050(B)(7), the term "applicant"
shall also include, when applicable, the person on whose behalf the
applicant is to perform the ROW work. The Director may consider
good faith disputes with, or circumstances beyond the control of,
the applicant or such person in determining whether to grant or
deny the application.
C. ROW Permit Revocation And Code Violation Prosecution.
1. The Director may revoke a ROW permit without fee refund after
notice and an opportunity to cure, but only in the event of a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of the ROW permit.
Prior to revocation the Director shall provide written notice to the
ROW user identifying any substantial breach and allowing a
reasonable period of time not longer than thirty (30) days to cure
the problem, which cure period may be immediate if certain
activities must be stopped to protect the public safety. The cure
period shall be extended by the Director on good cause shown by
the ROW user. A substantial breach includes, but is not limited to,
the following:
a. A material violation of a provision of the ROW permit;
b. An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the
ROW permit or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any
fraud or deceit upon the City or its residents;
c. A material misrepresentation of fact in the ROW permit
application;
d. A failure to complete ROW work by the date specified in the
ROW permit, unless an extension is obtained or unless the
failure to complete the work is due to reasons beyond the ROW
user's control; and
e. A failure to correct, upon reasonable notice and opportunity to
cure as specified by the Director, work that does not conform to
applicable national safety codes, industry construction
standards or the City's pertinent and applicable ordinances,
including, but not limited to, this code, provided that City
standards are no more stringent than those of a national safety
code.
2. Any breach of the terms and conditions of a ROW permit shall also
be deemed a violation of this code and in lieu of revocation the
Director may initiate prosecution of the ROW user for such
violation as provided in Section 510.090(H) hereof.
Section
510.050
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.060
AO:1112
Section 510.060. Work in The Rights-Of-Way. [CC 1970 §20-55; Ord.
No. 5672 §1, 1-22-2002; Ord. No. 6003 §3(B)(5)(7), 12-11-2007]
A. Jurisdiction, Inspection And Stop Work Orders.
1. All facilities and ROW work shall be subject to inspection by the
City and the supervision of all Federal, State and local authorities
having jurisdiction in such matters to ensure compliance with all
applicable laws, ordinances, departmental rules and regulations
and the ROW permit.
2. The Director shall have full access to all portions of the ROW work
and may issue stop work orders and corrective orders to prevent
substandard or unauthorized work as established in Subsection (F)
hereof. Such orders:
a. May be delivered personally or by certified mail to the address
listed on the application for the ROW permit, the person in
charge of the construction site at the time of delivery or the
registered person's point of contact;
b. Shall state that substandard work or work not authorized by
the ROW permit is being carried out, summarize the
substandard or unauthorized work and provide a period of not
longer than thirty (30) days to cure the problem, which cure
period may be immediate if certain activities must be stopped
to protect the public safety; and
c. May be enforced by equitable action in the Circuit Court of the
County and in such case the person involved in the work shall
be liable for all costs and expenses incurred by the City in
enforcing such orders, including reasonable attorney's fees in
addition to any and all penalties established in this code.
B. Installation Of Facilities.
1. In conjunction with the City's long-standing policy favoring
underground construction, no person may erect, construct or
install new poles or other facilities above the surface of the rightsof-
way without the written permission of the City. Such permission
may be granted through a ROW permit when other similar facilities
exist above ground or when physical conditions are such that
underground construction is impossible, impractical or
economically unfeasible, as determined by the City and when in the
City's judgment the above ground construction has minimal
aesthetic impact on the area where the construction is proposed.
2. During installation of facilities and to the extent authorized by law,
existing underground conduits shall be used whenever feasible and
permitted by the owner thereof.
Section
510.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.060
AO:1113
3. In the case of new construction or property development, the
developer or property owner shall give to all persons registered
hereunder reasonable written advance notice of the particular date
on which open trenching will be available for installation of
facilities. Costs of trenching and easements required to bring
facilities within the development shall be borne by the developer or
property owner; except that if the facilities are not installed within
five (5) working days of the date the trenches are available as
designated in the notice given by the developer or property owner,
then once the trenches are thereafter closed, the cost of new
trenching shall be borne by the person installing the facilities.
C. Relocation Of Equipment And Facilities.
1. In the event of an emergency or where construction equipment or
facilities create or are contributing to an imminent danger to
health, safety or property, the City may, to the extent allowed by
law, remove, relay or relocate such construction equipment or the
pertinent parts of such facilities without charge to the City for such
action or for restoration or repair. The City shall attempt to notify
the owner of the construction equipment or facilities prior to taking
such action, but the inability to do so shall not prevent same.
Thereafter, the City shall notify the owner of the construction
equipment or facilities as soon as practicable.
2. Should the grades or boundaries of the rights-of-way be changed at
any time, a ROW user shall, if necessary, at its own cost and
expense, relocate or change its facilities so as to conform with the
new grades or boundaries. This requirement shall not apply when
the ROW user holds a valid easement that existed prior to the date
when the area in question became rights-of-way. The ROW user
shall bear the burden of establishing to the City's satisfaction the
fact of the pre-existing easement.
3. At the City's direction, all facilities shall be moved underground
and the cost shall be solely the obligation of the owners (or as
otherwise allowed or required by law).
4. Any ROW user shall, on the request of the City or any person
authorized by the City, temporarily relocate facilities to permit the
moving of buildings or oversized vehicles.
5. Any ROW user shall, within a reasonable time specified by the City,
protect, support, disconnect, relocate or remove, at its own
expense, construction equipment or discrete portions of its
facilities when required by the City by reason of traffic conditions;
public safety; rights-of-way construction, maintenance or repair
(including resurfacing or widening); change of rights-of-way grade;
construction, installation or repair of sewers, drains, water pipes,
power lines, signal lines, tracks or any type of government-owned
communications system, public work or improvement or any
Section
510.060
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.060
AO:1114
government-owned utility; rights-of-way vacation; or for any other
purpose where the convenience of the City would be reasonably
served thereby.
6. If any action under paragraphs (4) or (5) is reasonably required of a
ROW user to accommodate a person or another ROW user, the
ROW user shall, after reasonable advance written notice, take
action to effect the necessary actions requested and the actual cost,
reasonably incurred, of such actions shall be paid by the person or
ROW user upon whose behalf the action is requested. The ROW
user taking such action shall have the authority to require such
payment in advance.
7. Rather than relocate facilities as requested or directed, a ROW
user may abandon the facilities if approved by the City as provided
in Subsection (E) hereof.
8. No action hereunder shall be deemed a taking of property and no
person shall be entitled to any compensation therefor. No location
of any facilities within the rights-of-way shall be a vested interest.
D. Property Repair And Alterations.
1. During any ROW work, the person doing the work shall protect
from damage any and all existing structures and property
belonging to the City and any other person. Any and all rights-ofway,
public property or private property disturbed or damaged
during the work shall be repaired or replaced by the person doing
the work or the person on whose behalf the work is being done and
such person shall immediately notify the owner of the fact of the
damaged property. Such repair or replacement shall be completed
within a reasonable time specified by the Director and to the
Director's satisfaction.
2. Any alteration to the existing water mains, sewerage or drainage
system or to any City, State or other public structures or facilities in
the rights-of-way required on account of the construction,
installation, repair or maintenance of facilities within the rights-ofway
shall be made at the sole cost and expense of the owner of such
facilities.
E. Removal, Abandonment And Transfer Of Facilities.
1. If a registration is terminated, the City may require that the person
having facilities within the ROW remove its facilities from the
rights-of-way at the person's expense. In removing its facilities the
person shall obtain a ROW permit and restore any excavation that
shall be made by it as required by this code. The liability, indemnity,
insurance and bonding requirements as provided herein shall
continue in full force and effect during and after the period of
removal and restoration and until full compliance by the person
Section
510.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.060
AO:1115
with the terms and conditions of this paragraph and the
requirements of this code.
2. If the person having facilities within the ROW fails to remove the
facilities and restore the ROW within a reasonable period of time,
the City may, to the extent permitted by law, have the removal done
at the person's expense.
a. Alternatively, the City may permit the abandonment, without
removal, of any facilities if the Director determines that
abandonment will not result in interference with the use or
maintenance of the rights-of-way or if ownership of the
facilities is transferred as provided herein.
b. The City may decide that the ownership of the facilities shall
revert to the City or to such person as directed by the City. In
either case the owner of the facilities, if required by the City
and permitted by law, shall submit a written instrument,
satisfactory in form to the City, transferring to the City, or to
such person as directed by the City, ownership of the facilities.
The City may sell, assign or transfer all or part of the facilities
reverting to the City.
3. If a person having facilities within the ROW:
a. Discontinues use of any facility for a continuous period of
twelve (12) months;
b. Has installed the facilities without complying with the
requirements of this code; or
c. Declares the facilities abandoned or if such facilities are:
(1) No longer in active use;
(2) No longer capable of being used for the same or similar
purpose for which the facilities were installed; or
(3) Are physically disconnected from any other facility that is
in use or in service, the facilities may be deemed
abandoned.
If such abandonment occurs, the City may require
the removal of the facilities, remove the facilities at
the expense of the person having facilities within
the ROW, allow the abandonment of the facilities
without removal or require the transfer of the
facilities, all as provided in this Subsection (E).
4. The City shall not remove any facilities unless the existence of such
facilities prevents or significantly impairs the use, repair,
excavation or construction of the ROW. The City shall not remove or
seek to possess or transfer the facilities until thirty (30) days have
Section
510.060
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.060
AO:1116
passed following written notice to the person having facilities
within the ROW of the City's intent to so act. The City may choose
not to act on good cause shown by the person having facilities
within the ROW.
F. Standards For ROW Work.
1. Except for emergency ROW work as provided in Section
510.050(A)(1), ROW work shall be performed only upon issuance
and in accordance with the requirements of a ROW permit. At all
times during the work, ROW permits shall be conspicuously
displayed at the work site and shall be available for inspection by
the Director.
2. If at any time it appears that the duration or scope of the ROW work
shall differ from that allowed by the ROW permit, the ROW user
shall inform the Director. The Director may issue a waiver, an
extension or a revised ROW permit or require that the ROW user
reapply for a ROW permit in accordance with all requirements of
this code.
3. ROW users shall not open or encumber more of the rights-of-way
than is reasonably necessary to complete the ROW work in the
most expeditious manner or allow excavations to remain open
longer than is necessary to complete the work.
4. All ROW work that affects vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be
properly signed, barricaded and otherwise protected at the ROW
user's expense. The ROW user shall be responsible for providing
adequate traffic control to the area surrounding the work as
determined by the Director.
5. The ROW user shall perform the ROW work at such times that will
allow the least interference with the normal flow of traffic and the
peace and quiet of the neighborhood, as permitted by the Director.
Unless otherwise provided by the Director in the permit, nonemergency
ROW work on arterial and collector streets may not be
accomplished during the hours of 7:00 A.M. to 8:30 A.M. and 4:00
P.M. to 6:00 P.M. in order to minimize disruption of traffic flow.
6. The ROW user shall notify the City no less than three (3) working
days in advance of any ROW work that would require any street
closure or would reduce traffic flow to less than two (2) lanes of
moving traffic for more than four (4) hours. Except in the event of
emergency ROW work, no such closure shall take place without
notice and prior authorization from the City.
7. All ROW work shall be in accordance with all applicable Sections of
the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, the National
Electrical Safety Code and other Federal, State or local laws and
regulations that may apply including, without limitation, local
health, safety, construction and zoning codes and laws and
Section
510.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.060
AO:1117
accepted industry practices, all as hereafter may be amended or
adopted. In the event of a conflict among codes and standards, the
most stringent code or standard shall apply (except insofar as that
code or standard, if followed, would result in facilities that could
not meet requirements of Federal, State or local law).
8. All facilities shall be installed and located to cause minimum
interference with the rights and convenience of property owners,
other ROW users and the City. Facilities shall not be placed where
they will disrupt or interfere with other facilities or public
improvements or obstruct or hinder in any manner the various
utilities serving the residents and businesses in the City or public
improvements.
9. All facilities shall be of good and durable quality.
10. All ROW work shall be conducted in accordance with good
engineering practices, performed by experienced and properly
trained personnel so as not to endanger any person or property or
to unreasonably interfere in any manner with the rights-of-way, or
legal rights of any property owner, including the City, or
unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
11. All safety practices required by law shall be used during ROW
work, including commonly accepted methods and devices to
prevent failures and accidents that are likely to cause damage,
injury or nuisance to the public.
12. Any contractor or subcontractor of a ROW user must be properly
licensed under laws of the State and all applicable local ordinances
and each contractor or subcontractor shall have the same
obligations with respect to its work as a ROW user would have
pursuant to this code. A ROW user:
a. Must ensure that contractors, subcontractors and all
employees performing ROW work are trained and experienced;
b. Shall be responsible for ensuring that all work is performed
consistent with the ROW permit and applicable law;
c. Shall be fully responsible for all acts or omissions of
contractors or subcontractors;
d. Shall be responsible for promptly correcting acts or omissions
by any contractor or subcontractor; and
e. Shall implement a quality control program to ensure that the
work is properly performed.
13. A ROW user shall not place or cause to be placed any sort of signs,
advertisements or other extraneous markings on the facilities or in
the ROW, whether relating to the ROW user or any other person,
except such necessary minimal markings approved by the City as
Section
510.060
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.060
AO:1118
necessary to identify the facilities for service, repair, maintenance
or emergency purposes or as may be otherwise required to be
affixed by applicable law or regulation.
14. Unless otherwise approved in writing by the City, a ROW user shall
not remove, cut or damage any trees or their roots within the ROW.
15. Street crossings will be bored at the direction of the Director.
16. Above ground facilities shall be a neutral color and shall not be
bright, reflective or metallic. Black, gray and tan shall be
considered neutral colors, as shall any color that blends with the
surrounding dominant color and helps to camouflage the facilities.
Facilities shall be located in such a manner as to reduce or
eliminate their visibility. A sightproof landscape screen may be
required for any authorized above ground facilities taller than
three (3) feet in height or covering in excess of four (4) square feet
in size. Such screening shall be sufficient to reasonably conceal the
facility. A landscape plan identifying the size and species of
landscaping materials shall be approved by the Director prior to
installation of any facility requiring landscape screening. The
person having facilities within the ROW shall be responsible for the
installation, repair or replacement of screening materials.
Alternative screening or concealment may be approved by the
Director to the extent it meets or exceeds the purposes of these
requirements.
17. Above ground facilities shall be constructed and maintained in such
a manner so as not to emit any unnecessary or intrusive noise and
shall comply with all other applicable regulations and standards
established by the City or State or Federal law.
18. If the application of this Subsection excludes locations for above
ground facilities, to the extent that the exclusion conflicts with the
reasonable requirements of the applicant, the Director shall
cooperate in good faith with the applicant to attempt to find
suitable alternatives, but such alternatives may exceed the cost
increase limitation established by Section 510.050(B)(2), and the
City shall not be required to incur any financial cost or to acquire
new locations for the applicant.
G. Restoring And Maintaining The Rights-Of-Way.
1. To complete any ROW work the ROW user shall restore the ROW
and surrounding areas, including, but not limited to, any pavement,
foundation, concrete slabs or curbs, in accordance with the
standards of Subsection (F) hereof and the reasonable conditions of
the Director. Restoration of the ROW shall be completed within the
dates specified in the ROW permit unless the Director issues a
waiver, extension or a new or revised ROW permit.
Section
510.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.060
AO:1119
2. If a ROW user fails to restore the ROW within the date specified
either by the ROW permit or any extension thereof as granted by
the Director, the City may perform its own restoration. The City
may also opt to perform its own restoration regardless of any
failure by the ROW user, in which case the ROW permit, or any
amendment or revision thereto, shall note such option. In either
event, if the City performs the restoration, the ROW user shall be
responsible for reimbursing the City's reasonable actual
restoration costs within thirty (30) days of invoice.
3. Every ROW user to whom a ROW permit has been granted shall
guarantee for a period of four (4) years the restoration of the ROW
in the area where the ROW user conducted excavation and
performed the restoration. During this period the ROW user shall,
upon notification from the Director, correct all restoration work to
the extent necessary as required by the Director. Said work shall be
completed within a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30)
calendar days from receipt of the Director's notice unless otherwise
permitted by the Director. If a ROW user fails to restore the ROW
within the time specified, the City may perform the work and the
ROW user shall be responsible for reimbursing the City's
reasonable actual restoration costs within thirty (30) days of
invoice. The Director may extend the cure period on good cause
shown.
4. A ROW user shall not be relieved of the obligation to complete the
necessary right-of-way restoration and maintenance because of
payment of a degradation fee or the existence of a performance
bond pursuant to Subsection (I) hereof.
H. Mapping Requirements. After the completion of ROW work the ROW
user shall provide to the City as-built drawings, maps or other
comparable records as determined by the Director, drawn to scale and
certified to the City as reasonably depicting the location of all facilities
constructed pursuant to the ROW permit. Such records may be
provided to the Director in the form maintained by the ROW user, but
when available to the ROW user, shall be submitted in AUTOCAD.DXF,
AUTOCAD.DWG, MICROSTATION.DGN (or comparable as allowed by
the Director) automated formats or in hard copy otherwise.
I. Performance And Maintenance Bonds.
1. Prior to any ROW work a ROW user shall establish in the City's
favor a performance and maintenance bond in an amount to be
determined by the Director to ensure the restoration of the rightsof-
way. The bond shall continue in full force and effect for a period
of twenty-four (24) months following completion of the work. The
Director shall have the authority to extend the maintenance bond
period for up to an additional twenty-four (24) months in the same
manner as provided in Section 510.060(G)(3) hereof. The Director
may waive this requirement when the work involves no or only
Section
510.060
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.060
AO:1120
minor disruption or damage to the rights-of-way. The Director shall
waive this requirement when the ROW user has twenty-five million
dollars ($25,000,000.00) in net assets and does not have a history
of non-compliance with the provisions of this code.
2. In the event a ROW user fails to complete the ROW work in a safe,
timely and competent manner or if the completed restorative work
fails within the time period for the bond (as determined by the
Director), then after notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure
there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal
and surety of the bond any damages or loss suffered by the City as a
result, including the full amount of any compensation,
indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment of any property
of the ROW user and the cost of completing work within or
restoring the rights-of-way, plus a reasonable allowance for
attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the bond. The City may also
recover against the bond any amount recoverable against a
security fund or letter of credit where such amount exceeds that
available under a security fund or letter of credit.
3. Upon completion of ROW work to the satisfaction of the Director
and upon lapse of the bond period, including any extension by the
Director, the City shall eliminate the bond.
4. The bond shall be issued by a surety with an "A" or better rating of
insurance in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition,
shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney and shall
contain the following endorsement:
"This bond may not be canceled or allowed to lapse
until sixty (60) days after receipt by the City, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written
notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or
not to renew."
5. In lieu of the bond required herein, the ROW user may establish in
the City's favor such other security as the Director may determine
to be commensurate with the noted bonding requirements
including, but not limited to, an annual bond to be maintained in
the minimum amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
J. Miscellaneous.
1. Upon failure of a ROW user to commence, pursue or complete any
ROW work required by law or by the provisions of this code to be
done in any street within the time prescribed and to the reasonable
satisfaction of the City, the City may, at its option, after thirty (30)
days' notice, cause such work to be done and the ROW user shall
pay to the City the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by
the City to the ROW user within thirty (30) days after receipt of
such itemized report.
Section
510.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.060
AO:1121
Section 510.070. Open Books and Records. [CC 1970 §20-56; Ord.
No. 5672 §1, 1-22-2002; Ord. No. 6003 §3(B)(7), 12-11-2007]
2. Upon ten (10) days' written notice and with the supervision of the
City or as otherwise provided by law, a ROW user shall have the
authority to trim trees that overhang rights-of-way of the City so as
to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with
its facilities, at its own expense, subject to the supervision and
direction of the City. Nothing in this paragraph shall authorize the
trimming of trees on private property without permission of the
property owner. All cut materials shall be properly disposed.
3. During ROW work by a ROW user the City shall have the right to
install and to thereafter maintain at its own cost in any excavation
to or other applicable disturbance of the ROW any parallel facilities
of its own that do not unreasonably interfere with the operations of
other facilities.
4. Nothing in this code shall be in preference or hindrance to the right
of the City and any board, authority, commission or public service
corporation of the City to use or occupy the rights-of-way or to
perform or carry on any public works or public improvements of
any description.
A. Persons subject to rental fees as provided in Section 510.080 hereof
shall maintain sufficient records to document accurate payment of such
rental fees including, but not limited to, such plans, records or maps
showing the approximate location and length of all facilities located
within the rights-of-way.
B. The City shall have the right to inspect at a location in the metropolitan
St. Louis area all records that are reasonably necessary to monitor
compliance with the terms of this code. A person having facilities within
the ROW shall be responsible for collecting and producing such
information and by registering affirms that it will do so.
C. The Director may require provision or retention of additional
information, records and documents from time to time as may be
reasonably necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of the
rights, functions or duties of the City in connection with this code.
D. All records and information referenced herein shall be subject to
inspection and copying by the City, at no cost to the City, to ensure code
compliance. All records and information received by the City shall
remain confidential insofar as permitted by the State Open Meetings
Law and other applicable State and Federal laws. If any records cannot
be copied for security or other reasons, the person having facilities
within the ROW shall nonetheless make such records available for City
inspection and shall reimburse the City for all reasonable costs incurred
by the City in inspecting those records.
Section
510.060
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.070
AO:1122
Section 510.080. Rental Fees. [CC 1970 §20-57; Ord. No. 5672 §1,
1-22-2002]
E. If any records are too voluminous, then the person may request that the
inspection take place at some other location outside the metropolitan
St. Louis area, provided that such person must pay all reasonable travel
expenses incurred by the City in inspecting those records.
A. Finding And Intent. The City finds that rights-of-way are valuable public
property acquired and maintained at great expense to taxpayers. The
City further finds that the grant of permission to locate facilities within
the rights-of-way is a valuable property right and eliminates the need to
invest substantial capital in the private location of such facilities. Any
person that places facilities within the rights-of-way after the effective
date of this code and any person that leaves existing facilities within the
rights-of-way more than ninety (90) days after the effective date of this
code shall be deemed to have agreed to pay rental compensation for
such use of the rights-of-way as established herein. It is the intent of
this Section that the rental fees provided for herein be applied to and be
paid by only those persons having facilities within the rights-of-way.
B. Payment To City.
1. Any person having facilities within the ROW shall pay to the City
annual rent consisting of, depending on the facility, linear foot fees
and antenna fees for the use of the affected rights-of-way for the
applicable facilities.
2. If a person having facilities within the ROW has or is permitted to
install separate facilities within the ROW, then for the purpose of
linear foot fees such separate facilities shall be treated as discrete
facilities, each of which shall be subject to the compensation
requirements of this Section. The term "separate facilities" means
any existing or new facilities under common ownership or control
that occupy different cross-sectional areas within the same linear
portion of the ROW. Separate facilities include any such facilities
that require distinct and separate ROW access for purposes of
installation, change, replacement, relocation, removal,
maintenance or repair.
C. Not A Tax Or In Lieu Of Any Other Tax Or Fee—Credit.
1. The rental fees are not a tax, license or fee subject to any
requirement of voter approval, but rather constitute a charge for
special and individualized use of public property.
2. Rental fees are in addition to all other fees and all taxes and
payments that a person may be required to pay under any Federal,
State or local law or agreement, including any applicable property
and amusement taxes and any payment for attachment fees to
install facilities on City facilities or other City proprietary property.
Section
510.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.080
AO:1123
3. To promote economic development, any person obligated to pay
rental fees shall be granted a credit for all sums paid to the City by
such person for applicable occupational license fees as provided in
Sections 605.240 and 605.250 of the City Code, as amended, or
similar gross receipts taxes or fees up to the amount of the rental
fees. In no event shall such a credit result in a refund from the City.
D. Payments.
1. The rental fees shall be paid quarterly to the City and shall
commence as of the later of the effective date of this code or the
first (1st) day on which a person having facilities within the ROW
places facilities within the rights-of-way. The City shall be furnished
at the time of each payment with a statement certified by the
payer's chief financial officer or comparable officer or by an
independent certified public accountant reflecting the total amount
of rental compensation for the payment period. Payments shall be
made to the City no later than forty-five (45) days following the end
of each calendar quarter.
2. In the event any rental fee or other payment due is not made on or
before the date specified herein, interest charges shall also be due,
computed from such due date, at an annual rate equal to the
commercial prime interest rate of the City's primary depository
bank during the period such unpaid amount is owed plus a penalty
of two percent (2%) of the amount.
E. No Accord Or Satisfaction. No acceptance of any payment by the City
shall be construed as a release or an accord and satisfaction of any
claim the City may have for further or additional sums payable as rental
fees under this code or for the performance of any other obligation.
F. Audit. The City shall have the right to inspect all reasonably necessary
records and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts
determined to be payable under this code. Persons subject to rental fees
hereunder shall be responsible for providing the records to the City at
an office located within the metropolitan St. Louis area except as
provided in Section 510.070(E). Such records shall be maintained for at
least five (5) years. The City's audit expenses shall be borne by the
person audited if the rental fees paid during the audit period are less
than ninety-five percent (95%) of the amount owed according to the
audit. Any additional amounts due to the City as a result of the audit
shall be paid within thirty (30) days following written notice to the
person by the City of the underpayment, which notice shall include a
copy of the audit report. If recomputation results in an additional
amount to be paid to the City, such amount shall be subject to interest
and penalties as specified in Subsection (D)(2) above.
G. Exemption From Rental Fees.
Section
510.080
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.080
AO:1124
Section 510.090. Insurance — Surety — Indemnification —
Penalties. [CC 1970 §20-58; Ord. No. 5672 §1, 1-22-2002; Ord. No.
6003 §3(B)(6)(7), 12-11-2007]
1. Persons having facilities within the ROW pursuant to a duly-issued,
lawful and applicable license or franchise shall be exempt from this
Section for the duration of such license or franchise.
2. Governmental entities having facilities within the ROW shall not be
liable for rental fees, but such entities shall be subject to Sections
510.050 and 510.060 of this code and such other Sections or
provisions as may be appropriate to their presence in the ROW.
A. Insurance Required. All ROW users shall maintain, for the duration of
any ROW work and, when applicable, for as long as the ROW user has
facilities within the rights-of-way, at least the following liability
insurance coverage: [Ord. No. 6572, 12-11-2018]
1. Workers' Compensation and employer liability insurance to meet all
requirements of State law; and
2. Commercial general liability insurance with respect to the
construction, operation, maintenance and presence of the facilities
and the conduct of the ROW user's business in the City in a
sufficient amount to cover the extent to which the City may be
liable under the sovereign immunity limitations pursuant to State
law.
These insurance requirements shall not be construed to limit the liability
of any person.
B. Qualifications Of Sureties. All insurance policies shall be with sureties
qualified to do business in the State with an "A" or better rating of
insurance by Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition and in
a form approved by the City.
C. Policies Available For Review. All insurance policies shall be available
for review by the City and a ROW user having facilities within the
rights-of-way shall keep on file with the City current certificates of
insurance.
D. Additional Insured—Prior Notice Of Policy Cancellation. All general
liability insurance policies shall name the City, its officers, boards,
board members, commissions, commissioners, agents and employees as
additional insured and shall further provide that any cancellation or
reduction in coverage shall not be effective unless thirty (30) days' prior
written notice thereof has been given to the Director. A ROW user shall
not cancel any required insurance policy without submission of proof
that it has obtained alternative insurance that complies with this code.
E. Exemption From Insurance Requirements. The Director may exempt in
writing from the requirements of Sections 510.090(A) through
Section
510.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.090
AO:1125
510.090(D) any self-insured ROW user, provided that the ROW user
demonstrates to the Director's satisfaction that the ROW user's selfinsurance
plan is commensurate with said requirements and that the
ROW user has sufficient resources to meet all potential risks, liabilities
and obligations contemplated by the requirements of this code. The
Director may require a security fund or letter of credit as a condition
to a self-insured's exemption. The Director shall waive this requirement
when the ROW user has twenty-five million dollars (25,000,000.00) in
net assets and does not have a history of non-compliance with the
provisions of this code.
F. Indemnification.
1. Any ROW user granted a ROW permit and any person having
facilities within the rights-of-way, as partial consideration for the
privilege granted, shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify,
hold harmless and defend the City, its officials, boards, board
members, commissions, commissioners, agents and employees
against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings and
judgments for damages or equitable relief arising out of:
a. Any ROW work including, but not limited to, the construction,
maintenance, repair or operation of facilities;
b. Failure to secure consents from landowners; or
c. Any actions taken or omissions made by the person pursuant to
the authority of this code.
2. The foregoing indemnity provisions include, but are not limited to,
the City's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in defending against
any such claim, suit or proceeding prior to the person assuming
such defense. The City shall notify a person of claims and suits
within seven (7) business days of its actual knowledge of the
existence of such claim, suit or proceeding. Once a person assumes
such defense, the City may at its option continue to participate in
the defense at its own expense.
3. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this code,
the City shall not be so indemnified or reimbursed in relation to any
amounts:
a. Attributable to the City's own negligence, willful misconduct,
intentional or criminal acts; or
b. Attributable to the City acting in a proprietary capacity to
deliver service(s) within the City.
G. Relation To Insurance And Indemnity Requirements. Recovery by the
City of any amounts under insurance, a performance bond or otherwise
does not limit a person's duty to indemnify the City in any way; nor shall
such recovery relieve a person of amounts owed to the City or in any
Section
510.090
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.090
AO:1126
Section 510.100. Dispute Resolutions, Appeals and Arbitration. [CC
1970 §20-59; Ord. No. 5672 §1, 1-22-2002]
respect prevent the City from exercising any other right or remedy it
may have.
H. Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this code shall, upon
conviction by the City's Municipal Court, be punished by a fine not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to
exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each
day the violation continues may be charged as a separate offense.
A. Dispute Resolution By The Director. The Director shall make a final
determination as to any matter concerning the grant, denial or
revocation of a ROW permit as provided in this code. On the request of
an applicant or a ROW user and within a reasonable period of time, the
Director also shall make a final determination as to any other issue
relating to the use of the ROW, the imposition of any fee or the
application of any provision of this code, provided however, that this
review shall not apply to matters being prosecuted in court pursuant to
Section 510.060(A)(2)(c) or Section 510.090(H) hereof. Any final
determination of the Director shall be subject to review as provided
herein.
B. Appeals To The City Manager. Any person aggrieved by a final
determination of the Director may appeal in writing to the City
Manager within five (5) business days thereof. The appeal shall assert
specific grounds for review and the City Manager shall render a
decision on the appeal within fifteen (15) business days of its receipt
affirming, reversing or modifying the determination of the Director. The
City Manager may extend this time period for the purpose of any
investigation or hearing deemed necessary. A decision affirming the
Director's determination shall be in writing and supported by findings
establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
C. Chapter 536 Review. Any person aggrieved by the final determination of
the City Manager may file a petition for review pursuant to Chapter
536, RSMo., as amended, in the Circuit Court of the County. Such
petition shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the City Manager's
final determination.
D. Arbitration And Mediation.
1. On agreement of the parties and in addition to any other remedies,
any final decision of the City Manager may be submitted to
mediation or binding arbitration.
2. In the event of mediation, the City Manager and the applicant or
ROW user shall agree to a mediator. The costs and fees of the
mediator shall be borne equally by the parties and each party shall
pay its own costs, disbursements and attorney fees.
Section
510.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.100
AO:1127
Section 510.110. Miscellaneous Provisions. [CC 1970 §20-60; Ord.
No. 5672 §1, 1-22-2002]
3. In the event of arbitration, the City Manager and the applicant or
ROW user shall agree to an arbitrator. The costs and fees of a single
arbitrator shall be borne equally by the parties. If the parties
cannot agree on an arbitrator, the matter shall be resolved by a
three (3) person arbitration panel consisting of one (1) arbitrator
selected by the City Manager, one (1) arbitrator selected by the
applicant or ROW user and one (1) person selected by the other two
(2) arbitrators, in which case each party shall bear the expense of
its own arbitrator and shall jointly and equally bear with the other
party the expense of the third (3rd) arbitrator and of the
arbitration. Each party shall also pay its own costs, disbursements
and attorney fees.
A. Captions. Captions throughout this code are intended solely to facilitate
reading and reference to the Sections and provisions. Such captions
shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this code.
B. Interpretation Of Code. The provisions of this code shall be liberally
construed to promote the public interest.
C. Expense. Any act that a person is required to perform by this code or
other law shall be done at the person's expense, without City
reimbursement, unless expressly provided to the contrary by law.
D. Eminent Domain. Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to
impair or affect, in any way or to any extent, the power of eminent
domain held by the City or any other person.
E. Exclusive Contracts And Anticompetitive Acts Prohibited.
1. Unless otherwise allowed by law, no person shall enter into or
enforce an exclusive contract for the provision of services with any
other person or demand the exclusive right to serve another person
or location as a condition of extending service to that person or
location or any other person or location.
2. No person shall engage in acts that have the purpose or effect of
limiting competition for the provision of services in the City, except
for such actions as are expressly authorized by law.
F. No Recourse Against The City. Without limiting such immunities as the
City or other persons may have under applicable law, no person shall
have any recourse whatsoever against the City or its officials, members,
boards, commissions, agents or employees for any loss, costs, expense,
liability or damage arising out of any action undertaken or not
undertaken pursuant to any provision or requirement of this code or
because of the enforcement of this code or the City's exercise of its
authority pursuant to this code or other applicable law, unless such
recourse is expressly authorized by law.
Section
510.100
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.110
AO:1128
G. Rights And Remedies.
1. The rights and remedies reserved to the City by this code are
cumulative and shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other rights and remedies which the City may have with respect to
the subject matter of this code.
2. The City hereby reserves to itself the right to intervene in any suit,
action or proceeding involving any provision of this code.
3. Specific mention of the materiality of any of the provisions herein is
not intended to be exclusive of any others for the purpose of
determining whether any failure of compliance hereunder is
material and substantial.
4. No course of dealing between any person and the City, or any delay
on the part of the City in exercising any rights hereunder, shall
operate as a waiver of any such rights of the City or acquiescence
in the actions of such person in contravention of such rights except
to the extent expressly waived in writing. No person shall be
relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this
code by reason of any failure of the City to enforce prompt
compliance. Nor shall any inaction by the City be deemed to waive
a provision or render void any provision of this code.
H. Force Majeure. A person shall not be deemed in violation of this code
where performance was hindered by war or riots, civil disturbances,
floods or other natural catastrophes beyond the person's control and a
registration shall not be terminated or a person penalized for such noncompliance,
provided that the person takes prompt and diligent steps to
bring itself back into compliance and to comply as soon as reasonably
possible under the circumstances without unduly endangering the
health, safety and integrity of employees or property or the health,
safety and integrity of the public, rights-of-way, public property or
private property.
I. Public Emergency. In the event of a public emergency or disaster as
determined by the City, a ROW user immediately shall make facilities,
employees and property, as may be reasonably necessary, available for
use by the City or other civil defense or governmental agency
designated by the City for the term of such emergency or disaster for
emergency purposes. In the event of such use, the ROW user shall
waive any claim that such use by the City constitutes a use of eminent
domain, provided that the City shall return use of the facilities,
employees and property to the ROW user promptly after the emergency
or disaster has ended.
J. Calculation Of Time. Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance
or doing of any act, duty, matter or payment is required under this code
and a period of time is prescribed and is fixed herein, the time shall be
computed so as to exclude the day of the act, event or default after
which the designated period of time begins to run and include the last
Section
510.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.110
AO:1129
Section 510.120. Rights-Of-Way Usage Code Fee Schedule. [CC
1970 §20-61; Ord. No. 5672 §2, 1-22-2002; Ord. No. 6572,
12-11-2018]
Fee Code Section Amount
Registration fee § 510.040(A)(2) $50.00
ROW work permit fee § 510.050(A)(5)(a) $100.00
Degradation fee § 510.050(A)(5)(b) (Linear feet of the
perimeter of the cut) x
($1.25)* x (Number of
years to next overlay)
*Public works' estimate of annual cut maintenance cost
Linear foot fee § 515.080(B) $1.90**
Antenna fee § 515.080(B) $100.00***
day of the prescribed or fixed period of time, unless it is a Saturday,
Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the next
day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. If the period
is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal
holidays shall be excluded in the computation. This paragraph shall not
apply in the context of obligations that continue on a daily basis.
K. Severability. If any term, condition, clause, sentence or provision of this
code shall, to any extent, be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the
remainder hereof shall be valid in all other respects and continue to be
effective. In the event of a subsequent change in applicable law so that
the provision which had been held invalid is no longer invalid, said
provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect without further
action by the City and shall thereafter be binding.
Section
510.110
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.120
AO:1130
** This amount shall be adjusted beginning January 1, 2002, and every
two (2) years thereafter to reflect price changes in accordance with
the Consumer Price Index published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics
of the U.S. Department of Labor in accord with this paragraph. The
index number shown for the County titled "all items" and under the
heading of "CPI-U" for the first (1st) half of 2000, which index shall
be the base number and the corresponding index number available
for the year prior to the recalculation date shall be the current index
number. From the quotient thereof, there shall be subtracted the
integer one (1) and any resulting positive number shall be multiplied
by one hundred (100) and then deemed to be the percentage increase
in the cost of living. Said percentage shall then be multiplied by the
previous annual payment rate and the resultant figure shall constitute
the applicable payment rate. No adjustment shall be made to reduce
any applicable payment rate. If the designated Consumer Price Index
is not available for use as the "current index number" for the period
provided, the City Manager shall use another appropriate standard
cost of living index.
*** This amount shall be adjusted beginning January 1, 2004, and every
two (2) years thereafter in the same manner as the linear foot fee as
outlined above.
Section
510.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.120
AO:1131

ARTICLE II
Small Wireless Facility Deployment
Section 510.150. Title And Intent.118 [Ord. No. 6571, 12-11-2018]
This Section shall be known and may be cited as the "Small Wireless
Facility Deployment Code," and it is intended to encourage and streamline
the deployment of small wireless facilities in the City and to help ensure
that robust and dependable wireless radio-based communication services
and networks are available throughout the City, consistent with State and
Federal law including Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121, RSMo., (while in effect)
and Sections 67.1830 to 67.1846, RSMo. The provisions of other Sections
of the Municipal Code and, specifically, Chapter 510 shall apply to small
wireless deployments except to the extent inconsistent with this Article.
Section 510.160. Definitions.119 [Ord. No. 6571, 12-11-2018]
As used in this Section, the following terms shall mean:
ANTENNA — Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.
APPLICABLE CODES — Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or
the City's amendments such codes enacted to prevent physical property
damage or reasonably foreseeable injury to persons to the extent not
inconsistent with Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121, RSMo., (while in effect).
APPLICANT — Any person who submits an application and is a wireless
provider.
APPLICATION — A request submitted by an applicant to the City for a
permit to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless
support structure, or to approve the installation, modification, or
replacement of a utility pole.
AUTHORITY or CITY — The City of Clayton.
AUTHORITY POLE — A utility pole owned, managed, or operated by or on
behalf of the City, but such term shall not include municipal electric utility
distribution poles.
AUTHORITY WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A wireless support
structure owned, managed, or operated by or on behalf of the City.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION — To install, mount, maintain, modify,
operate, or replace small wireless facilities on or immediately adjacent to a
wireless support structure or utility pole, provided that the small wireless
facility antenna is located on the wireless support structure or utility pole.
118. State Law Reference: See Section 67.5110, RSMo.
119. State Law Reference: See Section 67.5111, RSMo.
Section
510.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.160
AO:1133
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — The set of equipment and network
components, including wires, cables, and associated facilities used by a
cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 522(5); a telecommunications
carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 153(51); a provider of information
service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 153(24); or a wireless services
provider; to provide communications services, including cable service, as
SS SCS HCS HB 1991, 7 defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 522(6);
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 153(53); an
information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 153(24); wireless
communications service; or other one-way or two-way communications
service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER — A cable operator, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. Section 522(5); a provider of information service, as defined in
47 U.S.C. Section 153(24); a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47
U.S.C. Section 153(51); or a wireless provider.
DECORATIVE POLE — A pole that is specially designed and placed for
aesthetic purposes.
FEE — A one-time, non-recurring charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — A group of buildings, properties, or sites that
are either listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally
determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the
individual who has been delegated the authority by the Federal agency
to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register,
in accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i-v of the Nationwide Programmatic
Agreement codified at 47 C.F.R. Part 1, Appendix C, or are otherwise located
in a district made subject to special design standards adopted by City
ordinance or under State law as of January 1, 2018, or subsequently enacted
for new developments.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY — A small wireless facility that meets the
following qualifications:
PERMIT — A written authorization required by the City to perform an action
or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including any
government authority.
RATE — A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, sidewalk, alley, or similar property used for public travel, but not
including a Federal interstate highway, railroad right-of-way, or private
easement.
Is not larger in dimension than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen
(15) inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height; and
1.
2. Any exterior antenna no longer than eleven (11) inches.
Section
510.160
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.160
AO:1134
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY — A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications:
TECHNICALLY FEASIBLE — By virtue of engineering or spectrum usage,
the proposed placement for a small wireless facility or its design or site
location can be implemented without a reduction in the functionality of the
small wireless facility.
UTILITY POLE — A pole or similar structure that is or may be used in
whole or in part by or for wireline communications, electric distribution,
lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function, or for the collocation
of small wireless facilities; provided, however, such term shall not include
wireless support structures, electric transmission structures, or breakaway
poles owned by the State Highways and Transportation Commission.
WIRELESS FACILITY — Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network,
including equipment associated with wireless communications and radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup
power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological
configuration. The term includes small wireless facilities. The term does not
include:
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER — Any person, including a
person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State, that
Each wireless provider's antenna could fit within an enclosure of no
more than six (6) cubic feet in volume; and
1.
All other equipment associated with the wireless facility, whether
ground or pole-mounted, is cumulatively no more than twenty-eight
(28) cubic feet in volume, provided that no single piece of equipment on
the utility pole shall exceed nine (9) cubic feet in volume; and no single
piece of ground mounted equipment shall exceed fifteen (15) cubic
feet in volume, exclusive of equipment required by an electric utility
or municipal electric utility to power the small wireless facility. The
following types of associated ancillary equipment shall not be included
in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment
elements, telecommunications demarcation box, grounding equipment,
power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs and
related conduit for the connection of power and other services.
2.
The structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated;
1.
Coaxial or fiber-optic cable between wireless support structures or
utility poles;
2.
Coaxial or fiber-optic cable not directly associated with a particular
small wireless facility;
3.
4. A wireline backhaul facility.
Section
510.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.160
AO:1135
builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment or
wireless facilities but that is not a wireless services provider.
WIRELESS PROVIDER — A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless
services provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES — Any services using licensed or unlicensed
spectrum, including the use of wifi, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided to the public using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER — A person who provides wireless
services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — An existing structure, such as a
monopole or tower, whether guyed or self-supporting, designed to support
or capable of supporting wireless facilities; an existing or proposed
billboard; an existing or proposed building; or other existing or proposed
structure capable of supporting wireless facilities, other than a structure
designed solely for the collocation of small wireless facilities. Such term
shall not include a utility pole.
WIRELINE BACKHAUL FACILITY — A physical transmission path, all or
part of which is within the right-of-way, used for the transport of
communication data by wire from a wireless facility to a network.
Section 510.170. Deployment Of Small Wireless Facilities And
Associated Poles In Right-Of-Way.120 [Ord. No. 6571, 12-11-2018]
A. The provisions of this Section shall only apply to activities of a wireless
provider within the right-of-way to deploy small wireless facilities and
associated utility poles.
B. Subject to the provisions of this Section and Sections 67.5110 to
67.5121, RSMo., (while in effect), a wireless provider may, as a
permitted use not subject to zoning review or approval, collocate small
wireless facilities and install, maintain, modify, operate, and replace
utility poles along, across, upon, and under the right-of-way, except that
the placement in the right-of-way of new or modified utility poles in
single-family residential zoning districts or areas zoned as historic as of
August 28, 2018, shall remain subject to any applicable zoning
requirements, including architectural review, that are consistent with
Sections 67.5090 to 67.5103, RSMo., including but not limited to,
requirements for underground utilities as set forth in Chapter 510.
Small wireless facilities collocated outside the right-of-way in property
not zoned primarily for single-family residential use shall be classified
as permitted uses and not subject to zoning review or approval. Such
small wireless facilities and utility poles shall be installed and
maintained as not to obstruct or hinder the usual travel or public safety
on such right-of-way or obstruct the legal use of such right-of-way by
the City, other governmental authorities or other authorized right-ofway
users.
120. State Law Reference: See Section 67.5112, RSMo.
Section
510.160
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.170
AO:1136
C. A wireless provider must obtain a permit pursuant to this Chapter, with
such reasonable conditions as may be imposed by the City, for work in a
right-of-way that will involve excavation, affect traffic patterns, obstruct
traffic in the right-of-way, or materially impede the use of a sidewalk.
D. Each new, replacement, or modified utility pole installed in the right-ofway
shall not exceed the greater of ten (10) feet in height above the
tallest existing utility pole in place as of January 1, 2019, located within
five hundred (500) feet of the new pole in the same right-of-way, or fifty
(50) feet above ground level. New small wireless facilities in the rightof-
way shall not extend more than ten (10) feet above an existing utility
pole in place as of August 28, 2018, or for small wireless facilities on a
new utility pole, above the height permitted for a new utility pole. A
new, modified, or replacement utility pole that exceeds these height
limits shall be subject to all applicable zoning requirements that apply
to other utility poles, to the extent consistent with Sections 67.5090 to
67.5103, RSMo.
E. All new utility poles located along a public street in the downtown area
must be decorative poles consistent with the appearance, construction
and aesthetic of existing street lights in the downtown area. Other
types of utility poles may be located in the alleys in the downtown area
provided that such poles are behind the front building lines of the
adjacent buildings.
F. A wireless provider shall be permitted to replace decorative poles when
necessary to collocate a small wireless facility, but any replacement
pole shall reasonably conform to the design aesthetics of the decorative
pole or poles being replaced, as determined by the Director of Planning
and Development.
G. Subject to Section 510.180 below, and except for facilities excluded
from evaluation for effects on historic properties under 47 C.F.R.
Section 1.1307(a)(4) of the Federal Communications Commission rules,
a wireless provider must use appropriate and reasonable, technically
feasible, non-discriminatory, and technologically neutral design or
concealment measures in a historic district, as determined by the
Director of Planning and Development. Any such design or concealment
measures shall not have the effect of prohibiting any provider's
technology, nor shall any such measures be considered a part of the
small wireless facility for purposes of the size restrictions in the
definition of small wireless facility.
H. Small wireless facility collocations shall not interfere with or impair the
operation of existing utility facilities, or City or third-party attachments.
A wireless provider shall repair all damage to the right-of-way directly
caused by the activities of the wireless provider in the right-of-way and
shall return the right-of-way to its functional equivalence before the
damage under the competitively neutral, reasonable requirements and
specifications of the City. If the wireless provider fails to make the
repairs required by the City within a reasonable time after written
Section
510.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.170
AO:1137
Section 510.180. Permits For Poles In Right-Of-Way And Wireless
Facilities In All Locations.121 [Ord. No. 6571, 12-11-2018]
notice, the City may make those repairs and charge the wireless
provider the reasonable, documented cost of such repairs.
A. The provisions of this Section shall apply to the permitting of small
wireless facilities to be installed by or for a wireless provider in or
outside the right-of-way and to the permitting of the installation,
modification, and replacement of utility poles by a wireless provider
inside the right-of-way.
B. Wireless providers or their agents shall apply for and obtain a permit to
collocate a small wireless facility or install a new, modified, or
replacement utility pole associated with a small wireless facility as
provided in Section 510.170 above. The City shall receive applications
for, process, and issue such permits subject to the following
requirements:
1. An applicant shall not be required to perform services or provide
goods unrelated to the permit, such as in-kind contributions to the
City, including reserving fiber, conduit, or pole space for the City;
2. An applicant shall not be required to provide more information to
obtain a permit than communications service providers that are not
wireless providers, provided that an applicant shall include
construction and engineering drawings and information
demonstrating compliance with the criteria in Subdivision (9) of
this Subsection and an attestation that the small wireless facility
complies with the volumetric limitations in the definition of Small
Wireless Facility of Section 510.160 above;
3. An applicant shall not be required to place small wireless facilities
on any specific utility pole or category of poles or require multiple
antenna systems on a single utility pole;
4. There is no limit as to the placement of small wireless facilities by
minimum horizontal separation distances;
5. An applicant shall comply with reasonable, objective, and costeffective
concealment or safety requirements as provided herein;
6. An applicant that is not a wireless services provider shall provide
evidence of agreements or plans demonstrating that the small
wireless facilities will be operational for use by a wireless services
provider within one (1) year after the permit issuance date, unless
the City and the applicant agree to extend this period or if delay is
caused by lack of commercial power or communications transport
facilities to the site and the applicant notifies the City thereof. An
121. State Law Reference: See Section 67.5113, RSMo.
Section
510.170
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.180
AO:1138
applicant that is a wireless services provider shall provide the
information required by this Subdivision by attestation;
7. Within fifteen (15) days of receiving an application, the City shall
determine and notify the applicant, in writing, whether the
application is complete. If an application is incomplete, the City
shall specifically identify the missing information in writing. The
processing deadline in Subdivision (8) of this Subsection shall be
tolled from the time the City sends the notice of incompleteness to
the time the applicant provides the missing information. That
processing deadline may also be tolled by agreement of the
applicant and the City;
8. An application for collocation shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory
basis and deemed approved if the City fails to
approve or deny the application within forty-five (45) days of
receipt of the application. An application for installation of a new,
modified, or replacement utility pole associated with a small
wireless facility shall be processed on a non-discriminatory basis
and deemed approved if the City fails to approve or deny the
application within sixty (60) days of receipt of the application;
9. The City may deny a proposed collocation of a small wireless
facility or installation, modification, or replacement of a utility pole
if the action proposed in the application could reasonably be
expected to:
a. Materially interfere with the safe operation of traffic control
equipment or City-owned communications equipment;
b. Materially interfere with sight lines or clear zones for
transportation, pedestrians, or non-motorized vehicles;
c. Materially interfere with compliance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. Sections 12101 to 12213, or similar
Federal or State standards regarding pedestrian access or
movement;
d. Materially obstruct or hinder the usual travel or public safety
on the right-of-way;
e. Materially obstruct the legal use of the right-of-way by the City,
a utility, or other third party;
f. Fail to comply with reasonable and non-discriminatory spacing
requirements of general application adopted by ordinance or
regulations promulgated by the State Highways and
Transportation Commission that concern the location of
ground mounted equipment and new utility poles, subject to
wireless provider requests for exception or variance;
Section
510.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.180
AO:1139
g. Fail to comply with applicable codes, including nationally
recognized engineering standards for utility poles or wireless
support structures;
h. Fail to comply with the reasonably objective and documented
aesthetics of a decorative pole and the applicant does not
agree to pay to match the applicable decorative elements; or
i. Fail to comply with reasonable and non-discriminatory
undergrounding requirements contained in City ordinances as
of January 1, 2018, or subsequently enacted for new
developments, that require all new utility facilities in the area
to be placed underground and prohibit the installation of new
or the modification of existing utility poles in a right-of-way
without prior approval, including by wireless provider requests
for exception or variance;
10. The City shall document the complete basis for a denial in writing,
and send the documentation to the applicant with the
communication denying an application. The applicant may cure the
deficiencies identified by the City and resubmit the application
within thirty (30) days of the denial without paying an additional
application fee. The City shall approve or deny the revised
application within thirty (30) days. Any subsequent review shall be
limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial;
11. Additionally:
a. An applicant may file a consolidated application and receive a
single permit for the collocation of multiple small wireless
facilities; provided, however, the denial of one (1) or more
small wireless facilities in a consolidated application shall not
delay processing of any other small wireless facilities in the
same batch; and
b. An application may include up to twenty (20) separate small
wireless facilities, provided that they are for the same or
materially same design of small wireless facility being
collocated on the same or materially the same type of utility
pole or wireless support structure, and geographically
proximate. If the City receives individual applications for
approval of more than fifty (50) small wireless facilities or
consolidated applications for approval of more than seventyfive
(75) small wireless facilities within a fourteen-day period,
whether from a single applicant or multiple applicants, the City
may, upon its own request, obtain an automatic thirty-day
extension for any additional collocation or replacement or
installation application submitted during that fourteen-day
period or in the fourteen-day period immediately following the
prior fourteen-day period. The City shall promptly
communicate its request to each affected applicant. In
Section
510.180
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.180
AO:1140
rendering a decision on an application for multiple small
wireless facilities, the City may approve the application as to
certain individual small wireless facilities while denying it as
to others based on applicable requirements and standards,
including those identified in this Section. The City's denial of
any individual small wireless facility or subset of small wireless
facilities within an application shall not be a basis to deny the
application as a whole;
12. Installation or collocation for which a permit is granted under this
Section shall be completed within one (1) year after the permit
issuance date unless the City and the applicant agree to extend this
period, or the applicant notifies the City that the delay is caused by
a lack of commercial power or communications transport facilities
to the site;
13. Approval of an application authorizes the applicant to:
a. Undertake the installation or collocation; and
b. Operate and maintain the small wireless facilities and any
associated utility pole covered by the permit for a period of ten
(10) years, which shall be renewed for equivalent durations so
long as the facilities and poles remain in compliance with the
criteria set forth in Subdivision (9) of this Subsection, unless
the applicant and the City agree to an extension term of less
than ten (10) years. The provisions of this paragraph shall be
subject to the right of the City to require, upon adequate notice
and at the facility owner's own expense, relocation of facilities
as may be needed in the interest of public safety and
convenience, and the applicant's right to terminate at any time;
14. There shall be a temporary moratorium on applications for small
wireless facilities and the collocation thereof for the duration of a
Federal or State-declared natural disaster plus a reasonable
recovery period, or for no more than thirty (30) days in the event of
a major and protracted staffing shortage that reduces the number
of personnel necessary to receive, review, process, and approve or
deny applications for the collocation of small wireless facilities by
more than fifty percent (50%);
15. Abandoned small wireless facilities shall be removed as provided in
this Chapter 510 or an agreement, as applicable;
16. In determining whether sufficient capacity exists to accommodate
the attachment of a new small wireless facility, the City shall take
into account that any grant of access hereunder shall be subject to
a reservation to reclaim such space, when and if needed, to meet a
core utility purpose or documented plan projected at the time of
the application pursuant to a bona fide development plan; and
Section
510.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.180
AO:1141
Section 510.190. Collocations On City Poles And Wireless Support
Structures Outside Of Right-Of-Way.122 [Ord. No. 6571, 12-11-2018]
17. In emergency circumstances that result from a natural disaster or
accident, the City may require the owner or operator of a wireless
facility to immediately remove such facility if the wireless facility is
obstructing traffic or causing a hazard on the City's roadway. In the
event that the owner or operator of the wireless facility is unable to
immediately remove the wireless facility, the City may remove the
wireless facility from the roadway or other position that renders
the wireless facility hazardous. Under these emergency
circumstances, the City shall not be liable for any damage caused
by removing the wireless facility and may charge the owner or
operator of the wireless facility the City's reasonable expenses
incurred in removing the wireless facility.
C. A permit is not required for:
1. Routine maintenance on previously permitted small wireless
facilities;
2. The replacement of small wireless facilities with small wireless
facilities that are the same or smaller in size, weight, and height;
or
3. The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or
replacement of micro wireless facilities that are strung on cables
between utility poles, in compliance with applicable codes.
For work described in Subdivisions (1) and (2) of this Subsection that
involves different equipment than that being replaced, the wireless
services provider shall submit a description of such new equipment so that
the City may maintain an accurate inventory of the small wireless facilities
at that location.
D. No approval for the installation, placement, maintenance, or operation
of a small wireless facility under this Section shall be construed to
confer authorization for the provision of cable television service, or
installation, placement, maintenance, or operation of a wireline
backhaul facility or communications facility, other than a small wireless
facility, in the right-of-way.
E. A municipal electric utility shall not require an application for the
installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of
micro wireless facilities that are strung on cables between utility poles,
in compliance with applicable codes.
A. This Section only applies to collocations on City poles and wireless
support structures that are located outside the right-of-way.
122. State Law Reference: See Section 67.5114, RSMo.
Section
510.180
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.190
AO:1142
Section 510.200. Collocations On City Poles Within The Right-Of-
Way.123 [Ord. No. 6571, 12-11-2018]
B. Subject to Subsection (C) of this Section, the City shall authorize the
collocation of small wireless facilities on City wireless support
structures and poles to the same extent, if any, that it permits access to
such structures for other commercial projects or uses. Such
collocations shall be subject to reasonable and non-discriminatory
rates, fees, and terms as provided in an agreement between the City, or
its agent, and the wireless provider in a form approved by the Board of
Aldermen.
C. The City shall not enter into an exclusive agreement with a wireless
provider concerning City poles or wireless support structures,
including stadiums and enclosed arenas, unless the agreement meets
the following requirements:
1. The wireless provider provides service using a shared network of
wireless facilities that it makes available for access by other
wireless providers, on reasonable and non-discriminatory rates and
terms that shall include use of the entire shared network, as to
itself, an affiliate, or any other entity; or
2. The wireless provider allows other wireless providers to collocate
small wireless facilities, on reasonable and non-discriminatory
rates and terms, as to itself, an affiliate, or any other entity.
D. When determining whether a rate, fee, or term is reasonable and nondiscriminatory
for the purposes of this Section, consideration may be
given to any relevant facts, including alternative financial or service
remuneration, characteristics of the proposed equipment or
installation, structural limitations, or other commercial or unique
features or components.
A. The provisions of this Section apply to collocations on City poles within
the right-of-way by a wireless provider.
B. Neither the City nor any person owning, managing, or controlling City
poles in the right-of-way shall enter into an exclusive arrangement with
any person for the right to attach to such poles. A person who
purchases or otherwise acquires a City pole is subject to the
requirements of this Section.
C. The City shall allow the collocation of small wireless facilities on its
poles using the process set forth in Section 510.180.
D. An application shall include engineering and construction drawings, as
well as plans and detailed cost estimates for any make-ready work as
needed, for which the applicant shall be solely responsible.
123. State Law Reference: See Section 67.5115, RSMo.
Section
510.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.200
AO:1143
Section 510.210. Rates And Fees.124 [Ord. No. 6571, 12-11-2018]
E. Make-ready work shall be addressed as follows, unless the City (or its
successor) and applicant agree to different terms in a pole attachment
agreement:
1. The rates, fees, and terms and conditions for the make-ready work
to collocate on a City pole shall be non-discriminatory,
competitively neutral, and commercially reasonable, and shall
comply with Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121, RSMo.;
2. Unless the City allows the applicant to perform any make-ready
work, the City shall provide a good faith estimate for any makeready
work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested
collocation by a wireless provider, including pole replacement if
necessary, within sixty (60) days after receipt of a complete
application. If applicable, make-ready work, including any pole
replacement, shall be completed by the City within sixty (60) days
of written acceptance of the good faith estimate and advance
payment by the applicant. The City may require replacement of its
pole on a non-discriminatory basis for reasons of safety and
reliability, including a demonstration that the collocation would
make the pole structurally unsound, including, but not limited to, if
the collocation would cause a utility pole to fail a crash test; and
3. The person owning, managing, or controlling the City pole shall not
require more make-ready work than required to meet applicable
codes or industry standards. Fees for make-ready work shall not
include costs related to preexisting or prior damage or noncompliance
unless the City had determined, prior to the filing of the
application, to permanently abandon and not repair or replace the
structure. Fees for make-ready work, including any pole
replacement, shall not exceed actual costs or the amount charged
to other communications service providers for similar work, and
shall not include third party fees, charges, or expenses, except for
amounts charged by licensed contractors actually performing the
make-ready work.
F. When a small wireless facility is located in the right-of-way of the State
Highway System, equipment and facilities directly associated with a
particular small wireless facility, including coaxial and fiber optic cable,
conduit, and ground mounted equipment, shall remain in the utility
corridor except as needed to reach a City or utility pole in the right-ofway
but outside the utility corridor in which the small wireless facility is
collocated.
A. This Section governs the rates and fees to collocate small wireless
facilities on City poles and the rates and fees for the placement of utility
poles, but does not limit the City's ability to recover specific removal
124. State Law Reference: See Section 67.5116, RSMo.
Section
510.200
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.210
AO:1144
Section 510.220. Authority Preserved.125 [Ord. No. 6571,
12-11-2018]
Subject to the provisions of Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121, RSMo., (while
in effect) and applicable Federal law, the City shall continue to exercise
zoning, land use, planning, and permitting authority within its territorial
costs from the attaching wireless provider for abandoned structures.
The rates to collocate on City poles shall be non-discriminatory
regardless of the services provided by the collocating applicant.
B. The City shall not require a wireless provider to pay any rates, fees, or
compensation to the authority or other person other than what is
expressly authorized by Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121, RSMo., (while in
effect) for the use and occupancy of a right-of-way, for collocation of
small wireless facilities on utility poles in the right-of-way, or for the
installation, maintenance, modification, operation, and replacement of
utility poles in the right-of-way.
C. Application fees shall be as follows:
1. The total fee for any application for collocation of small wireless
facilities on existing City poles shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00) per small wireless facility. An applicant filing a
consolidated application under Subdivision (11) of Subsection (B)
of Section 510.180 shall pay one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
small wireless facility included in the consolidated application; and
2. The total application fees for the installation, modification, or
replacement of a pole and the collocation of an associated small
wireless facility shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per pole.
D. Additional Fee Regulations.
1. The rate for collocation of a small wireless facility to a City pole
shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per pole per year.
2. The City shall not charge a wireless provider any fee, tax other than
a tax authorized by Subdivision (3) below, or other charge, or
require any other form of payment or compensation, to locate a
wireless facility or wireless support structure on privately owned
property, or on a wireless support structure not owned by the City.
3. The City shall not demand any fees, rentals, licenses, charges,
payments, or assessments from any applicant or wireless provider
for, or in any way relating to or arising from, the construction,
deployment, installation, mounting, modification, operation, use,
replacement, maintenance, or repair of small wireless facilities or
utility poles, if not allowed by Section 67.5116, RSMo., (while in
effect).
125. State Law Reference: See Section 67.5118, RSMo.
Section
510.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.220
AO:1145
boundaries, including with respect to wireless support structures and utility
poles, except that the City shall not have or exercise any jurisdiction or
authority over the design, engineering, construction, installation, or
operation of any small wireless facility located in an interior structure or
upon the site of any campus, stadium, or athletic facility not owned or
controlled by the City, other than to comply with applicable codes.
Section 510.230. Prior Agreements.126 [Ord. No. 6571, 12-11-2018]
This Article shall not nullify, modify, amend, or prohibit a mutual agreement
between the City and a wireless provider made prior to August 28, 2018, but
an agreement that does not fully comply with Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121,
RSMo., (while in effect) shall apply only to small wireless facilities and
utility poles that were installed or approved for installation before August
28, 2018, subject to any termination provisions in the agreement. Such an
agreement shall not be renewed, extended, or made to apply to any small
wireless facility or utility pole installed or approved for installation after
August 28, 2018, unless it is modified to fully comply with Sections 67.5110
to 67.5121, RSMo., (while in effect). In the absence of an agreement, and
until such a compliant agreement or ordinance is entered or adopted,
small wireless facilities and utility poles that become operational or were
constructed before August 28, 2018, may remain installed and be operated
under the requirements of Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121, RSMo., (while in
effect).
Section 510.240. Indemnification, Insurance, And Bonding
Requirements.127 [Ord. No. 6571, 12-11-2018]
A. A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the City and its elected
and appointed officers and employees harmless against any damage or
personal injury caused by the negligence of the wireless provider or its
employees, agents, or contractors, including but not limited to
reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the City.
B. A wireless provider shall have in effect insurance coverage consistent
with this Section, or demonstrate a comparable self-insurance program,
all in accordance with Section 510.090. A self-insured wireless provider
does not need to name the City or its officers and employees as
additional insured. A wireless provider shall furnish proof of insurance,
if applicable, prior to the effective date of any permit issued for a small
wireless facility.
C. The bonding requirements of Section 510.060 shall apply to small
wireless facilities. The purpose of such bonds shall be to:
1. Provide for the removal of abandoned or improperly maintained
small wireless facilities, including those that an authority
126. State Law Reference: See Section 67.5119, RSMo.
127. State Law Reference: See Section 67.5121, RSMo.
Section
510.220
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
510.240
AO:1146
Section 510.250. Expiration.128 [Ord. No. 6571, 12-11-2018]
The provisions contained within this Article II shall expire at such time that
Sections 67.5110 to 67.5122, RSMo., expire, except that for small wireless
facilities already permitted or collocated on City poles prior to such date,
the rate set forth in this Article for collocation of small wireless facilities on
City poles shall remain effective for the duration of the permit authorizing
the collocation.
determines need to be removed to protect public health, safety, or
welfare;
2. Restore the right-of-way in connection with removals under Section
67.5113, RSMo.;
3. Recoup rates or fees that have not been paid by a wireless provider
in over twelve (12) months, so long as the wireless provider has
received reasonable notice from the City of any non-compliance
listed above and been given an opportunity to cure;
4. Bonding requirements shall not exceed one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00) per small wireless facility. For wireless
providers with multiple small wireless facilities within the City, the
total bond amount across all facilities shall not exceed seventy-five
thousand dollars ($75,000.00), which amount may be combined
into one (1) bond instrument.
D. Applicants that have at least twenty-five million dollars
($25,000,000.00) in assets in the State and do not have a history of
permitting non-compliance within the City shall, under Section
67.1830, RSMo., be exempt from the insurance and bonding
requirements otherwise authorized by this Section.
E. Any contractor, subcontractor, or wireless infrastructure provider shall
be under contract with a wireless services provider to perform work in
the right-of-way related to small wireless facilities or utility poles, and
such entities shall be properly licensed under the laws of the State and
all applicable City ordinances. Each contracted entity shall have the
same obligations with respect to his or her work as a wireless services
provider would have under this Section, under Sections 67.5110 to
67.5121, RSMo., and other applicable laws if the work were performed
by a wireless services provider. The wireless services provider shall be
responsible for ensuring that the work of such contracted entities is
performed consistently with the wireless services provider's permits
and applicable laws relating to the deployment of small wireless
facilities and utility poles, and responsible for promptly correcting acts
or omissions by such contracted entity.
128. State Law Reference: See Section 67.5122, RSMo.
Section
510.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.250
AO:1147
Chapter 515
TREES, SHRUBBERY AND OTHER PLANTS
Section 515.010. Tree Planting. [CC 1970 §20-108; Ord. No. 4923
§1, 9-22-1992; Ord. No. 5978 §20-108, 7-10-2007]
A. The Department of Public Works, Forestry Division shall write and
implement an annual community forestry work plan. This plan shall be
in accordance with Section 515.020 through Section 515.110 and shall
be part of a five (5) year tree care program.
B. The following list constitutes the official tree species for the City of
Clayton. No species other than those included may be planted as street
trees without written permission of the Director of Public Works.
Small trees
(Less than 25')
Medium trees
(25'--50')
Large trees
(Greater than 50')
Purple Plum* Ash*
(Green or White)
Sugar Maple*
Yoshino Cherry Honey Locust*
(Thornless)
Norway Maple
Kwansan Cherry Linden* Northern Red Oak*
Red Bud*
(Single stem)
Golden Rain Tree London Plane
Dogwood* Red Maple* American Elm*
Crabapple* (All) Bald Cypress* Tulip Poplar*
Hawthorne* Hackberry* Shumard Oak*
Amur Maple Zelkova Willow Oak*
Serviceberry Ginkgo
(Male only)
Japanese Lilac River Birch*
(Single Stem)
Evergreens
(Use only on parkways or other landscaped right-of-way)
Hersey Upright Juniper Japanese Pine
Norway Spruce Eastern White Pine
Blue Spruce American Holly*
Foster Holly Sky Rocket Upright Juniper
Section
510.250
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
515.010
AO:1148
Section 515.020. Spacing. [CC 1970 §20-109; Ord. No. 4923 §1,
9-22-1992; Ord. No. 5978 §20-109, 7-10-2007]
Street trees shall not be planted more closely than the minimum spacing
specified in this Section, based on the classification of the tree being
planted as small, medium or large listed in Section 515.010 above: small
trees, thirty (30) feet; medium trees and large trees, forty (40) feet; except
in special plantings designed or approved by the forestry division.
Section 515.030. Distance From Curb and Sidewalk. [CC 1970
§20-110; Ord. No. 4923 §1, 9-22-1992; Ord. No. 5978 §20-110,
7-10-2007]
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and sidewalks
shall in no case be closer than two (2) feet. Typically trees shall be planted
in the middle of the tree lawn area. In the case of tree lawns less than
four (4) feet in width, no street trees shall be planted, except in designs
approved by the forestry division.
Section 515.040. Distance From Street Corners and Fireplugs. [CC
1970 §20-111; Ord. No. 4923 §1, 9-22-1992; Ord. No. 5978 §20-111,
7-10-2007]
No street tree shall be planted within thirty-five (35) feet of any street
corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines.
No street tree shall be planted within ten (10) feet of any fireplug.
Section 515.050. Utilities. [CC 1970 §20-112; Ord. No. 4923 §1,
9-22-1992; Ord. No. 5978 §20-112, 7-10-2007]
Section 515.060. Public Tree Care. [CC 1970 §20-113; Ord. No.
4923 §1, 9-22-1992; Ord. No. 5978 §20-113, 7-10-2007]
* Missouri native
A. No street trees or trees on City owned property other than those
species listed as small trees may be planted under or within ten (10)
lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five (5) lateral
feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or
other utility.
B. Utility planting guidelines adopted under this Chapter will be
coordinated with best management practices prepared and updated by
public utility companies in the City of Clayton and approved by the
International Society of Arbor Culture (ISA) and or Missouri
Department of Conservation.
A. The City shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues,
lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public
Section
515.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.060
AO:1149
Section 515.070. Tree Topping. [CC 1970 §20-114; Ord. No. 4923 §1,
9-22-1992; Ord. No. 5978 §20-114, 7-10-2007]
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or City
department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public
property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs
larger than three (3) inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a
degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees
severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility
wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical
may be exempted from this Chapter at the determination of the Department
of Public Works.
Section 515.080. Pruning Corner Clearance. [CC 1970 §20-115;
Ord. No. 4923 §1, 9-22-1992; Ord. No. 5978 §20-115, 7-10-2007]
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the
City shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the
light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection
and so that there shall be a clear space of eight (8) feet above the surface
of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or
dangerous or broken or decayed limbs which constitutes a menace to the
safety of the public. The City shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub
on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along
the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control
device or sign.
Section 515.090. Dead or Diseased Tree Removal On Private
Property. [CC 1970 §20-116; Ord. No. 4923 §1, 9-22-1992; Ord. No.
5978 §20-116, 7-10-2007]
The City shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased
trees on private property within the City, when such trees constitute a
hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitutes a
safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such
public grounds.
B. The Public Works Department may remove or cause or order to be
removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or
which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines,
gas lines, water lines or other public improvements, or is affected with
any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This Section does not prohibit
the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that
the selection and location of said trees is in accordance with Section
515.010 through Section 515.110 of this Chapter, however, any street
tree or other vegetation planted by private parties shall be property of
the City and be subject to pruning, trimming and removal by the City in
the sole discretion of the Director of Public Works without any
compensation to the party planting and/or adjoining property owner.
Section
515.060
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
515.090
AO:1150
potential threat to other trees within the City. The Public Works Department
will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said
owners at their own expense within sixty (60) days after the date of service
of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions,
the City shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost
of removal to the property owner.
Section 515.100. Removal of Stumps. [CC 1970 §20-117; Ord. No.
4923 §1, 9-22-1992; Ord. No. 5978 §20-117, 7-10-2007]
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface
of the ground.
Section 515.110. Damaging, Interfering With. [CC 1970 §20-118;
CC 1947 §7-74; Ord. No. 4923 §1, 9-22-1992; Ord. No. 5978 §20-118,
7-10-2007]
It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, remove, injure, burn or cut
down any tree, shrub, vine or flower planted or standing in any public
street, public park, alley, parkway, tree lawn or public place in the City,
or to pick any flowers or branches therefrom, or to place about any such
tree or other plant any stone, cement or substance which might impede
the free entrance of water and air to the roots thereof, without leaving an
open space about the trunk of not less than four (4) square feet. It shall be
unlawful to attach in any manner any telephone, telegraph, electric or other
wire to any such tree or to string any wires so that they come in contact
with any branch or part thereof.
Chapter 600
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Cross Reference—Driving while intoxicated, §342.010.
Section
515.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.110
AO:1151

ARTICLE I
In General
Section 600.010. Definitions.129 [CC 1970 §3-1; CC 1947 §10-35;
Ord. No. 3485 §1, 8-10-1971; Ord. No. 4212 §1, 10-13-1981; Ord. No.
4869 §1, 3-10-1992; Ord. No. 5195 §1, 9-26-1995; Ord. No. 6160 §1,
9-13-2011]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the respective
meanings ascribed to them:
BAR — Any counter or similar furnishing other than a table for which the
primary purpose is the service of alcoholic beverages or light meals.
BUSINESS DISTRICT — Those areas within the following boundaries:
CITY — The City of Clayton, Missouri.
CLUB — Any not-for-profit organization, incorporated or unincorporated,
having in excess of fifty (50) members and personal property and equipment
costing in excess of twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), all of which
property shall be owned by the members in the manner provided by
Missouri law for incorporated and unincorporated organizations.
HAPPY HOUR — Any designated period of time during which the
consumption of intoxicating liquor on the premises is encouraged by the
An area bounded by the City limits on the east, Hanley Road on the
west, Forsyth Boulevard on the north and Forest Park Expressway on
the south.
1.
An area bounded by Hanley Road on the east, Brentwood Boulevard on
the west, Maryland Avenue on the north and Shaw Park Drive on the
south.
2.
An area bounded by Brentwood Boulevard on the east, North Forsyth
Boulevard on the west, the south side of Maryland on the north and
Forsyth Boulevard on the south.
3.
The south side of Maryland Avenue from North Forsyth Boulevard on
the east to the City limits on the west.
4.
The north side of Maryland Avenue from Brentwood Boulevard on the
east to North Forsyth Boulevard on the west.
5.
The triangular area bounded by Forest Park Parkway, Brentwood
Boulevard and Interstate 170 (known as Corporate Park).
6.
The triangular area bounded by Interstate 170, Brentwood Boulevard
and Clayton Road.
7.
129. Cross Reference—Definition of "original package", §600.140(B). State Law
References—For definitions, §§311.020, 311.030, 311.060, 311.095, 311.100, 311.290,
311.550, 312.010, RSMo.
Section
600.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.010
AO:1153
sale and/or service of intoxicating liquor or other beverages of any type and/
or food at a discount, at no charge or by any other means.
INTOXICATING LIQUOR — Alcohol for beverage purposes, including
alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt, or other liquors, or
combination of liquors, a part of which is spirituous, vinous, or fermented,
and all preparations or mixtures for beverage purposes containing in excess
of one-half of one percent (0.5%) by volume, except for non-intoxicating
beer as defined herein. All beverages having an alcoholic content of less
than one-half of one percent (0.5%) by volume shall be exempt from the
provisions of this Chapter.
LIGHT WINES — Any wines manufactured exclusively from grapes, berries
and other fruits and vegetables containing not in excess of fourteen percent
(14%) of alcohol by weight.
MALT LIQUOR — Any beer manufactured from pure hops or pure extract
of hops and pure barley malt or other wholesome grains or cereals and
wholesome yeast and pure water and free from all harmful substances,
preservatives and adulterants and having an alcoholic content in excess of
three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) by weight.
MICROBREWERY — A business whose primary activity is the brewing and
selling of beer, with an annual production of ten thousand (10,000) barrels
or less.
NON-INTOXICATING BEER — Any beer manufactured from pure hops or
pure extract of hops and pure barley malt or other wholesome grains or
cereals and wholesome yeast and pure water and free from all harmful
substances, preservatives and adulterants and having an alcoholic content
in excess of one-half of one percent (.5%) by volume and not in excess of
three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) by weight.
PERSON — Any individual, association, joint stock company, syndicate,
co-partnership, corporation, receiver, trustee, conservator or other officer
appointed by any State or Federal Court.
PREMISES — The place where intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating beer
is sold, dispensed and consumed and may be one (1) room, a building
comprising several rooms or a building with adjacent or surrounding land
such as a lot or garden.
RESIDENTIAL AREA — An area located in the City that has been designated
as residential as set forth in Title IV of this Code, Zoning Regulations.
RESTAURANT — Any place of business, the main purpose and activity of
which is to serve meals, sandwiches, short orders and other food to be eaten
by its customers on the premises and which does not provide or furnish to
the public lodging or sleeping rooms.
RESTAURANT BAR — Any establishment having a restaurant or similar
facility on the premises at least fifty percent (50%) of the gross income
of which is derived from the sale of prepared meals or food consumed on
such premises or which has an annual gross income of at least two hundred
Section
600.010
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
600.010
AO:1154
thousand dollars ($200,000.00) from the sale of prepared meals or food
consumed on such premises.
WINE BAR — A type of restaurant (as defined in Section 405.390) with a
floor area not exceeding one thousand five hundred (1,500) gross square
feet which serves food and only beer, wine and non-alcoholic beverages and
where the sale of food consumed on the premises constitutes at least twenty
percent (20%) of gross sales of the establishment.
Section 600.020. Druggists May Sell and Physicians Prescribe
Liquor.
Any druggist may have in his/her possession intoxicating liquor purchased
by him/her from a licensed vendor under a license pursuant to State law,
or intoxicating liquor lawfully acquired at the place of acquisition and
legally transported into this State, and lawfully inspected, gauged and
labeled as provided by State law; such intoxicating liquor to be used in
connection with the business of a druggist in compounding medicines or as
a solvent or preservant; provided, that nothing in this Chapter shall prevent
a regularly licensed druggist, after he/she procures a license therefor, from
selling intoxicating liquor in the original package but not to be drunk or
the packages opened on the premises where sold; and provided further,
that nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting the right of
a physician to prescribe intoxicating liquor in accordance with his/her
professional judgment for any patient at any time or prevent a druggist
from selling intoxicating liquor to a person on prescription from a regularly
licensed physician as above provided.
Section 600.030. Sales of Liquor Prohibited Near Schools and
Churches. (RSMo. §311.080, 2005)
A. No license shall be granted for the sale of intoxicating liquor, as defined
in this Chapter, within two hundred (200) feet of any school, church or
other building regularly used as a place of religious worship, unless the
applicant for the license shall first obtain the consent in writing of the
Board of Aldermen, except that when a school, church or place of
worship shall hereafter be established within two hundred (200) feet of
any place of business licensed to sell intoxicating liquor, the license
shall not be denied for this reason. Such consent shall not be granted
until at least ten (10) days' written notice has been provided to all
owners of property within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed
licensed premises.
B. Subsection (A) of this Section shall not apply to a license issued by the
Supervisor of Alcohol and Tobacco Control for the sale of intoxicating
liquor pursuant to Section 311.218, RSMo., or to a license issued to any
church, school, civic, service, fraternal, veteran, political, or charitable
club or organization which has obtained an exemption from the
payment of federal taxes.
Section
600.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.030
AO:1155
Section 600.035. Numerical Limitation On Certain Licenses. [Ord.
No. 6160 §2, 9-13-2011]
No more than one (1) "wine bar" license shall be approved and issued
by the City for each six thousand (6,000) residents or portion thereof as
determined by the most recent decennial census.
Section 600.040. Days and Hours of Sale — Intoxicating Liquor —
Special Tastings Permit. [CC 1970 §3-13; CC 1947 §10-37(d); Ord.
No. 3486 §1, 8-10-1971; Ord. No. 4097 §1, 3-25-1980; Ord. No. 4329
§1, 9-27-1983; Ord. No. 4529 §1, 9-9-1986; Ord. No. 4624 §1,
3-22-1988; Ord. No. 5762 §1, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 5790 §1,
10-28-2003]
C. Subsection (A) of this Section shall not apply to any premises holding a
license issued before January 1, 2004, by the Supervisor of Alcohol and
Tobacco Control for the sale of intoxicating liquor. To retain a license
under this Subsection, the licensed premises shall not change license
type, amend the legal description, or be without a liquor license for
more than ninety (90) days.
A. No person having a license issued pursuant to this Chapter or Chapter
312, RSMo., nor any employee of such person shall sell, give away or
permit the consumption of any intoxicating liquor in any quantity
between the hours of 1:30 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on weekdays and
between the hours of 1:30 A.M. Sunday and 6:00 A.M. on the following
Monday upon or about his/her premises; provided when December
thirty-first (31st) falls on Sunday, any person having a license to sell
intoxicating liquor by the drink under the provisions of his/her license
may do so on that day after the hour of 9:00 A.M. and until the time
which would be lawful on any other day of the week notwithstanding
any provisions of the law or ordinance to the contrary.
B. Where such licenses authorizing the sale of intoxicating liquor by the
drink are held by clubs or hotels, this Section shall apply only to the
room or rooms in which intoxicating liquor is dispensed; and where
such licenses are held by restaurants whose business is conducted in
one (1) room only and substantial quantities of food and merchandise,
other than intoxicating liquor, are dispensed, then the licensee shall
keep securely locked during the hours and on the days herein specified
all refrigerators, cabinets, cases, boxes and taps from which
intoxicating liquor is dispensed.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter to the contrary,
any person who possesses the qualifications required by this Chapter
and who now hereafter meets the requirements of and complies with
the provisions of this Chapter may apply for and, upon approval of the
Board of Aldermen, the Director of Finance may issue a license to sell
intoxicating liquor, as in this Chapter defined, between the hours of
9:00 A.M. and Midnight on Sunday by the drink at retail for
Section
600.030
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
600.040
AO:1156
Section 600.045. Certain Holidays, Sale By The Drink On Sunday
Allowed.
When January first (1st), March seventeenth (17th), July fourth (4th) or
December thirty-first (31st) falls on Sunday, and on the Sundays prior to
Memorial Day and Labor Day and on the Sunday on which the national
championship game of the National Football League is played, commonly
known as "Super Bowl Sunday", any person having a license to sell
intoxicating liquor by the drink may be open for business and sell
intoxicating liquor by the drink under the provisions of his/her license on
that day from the time and until the time which would be lawful on another
day of the week, notwithstanding any provisions of this Chapter to the
contrary.
Section 600.050. Persons Eighteen Years of Age or Older May Sell
or Handle Liquor or Beer, When.
consumption on the premises of any restaurant bar as described in this
Chapter and in the application. Persons holding a license under this
paragraph shall comply with all provisions of the State law and with
all other ordinances and regulations of the City relating to the sale of
liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold.
D. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter to the contrary,
any person who possesses the qualifications required by this Chapter
and who is licensed to sell intoxicating liquor in the original package at
retail under this Chapter may apply for and, upon approval of the Board
of Aldermen, the Director of Finance may issue a special permit to
conduct wine, malt beverage and distilled spirit tastings on the licensed
premises; provided however, that issuance of such a permit shall not be
construed to permit the licensee to sell wine, malt beverages or distilled
spirits for on-premises consumption.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, no person under the age
of twenty-one (21) years shall sell or assist in the sale or dispensing of
intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating beer.
B. In any place of business licensed in accordance with this Chapter,
persons at least eighteen (18) years of age may stock, arrange displays,
operate the cash register or scanner connected to a cash register and
accept payment for, and sack for carryout, intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating
beer. Delivery of intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating
beer away from the licensed business premises cannot be performed by
anyone under the age of twenty-one (21) years. Any licensee who
employs any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, as
authorized by this Subsection, shall, when at least fifty percent (50%) of
the licensee's gross sales does not consist of non-alcoholic sales, have
an employee twenty-one (21) years of age or older on the licensed
premises during all hours of operation.
Section
600.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.050
AO:1157
Section 600.060. Misrepresentation of Age By Minor To Obtain
Liquor — Use of Altered Driver's License, Passport or I.D. To Obtain
Liquor — Use of Altered Driver's License, Passport or I.D. Cards,
Penalties.
C. In any distillery, warehouse, wholesale distributorship, or similar place
of business which stores or distributes intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating
beer but which does not sell intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating
beer at retail, persons at least eighteen (18) years of age
may be employed and their duties may include the handling of
intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating beer for all purposes except
consumption, sale at retail, or dispensing for consumption or sale at
retail. Any wholesaler licensed pursuant to this Chapter or Chapter
312, RSMo., may employ persons of at least eighteen (18) years of age
to rotate, stock and arrange displays at retail establishments licensed to
sell intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating beer.
D. Persons eighteen (18) years of age or older may, when acting in the
capacity of a waiter or waitress, accept payment for or serve
intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating beer in places of business which
sell food for consumption on the premises if at least fifty percent (50%)
of all sales in those places consists of food; provided that nothing in this
Section shall authorize persons under twenty-one (21) years of age to
mix or serve across the bar intoxicating beverages or non-intoxicating
beer.
A. Any person of the age of seventeen (17) years and under the age of
twenty-one (21) years who shall represent that he/she has attained the
age of twenty-one (21) years for the purpose of purchasing, asking for
or in any way receiving any intoxicating liquor, except in cases
authorized by law, shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of an
ordinance violation. Any person under the age of seventeen (17) years
who shall represent that he/she has attained the age of twenty-one (21)
years for the purpose of purchasing, asking for or in any way receiving
any intoxicating liquor, except in cases authorized by law, may be
considered a delinquent child and may be dealt with in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 211, RSMo.
B. In addition to any other penalties established in Subsection (A) of this
Section and established in Sections 577.500 to 577.530, RSMo., any
person who is less than twenty-one (21) years of age who uses a
reproduced, modified or altered chauffeur's license, motor vehicle
operator's license, identification card issued by any uniformed service
of the United States, passport or identification card established in
Section 302.181, RSMo., for the purpose of purchasing, asking for or in
any way receiving any intoxicating liquor, shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation and shall be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each separate offense.
Section
600.050
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
600.065
AO:1158
Section 600.065. Purchase or Possession By Minor, An Ordinance
Violation — Container Need Not Be Opened and Contents Verified,
When — Burden of Proof On Violator To Prove Not Intoxicating
Liquor—Section Not Applicable To Certain Students, Requirements.
A. Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, who purchases or
attempts to purchase, or has in his/her possession, any intoxicating
liquor as defined in Section 600.010 or who is visibly intoxicated as
defined in Section 577.001, RSMo., or has a detectable blood alcohol
content of more than two-hundredths of one percent (.02%) or more by
weight of alcohol in such person's blood is guilty of an ordinance
violation. For purposes of prosecution under this Section or any other
provision of this Chapter involving an alleged illegal sale or transfer of
intoxicating liquor to a person under twenty-one (21) years of age, a
manufacturer-sealed container describing that there is intoxicating
liquor therein need not be opened or the contents therein tested to
verify that there is intoxicating liquor in such container. The alleged
violator may allege that there was not intoxicating liquor in such
container, but the burden of proof of such allegation is on such person,
as it shall be presumed that such a sealed container describing that
there is intoxicating liquor therein contains intoxicating liquor.
B. For purposes of determining violations of any provision of this Chapter,
or of any rule or regulation of the Supervisor of Alcohol and Tobacco
Control, a manufacturer-sealed container describing that there is
intoxicating liquor therein need not be opened or the contents therein
tested to verify that there is intoxicating liquor in such container. The
alleged violator may allege that there was not intoxicating liquor in
such container, but the burden of proof of such allegation is on such
person, as it shall be presumed that such a sealed container describing
that there is intoxicating liquor therein contains intoxicating liquor.
C. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to a student who:
1. Is eighteen (18) years of age or older;
2. Is enrolled in an accredited college or university and is a student in
a culinary course;
3. Is required to taste, but not consume or imbibe, any beer, ale,
porter, wine, or other similar malt or fermented beverage as part of
the required curriculum; and
4. Tastes a beverage under Subdivision (3) of this Subsection only for
instructional purposes during classes that are part of the
curriculum of the accredited college or university.
Section
600.065
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.065
AO:1159
Section 600.070. Sale To Minor — Certain Other Persons,
Ordinance Violation — Exceptions — Permitting Drinking or
Possession By A Minor, Penalty, Exception — Defenses.
The beverage must at all times remain in the possession and
control of an authorized instructor of the college or university,
who must be twenty-one (21) years of age or older. Nothing in
this Subsection may be construed to allow a student under the
age of twenty-one (21) to receive any beer, ale, porter, wine, or
other similar malt or fermented beverage unless the beverage
is delivered as part of the student's required curriculum and
the beverage is used only for instructional purposes during
classes conducted as part of the curriculum.
A. Any licensee under this Chapter, or his/her employee, who shall sell,
vend, give away or otherwise supply any intoxicating liquor in any
quantity whatsoever to any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years, or to any person intoxicated or appearing to be in a state of
intoxication, or to a habitual drunkard, and any person whomsoever
except his/her parent or guardian who shall procure for, sell, give away
or otherwise supply intoxicating liquor to any person under the age of
twenty-one (21) years, or to any intoxicated person or any person
appearing to be in a state of intoxication, or to a habitual drunkard,
shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance violation, except that this
Section shall not apply to the supplying of intoxicating liquor to a
person under the age of twenty-one (21) years for medical purposes
only, or to the administering of such intoxicating liquor to any person by
a duly licensed physician. No person shall be denied a license or
renewal of a license issued under this Chapter solely due to a conviction
for unlawful sale or supply to a minor when serving in the capacity as an
employee of a licensed establishment.
B. Any owner, occupant, or other person or legal entity with a lawful right
to the exclusive use and enjoyment of any property who knowingly
allows a person under the age of twenty-one (21) to drink or possess
intoxicating liquor or knowingly fails to stop a person under the age of
twenty-one (21) from drinking or possessing intoxicating liquor on such
property, unless such person allowing the person under the age of
twenty-one (21) to drink or possess intoxicating liquor is his or her
parent or guardian, is guilty of an ordinance violation.
C. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this Section if:
1. The defendant is a licensed retailer, club, drinking establishment,
or caterer or holds a temporary permit, or an employee thereof;
2. The defendant sold the intoxicating liquor to the minor with
reasonable cause to believe that the minor was twenty-one (21) or
more years of age; and
Section
600.065
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
600.070
AO:1160
Section 600.080. Minors — Loitering in Premises of Intoxicating
Liquor Place By Minor. [CC 1970 §3-18; CC 1947 §10-37(f)]
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years
to be and remain or to loiter in any premises (other than the dining or
lodging areas of hotels or restaurants) where intoxicating liquors are sold
at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises, unless accompanied
by the parent or legal guardian of such minor and it shall be unlawful
for any person licensed to sell intoxicating liquors at retail by the drink
for consumption on the premises or his/her employee to allow any minor
under the age of eighteen (18) years, unless accompanied by the parent
or legal guardian of such minor, to be and remain or to loiter on said
premises, except for the sale by minors in supermarkets as authorized by
State law and each such licensee shall keep at all times conspicuously
posted a printed sign displaying in black letters not less than one (1) inch
wide on a white background the words: "Notice—Minors under the age of
eighteen (18) years are not allowed here unless accompanied by parent or
legal guardian". The maintenance of such sign, however, shall not excuse
any licensee from a violation of this provision.
Section 600.081. Certain Acts Prohibited in Premises Licensed To
Sell At Retail Intoxicating Liquor, Wine or Beer. [Ord. No. 6420 §1,
4-12-2016]
3. To purchase the intoxicating liquor, the person exhibited to the
defendant a driver's license, Missouri non-driver's identification
card, or other official or apparently official document, containing a
photograph of the minor and purporting to establish that such
minor was twenty-one (21) years of age and of the legal age for
consumption of intoxicating liquor.
A. It shall be unlawful for any retail licensee, licensed to sell intoxicating
liquor, wine or beer, or his/her employee to permit in, upon or about the
licensed premises:
1. The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or
any sexual acts which are prohibited by law;
2. The displaying of any portion of the areola of the female breast or
failure to cover the entire areola and front of the breast with
opaque clothing;
3. The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the
breast, buttocks, anus or genitals;
4. The actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or
genitals or failure to cover pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals with
opaque clothing;
Section
600.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.081
AO:1161
Section 600.085. Drinking in Public. [CC 1970 §17-12; CC 1947
§12-37; Ord. No. 5066 §1, 4-26-1994]
5. Any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes
to public view any portion of his/her genitals or anus or fails at any
time to have and keep opaque clothing over all parts of his/her
genitals and anus; and
6. The displaying of films, video or DVD programs or pictures
depicting acts, the live performances of which are prohibited by
this regulation or by any other law.
B. Additional unlawful acts for any retail licensee, licensed to sell
intoxicating liquor, wine or beer, or his/her employee:
1. At no time, under any circumstances, shall any licensee or his/her
employees immediately fail to prevent or suppress any violent
quarrel, disorder, brawl, fight or other improper or unlawful
conduct of any person upon the licensed premises, nor shall any
licensee or his/her employees allow any indecent, profane or
obscene language, song, entertainment, literature or advertising
material upon the licensed premises.
2. In the event that a licensee or his/her employee knows or should
have known, that an illegal or violent act has been committed on or
about the licensed premises, they immediately shall report the
occurrence to law enforcement authorities and shall cooperate
with law enforcement authorities and agents of the Division of
Liquor Control during the course of any investigation into an
occurrence.
C. In addition to the licensee and/or his/her employee being subject to all
penalties contained in Section 100.110 of this Code, violation of any act
or any provision contained herein shall be grounds for the license of the
licensee to be suspended or revoked.
A. Any person who shall use, distribute, possess, purchase, sell or
otherwise obtain any intoxicating liquor, malt liquor or non-intoxicating
beer and shall be found in the City with any of said beverages in his/her
possession intending to drink, drinking or having drunk any of said
beverages in or on any highway, thoroughfare, street, alley, place, way,
parking lot or other area open to the public for vehicular or pedestrian
travel or use, regardless of his/her legal status or whether owned by the
City or other public bodies or by private persons or in any public place,
shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance violation. Provided however, that
the provisions of this Section shall not apply to:
1. Any person who has been granted a license or permit as provided in
Chapter 600 of this Code of Ordinances.
Section
600.081
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
600.085
AO:1162
2. Any person possessing a beverage container containing alcoholic
beverages for immediate consumption, within the boundaries of a
civic event, which was obtained from an authorized concessionaire.
3. Any person possessing a beverage container containing alcoholic
beverages for immediate consumption within thirty (30) feet of any
designated outdoor dining or outdoor seating area of a restaurant
duly authorized to provide outdoor dining or outdoor seating for its
patrons. This exception shall apply only on those days when any
permit for a civic event has been issued and only for the time
during said event and within thirty (30) minutes thereafter.
4. Any person possessing an unopened alcohol beverage container,
outside the boundaries of a civic event, which has been purchased
from a licensed retailer for the purpose of transport to his/her
residence or other private premises on which he/she is a invitee,
guest or licensee for future consumption.
5. For purposes of this Section, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings set forth below, unless the context otherwise
requires:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Intoxicating liquor as defined in
Section 311.020, RSMo.
BEVERAGE CONTAINER — Any metal, glass, plastic, wood, leather
or animal skin or other container, can, bottle, jug or barrel, sealed
or unsealed, designed or used for containing liquids intended for
human consumption.
CIVIC EVENT — Any picnic, fair, festival (except those festivals
described and defined in Section 600.220 of the Clayton Code of
Ordinances), carnival or other event to which the general public is
invited and for which a permit has been issued for use of public
streets, parks or other public property or within the area of a public
park or other public place.
Section
600.085
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.085
AO:1163

ARTICLE II
Licenses and Licensee Regulations130
Section 600.090. Operation Without License Unlawful. [CC 1970
§3-26; CC 1947 §10-36(a)]
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or expose for sale, either at retail
or wholesale, or to manufacture in the City any intoxicating liquor, malt
liquor or non-intoxicating beer without first having obtained from the City a
license therefor, except as otherwise provided herein.
Section 600.100. Application For License and Renewal.
A. Filing Of An Application. Each application for an original or renewal
license shall be filed with the City Clerk on a form to be provided by the
City, signed and sworn to by the applicant. Each application shall be
accompanied by a proper remittance reflecting the appropriate license
fee made payable to the City.
B. Qualifications. Neither the applicant nor any officer, director or
shareholder of a corporate applicant shall have been convicted of a
felony or of any distribution, sale or possession of any controlled
substances or dangerous drugs. The applicant shall present with the
application a bona fide sale contract or option duly executed, which
may be subject to the applicant obtaining a liquor license, or a bona fide
lease duly executed by the lessor, or an option for a lease duly executed,
subject to the applicant obtaining a liquor license, covering the
property for which a liquor license is requested. If the applicant is a
corporation, the petition shall set forth all of the above information with
respect to the managing officer or officers, identifying such officer or
officers. The application shall further state the full name of the
corporation, its date of incorporation, its registered agent and
registered address, the names and addresses of all shareholders of the
corporation, and whether said corporation operates any other business
or controls or is controlled by any other corporation or business and, if
so, the application shall further state the name of such controlled or
controlling corporation or business, its registered agent and registered
address, and the location of all businesses operated by it and the name
and address of any such businesses with a liquor license, whether
within or without the City; and the application shall also state if such
controlling corporation or any controlled corporation is doing business
under a fictitious name, and the address where said business is located.
The Board of Aldermen also may request such additional information of
an applicant as it may deem necessary for it to make a determination
with respect to the issuance of a liquor license.
C. Upon approval of any application for a license, the Clerk shall grant the
applicant a license to conduct business in the City for a term to expire
with the thirtieth (30th) day of June next succeeding the date of such
130. Charter Reference—Authority to license, tax and regulate, art. II §15(22).
Section
600.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.100
AO:1165
Section 600.110. Filing License Application — Consent of
Neighbors To Certain Licenses. [CC 1970 §3-28; CC 1947 §10-35(f);
Ord. No. 4869 §2, 3-10-1992; Ord. No. 5195 §1, 9-26-1995; Ord. No.
6160 §3, 9-13-2011]
license, unless such license be revoked or suspended for cause before
the expiration of such time.
D. Applications for renewal of licenses must be filed on or before the first
(1st) day of May of each calendar year. Such renewal application shall
be reviewed by the Board at its next meeting. Upon approval of the
majority of the Board and payment of the license fee provided herein,
the Clerk shall renew the license. In the event that any person residing
or conducting businesses within two hundred (200) feet of the
applicant's place of business shall file a written protest against the
renewal of such license, the Board shall conduct a hearing on the
application for license renewal as provided in this Subsection.
A. All applications for licenses for the sale of intoxicating liquor, light
wine, non-intoxicating beer and/or malt liquor, at retail by the drink and
for tasting or sampling the same, for consumption on the premises,
regardless of the location of the premises, shall be filed with the
Director of Finance on forms to be furnished by the Director, such
applications to be signed and sworn to by the applicant. All such
applications shall be accompanied by the following:
1. The annual or prorated fees set forth in this Chapter for the class of
license applied for in such applications.
2. A petition signed by two-thirds (2/3) of the assessed taxpaying
citizens owning real property and by two-thirds (2/3) of the persons
occupying or conducting any business on the main or surface floor
of buildings within a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the
proposed location in all directions and located within the City
assenting to such application.
The foregoing notwithstanding, however, the requirement that
a petition be submitted, in accordance with Subsection (A)(2)
above, shall be waived in the event that the issuance of the
license shall be approved by the affirmative vote of two-thirds
(2/3) of the members of the Board of Aldermen.
B. In addition to the foregoing, applications for licenses for the sale of
intoxicating liquors, light wine, non-intoxicating beer and/or malt
liquor, at retail by the drink and for tasting or sampling the same, for
consumption in or on a premises located outside of the business
district, shall be accompanied by such evidence as the Director of
Finance shall reasonably require that the applicant has operated a
restaurant on the same premises for a period of not less than one (1)
year. However, the foregoing requirement of this Subsection (B) shall
be waived if:
Section
600.100
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
600.110
AO:1166
1. The application for the license is approved by the affirmative vote
of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Board of Aldermen; or
2. The application is for the sale of light wine, wine, non-intoxicating
and/or beer only, at retail by the drink and for tasting or sampling
the same, for consumption in or on the premises; or
3. The application is for the tasting or sampling of wine only and the
applicant has been granted a license for the sale of liquor in the
original package in accordance with Section 600.140 of this
Chapter.
C. All licenses issued pursuant to Subsection (B) above shall be subject to
the following restrictions:
1. Happy hour shall be prohibited; and
2. Bar service shall be prohibited.
D. All "wine bar" licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be subject
to the following restrictions:
1. The establishment shall not have a floor area greater than one
thousand five hundred (1,500) gross square feet; and
2. The establishment shall not serve any alcoholic beverages except
beer or wine; and
3. The sale of food consumed on the premises constitutes at least
twenty percent (20%) of gross sales of the establishment.
E. All applications for the renewal of any license issued pursuant to
Subsections (A) or (B) above shall be filed with the Director of Finance
on forms to be furnished by the Director. Such applications shall be
signed and sworn to by the applicant and shall be accompanied by the
annual or prorated fees set forth in this Chapter for the class of license
applied for in such applications. Additionally, applications for the
renewal of licenses issued for establishments located outside the
business district shall be accompanied by such evidence as the Director
of Finance shall reasonably require that since the initial approval of the
application, at least fifty percent (50%) of the total revenue from the
premises for which the license was issued is realized from the sale of
products other than intoxicating liquor; and, in the case of wine bars,
the application shall be accompanied by such evidence as the Director
of Finance shall reasonably require that at least twenty percent (20%)
of the total revenue from the premises for which the license was issued
is realized from the sale of food consumed on the licensed premises.
F. No consumption of intoxicating liquor, light wine, non-intoxicating beer
and/or malt liquor of any type or nature whatsoever, including, but not
limited to, tasting and sampling, shall be permitted in or on any
premises unless a license for the sale or tasting of the same has been
issued in accordance with this Section.
Section
600.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.120
AO:1167
Section 600.120. Description of Premises in Application. [CC 1970
§3-29; CC 1947 §10-35(f); Ord. No. 4869 §2, 3-10-1992]
The premises shall, at the time of application for all licenses hereunder, be
fully described and the areas for sales, dispensing and consumption upon
and within said premises shall be accurately located in such application.
Section 600.130. Presenting Applications To Board — Issuance —
Renewal. [CC 1970 §3-30; CC 1947 §10-36(e); Ord. No. 5195 §1,
9-26-1995]
The Director of Finance shall, within thirty (30) days after filing, present
to the Board of Aldermen, at its regular or special meeting, all applications
for license filed pursuant to the requirements of this Chapter and upon
approval of any application by a majority of said Board and payment of
the fees herein provided, the Director of Finance shall issue a license to
such applicant to conduct business in the City until July thirty-first (31st)
following its issuance; and all renewals of licenses shall be issued by the
Director of Finance upon application of licensees and payment of the annual
license fee as a matter of course except as herein otherwise provided.
Section 600.140. Schedule of Fees — Business Authorized To Sell
Intoxicating Liquor in Original Package, Malt Liquor — Scope of
Distiller, Etc., License. [CC 1970 §3-44; CC 1947 §10-37(j); Ord. No.
3487 §1, 8-10-1971; Ord. No. 4213 §1, 10-13-1981; Ord. No. 4974 §1,
6-8-1993; Ord. No. 5102 §1, 9-27-1994; Ord. No. 5195 §1, 9-26-1995;
Ord. No. 5762 §2, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 5790 §3, 10-28-2003; Ord. No.
6160 §4, 9-13-2011]
A. All Intoxicating Liquor At Retail In Original Package. Except as
provided in Subsection (C) below, no license shall be issued for the sale
of intoxicating liquor in the original package, not to be consumed upon
the premises where sold, except to a person engaged in and to be used
in connection with the operation of one (1) or more of the following
businesses: drugstore, cigar or tobacco store, grocery store, general
merchandise store, confectionery or delicatessen store, nor to any such
person who does not have and keep in his/her store a stock of goods
having a value according to invoices of at least one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), exclusive of fixtures and intoxicating liquors. Except as
provided in Subsection (G), the annual license fee for each license to
sell all kinds of intoxicating liquor at retail in the original package
between the hours of 12:01 A.M. on Mondays and Midnight on
Saturdays shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00); and the annual
license fee for each license to sell all kinds of intoxicating liquor at
retail in the original package on Sundays between the hours of 9:00
A.M. and Midnight shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00).
B. Malt Liquor At Retail In Original Package. Malt liquor may be sold by
grocers and other merchants and dealers in the original package direct
to consumers but not for resale and not for consumption on the
Section
600.120
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
600.140
AO:1168
premises where sold (the term "original package" meaning for this
purpose three (3) or more standard bottles of beer) and a license for
such sale shall also permit the holder thereof to sell non-intoxicating
beer in like manner, but it shall be unlawful for any person holding
such license and not at the same time holding a license for sale of
all intoxicating liquor to have, keep, sell or offer to sell in or on said
premises any intoxicating liquor other than malt liquor. Except as
provided in Subsection (G) below, the annual license fee for each
license to sell malt liquor at retail in the original package between
the hours of 12:01 A.M. on Mondays and Midnight on Saturdays shall
be twenty-two dollars fifty cents ($22.50); and the annual license fee
for each license to sell malt liquor at retail in the original package on
Sundays between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and Midnight shall be fortyfive
dollars ($45.00).
C. Special Permit For Wine, Malt Beverage And Distilled Spirit Tastings.
The annual license fee for a special permit to conduct wine, malt
beverage and distilled spirit tastings on premises licensed for sale of
intoxicating liquor at retail in original package shall be thirty-seven
dollars fifty cents ($37.50).
D. All Alcoholic Beverages By The Drink. The annual license fee for the
sale of all kinds of alcoholic beverages, or a selection of alcoholic
beverages, at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises of the
licensee shall be for each separate license four hundred fifty dollars
($450.00) and for such sale on Sunday by a "restaurant bar" or a "wine
bar" an additional three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each separate
license.
E. Malt Liquor By The Drink. The annual license fee for the sale of malt
liquor or light wines or both malt liquor and light wines at retail by the
drink or consumption on the premises of the licensee shall be for each
separate license fifty-two dollars fifty cents ($52.50) and for such sale
on Sunday by a "restaurant bar" an additional one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each separate license; and said license fee shall include
the sale of non-intoxicating beer in such manner.
F. Distiller, Manufacturer, Brewer Or Blender Of Various Kinds Of
Intoxicating Liquor: The annual license fees for the distilling,
manufacturing, brewing or blending of intoxicating liquor within the
City shall be, for each separate license, as follows:
1. All kinds: six hundred seventy-five dollars ($675.00);
2. Not in excess of twenty-two percent (22%) of alcohol by weight:
Three hundred dollars ($300.00);
3. Malt liquor: Three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00).
Section
600.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.140
AO:1169
Said license fees shall include the sale at wholesale or in
quantities of not less than one (1) gallon, of the products of
such licensee at the premises where distilled, manufactured,
brewed or blended.
G. Wholesale—Various Kinds Of Intoxicating Liquor. The annual license
fees for the sale at wholesale of intoxicating liquor by any person who
makes one (1) or more sales for resale within the City or who conducts a
business of exposing for sale or selling for resale from an established
place of business in the City shall be, for each separate license, as
follows:
1. All kinds: Four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00);
2. Not in excess of twenty-two percent (22%) of alcohol by weight:
Three hundred dollars ($300.00);
3. Malt liquor: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
H. Microbreweries—Sales At Retail In Original Package. Initial
applications for a license for a microbrewery shall be filed with the
Director of Finance on forms to be furnished by the Director, such
applications to be signed and sworn to by the applicant. All such
applications shall be accompanied by the following:
1. A license for the sale of intoxicating liquors in the original package
pursuant to Subsection (A) of this Chapter. The annual license fee
for sales at retail in the original package on the premises of the
licensee between the hours of 12:01 A.M. on Mondays and
Midnight on Saturdays and on Sundays between 9:00 A.M. and
Midnight, together, shall be an amount equal to five dollars ($5.00)
for each one hundred (100) barrels of beer, non-intoxicating beer or
malt liquor or fraction thereof produced on the premises, up to a
maximum license fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00);
2. A petition signed by two-thirds (2/3) of the assessed taxpaying
citizens owning real property and by two-thirds (2/3) of the persons
occupying or conducting any business on the main or surface floor
of buildings located within the City and within a distance of three
hundred (300) feet from the proposed location in all directions
assenting to such application.
Section
600.140
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
600.140
AO:1170
Section 600.150. Schedule of Fees — in Lieu of Merchants License
Taxes. [CC 1970 §3-45; CC 1947 §10-36(i)]
The license fees hereunder shall be in lieu of the proportionate part of
any merchants, business or occupation taxes or fees paid by any licensee
hereunder to the City and neither the inventory nor sales of alcoholic
beverages provided for hereunder shall be included in reports to the City
nor assessed by the City for purposes of such merchants, business or
occupation taxes or fees.
Section 600.160. Due and Payment Dates. [CC 1970 §3-33; CC 1947
§10-36(h)]
The annual license fees payable hereunder shall be due and payable on or
before the first (1st) day of July annually and the license year shall run from
July first (1st) to June thirtieth (30th); provided applicants who shall apply
for licenses to commence business and who shall be granted a license to
so commence before July first (1st) shall pay for said license one-twelfth (1/
12th) of the annual fee for every month or part thereof from date of issuance
to the beginning of ensuing license year; provided further, the Director of
Finance shall issue no initial license or renewal thereof if such applicant or
licensee shall not have paid the license fees herein set forth; and, provided
further, all applications for renewals shall be filed on or before the first (1st)
Tuesday of July annually.
Section 600.170. Posting License. [CC 1970 §3-23; CC 1947
§10-36(c)]
All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be kept
conspicuously posted in the premises for which such license was issued.
Section 600.180. Licenses Non-Transferable — Exceptions.
Such application shall be renewable only upon the affirmative
vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Board of
Aldermen if two-thirds (2/3) of the assessed taxpaying citizens
owning real property and by two-thirds (2/3) of the persons
occupying or conducting any business on the main or surface
floor of buildings located within the City and within three
hundred (300) feet from the proposed location in all
directions, assenting to such application shall file a written
protest against such renewal within sixty (60) days prior to
any annual renewal date for such license. The protest must be
signed and acknowledged.
A. No license issued under this Chapter shall be transferable or assignable
except as herein provided. In the event of the death of the licensee, the
widow or widower or the next of kin of such deceased licensee, who
shall meet the other requirements of this law may make application and
the City may transfer such license to permit the operation of the
Section
600.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.180
AO:1171
Section 600.190. Interest of Wholesaler, Etc., in Retail Business —
Intoxicating Liquor. [CC 1970 §3-34; CC 1947 §10-37(k)]
Distillers, wholesalers, wine makers, brewers or their employees, officers
or agents shall not, under any circumstances, directly or indirectly, have
any financial interest in the retail business for sale of intoxicating liquors
and shall not, directly or indirectly, loan, give away or furnish equipment,
money, credit or property of any kind, except ordinary commercial credit,
for liquors sold to such retail dealers.
Section 600.200. Brewers — Manufacturers Not To Have Interest in
Retail Business — Contracts Void, When.
Section 600.210. Temporary License For Sale By The Drink May Be
Issued To Certain Organizations. [CC 1970 §3-36; Ord. No. 5067 §1,
4-26-1994; Ord. No. 5790 §2, 10-28-2003]
business of the deceased for the remainder of the period for which a
license fee has been paid by the deceased.
B. Whenever one (1) or more members of a partnership withdraws from
the partnership the City, upon being requested, shall permit the
remaining partner, or partners, originally licensed, to continue to
operate for the remainder of the period for which the license fee has
been paid, without obtaining a new license.
A. Neither brewers or manufacturers of non-intoxicating beer, or their
employees, officers, agents, subsidiaries or affiliates shall, under any
circumstances, directly or indirectly, have any financial interest in the
retail business for the sale of such non-intoxicating beer, nor shall they,
directly or indirectly, loan, give away or furnish equipment, money,
credit or property of any kind, except ordinary commercial credit for
such beer sold to such retail dealers.
B. All contracts entered into between such brewers or manufacturers, or
their officers, employees, directors or agents, in any way concerning
any of their products, obligating such retail dealers to buy or sell only
the products of any such brewer or manufacturer or obligating such
retail dealers to buy or sell the major part of such products, required by
such retail vendors from any such brewer or manufacturer, shall be void
and unenforceable in any court in this State, and proof of the execution
of such contract shall forfeit the license of both the vendor and the
vendee.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, in lieu of a license
issued annually, a license for the sale of intoxicating liquor and nonintoxicating
beer, as defined in this Chapter, for consumption on
premises where sold may be issued to any church, school, civic, service,
fraternal, veteran, political or charitable club or organization for the
sale of intoxicating liquor at a picnic, bazaar, fair or similar gathering.
The permit shall be issued only for the day or days named therein and it
Section
600.180
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
600.210
AO:1172
Section 600.220. Temporary Location For Liquor By The Drink
Caterers — Permit — Fee Required.
shall not authorize the sale of intoxicating liquor for more than seven
(7) days by any such club or organization in any fiscal year of the City.
B. In order to secure the license, the applicant shall complete a form
provided by the Director of Finance. The applicant shall pay a fee of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for such permit, which fee shall be due and
payable at the time application is submitted.
C. If the event will be held on a Sunday, the permit shall not authorize the
sale of intoxicating liquor on that day beginning earlier than 9:00 A.M.
D. At the same time that an applicant applies for a license under the
provisions of this Section, the applicant shall notify the Director of
Revenue of the State of Missouri of the holding of the event and by such
notification, by certified mail, shall accept responsibility for the
collection and payment of any applicable sales tax. Any sales tax due
shall be paid to the Director of Revenue within fifteen (15) days after
the close of the event and failure to do so shall result in a liability of
triple the amount of tax due plus payment of the tax and denial of any
other permit for a period of three (3) years. Under no circumstances
shall a bond be required from the applicant.
E. Nothing herein shall be interpreted as preventing any wholesaler or
distributor from providing customary storage, cooling or dispensing
equipment or use by the permit holder at such picnic, bazaar, fair or
similar gathering.
A. The City may issue a temporary permit to caterers and other persons
holding licenses to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for
consumption on the premises pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter
who furnish provisions and service for use at a particular function,
occasion or event at a particular location other than the licensed
premises, but not including a "festival" as defined in Chapter 316,
RSMo. The temporary permit shall be effective for a period not to
exceed one hundred sixty-eight (168) consecutive hours, and shall
authorize the service of alcoholic beverages at such function, occasion
or event during the hours at which alcoholic beverages may lawfully be
sold or served upon premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for onpremises
consumption. For every permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of this Section, the permittee shall pay to the City the sum of
fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each calendar day, or fraction thereof, for
which the permit is issued.
B. Except as provided in Subsection (C), all provisions of the Liquor
Control Law and the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City, in
which is located the premises in which such function, occasion or event
is held shall extend to such premises and shall be in force and
enforceable during all the time that the permittee, its agents, servants,
Section
600.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.220
AO:1173
Section 600.230. Delivery To Licensee Only. [CC 1970 §3-43; CC
1947 §10-37(l)]
Distillers, wholesalers, wine makers or brewers or their employees, officers
or agents shall not, directly or indirectly, sell or deliver intoxicating liquor of
any kind to any person in the City not licensed hereunder to sell intoxicating
liquor at retail, except as otherwise provided herein.
Section 600.240. Non-Intoxicating Beer Sales Included.131 [CC 1970
§3-46; CC 1947 §10-37]
Any person holding a license to sell intoxicating liquors at retail, either in
the original package or by the drink to be consumed on the premises where
sold, pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter regulating the sale of such
intoxicating liquors, may sell on the premises described in such license nonintoxicating
beer without obtaining the license required by this Chapter.
Section 600.250. Sale By The Drink Defined.
The sale of any intoxicating liquor except malt liquor, in the original
package, in any quantity less than fifty (50) milliliters shall be deemed "sale
by the drink" and may be made only by a holder of a retail liquor dealer's
license and, when so made, the container in every case shall be emptied and
the contents thereof served as other intoxicating liquors sold by the drink
are served.
Section 600.260. Administration of Law — License Suspension/
Revocation. [Ord. No. 6420 §2, 4-12-2016]
employees, or stock are in such premises. Except for Missouri-produced
wines in the original package, the provisions of this Section shall not
include the sale of packaged goods covered by this temporary permit.
C. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, any caterer who
possesses a valid State and valid local liquor license may deliver
alcoholic beverages, in the course of his/her catering business. A
caterer who possesses a valid State and valid local liquor license need
not obtain a separate license for each City the caterer delivers in, so
long as such City permits any caterer to deliver alcoholic beverages
within the City.
D. To assure and control product quality, wholesalers may, but shall not be
required to, give a retailer credit for intoxicating liquor with an alcohol
content of less than five percent (5%) by weight or non-intoxicating
beer delivered and invoiced under the catering permit number, but not
used, if the wholesaler removes the product within seventy-two (72)
hours of the expiration of the catering permit issued pursuant to this
Section.
131. Cross Reference—See §600.140(D).
Section
600.220
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
600.260
AO:1174
A. Suspension Or Revocation Of License—When—Manner. The Board may
suspend or revoke the license of any person for cause shown. In such
cases the City Clerk shall schedule a hearing before the Board not less
than ten (10) days prior to the effective date of revocation or
suspension, and prior to the hearing the Clerk shall give not less than
ten (10) days' written notice specifying grounds for the suspension or
revocation thereof to the licensee of the grounds upon which the license
is sought to be revoked or suspended and the time, date and place of
the hearing. Notice may be accomplished by personal delivery, U.S. mail
or by posting on the licensed premises. The hearing shall be conducted
in accordance with Section 600.270 of this Chapter.
B. Grounds For Suspension Or Revocation. A license may be suspended or
revoked for any of the following reasons:
1. Violating any of the provisions of either this Chapter, Chapters 311
or 312, RSMo., the Code of State Regulations applicable to the
conduct of licensees, or any ordinance of the City;
2. Failing to obtain or keep a license from the State Supervisor of
Alcohol and Tobacco Control;
3. Making a false affidavit in an application for a license under this
Chapter;
4. Failing to keep an orderly place or house;
5. Selling, offering for sale, possessing or knowingly permitting the
consumption on the licensed premises of any kind of intoxicating
liquors, the sale, possession or consumption of which is not
authorized under the license;
6. Selling, offering for sale, possessing or knowingly permitting the
consumption of any intoxicating liquor which has not been
inspected and labeled according to the laws of the State of
Missouri; or
7. Selling, giving, or otherwise supplying intoxicating liquor to:
a. Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years,
b. Any person during unauthorized hours on the licensed
premises,
c. A habitual drunkard or to any person who is under or
apparently under the influence of intoxicating liquor, or
d. Any person on the licensed premises during a term of
suspension as ordered by the Board.
C. Automatic Revocation/Suspension. A license shall be revoked
automatically if the licensee's State liquor license is revoked or if the
licensee is convicted in any court of any violation of Chapter 311 or
Section
600.260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.260
AO:1175
Section 600.270. Hearings Upon Suspension or Revocation of
Licenses. [Ord. No. 6420 §2, 4-12-2016]
Chapter 312, RSMo., or of any felony violation of Chapter 195, RSMo.,
in the course of business. A license shall be suspended automatically
if the licensee's State liquor license is suspended, and the suspension
shall be for a term not less than that imposed by the State.
D. Effect Of Suspension. No person whose license shall have been
suspended by order of the Board shall sell or give away any intoxicating
liquor or non-intoxicating beer during the time such suspension is in
effect. Any licensee desiring to keep premises open for the sale of food
or merchandise during the period of suspension shall display the
Board's order of suspension in a conspicuous place on the premises so
that all persons visiting the premises may readily see the same.
E. Appeal. Any applicant or licensee aggrieved by a decision of the Board
may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court as provided in Chapter
536, RSMo. for contested cases, provided such appeal is filed within ten
(10) days of the date of the Board's decision. The Board may delay the
implementation of its order pending appeal.
A. Testimony—Evidence. The licensee shall be given reasonable notice of
hearing and the grounds upon which discipline will be considered.
Hearings before the Board shall be in the nature of informal
investigations. Testimony of witnesses and other evidence pertinent to
the inquiry may be taken in such hearings, and all proceedings in such
hearings shall be recorded. Any person residing or conducting a
business within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed establishment
shall have the right to produce witnesses and testimony.
B. Witnesses—How Summoned. Subpoenas may be issued by the Board
for any person whose testimony is desired at any hearing. Such
subpoenas may be served and returns thereon made by any agent and
in the same manner as provided by law for the service of subpoenas in
civil suits in the Circuit Courts of this State. The Board also may issue
subpoenas duces tecum requiring the production of documents or other
items pertaining to the subject of the inquiry.
C. Witnesses To Be Sworn. Before any witness shall testify in any such
hearing, he/she shall be sworn by the City Clerk to tell the truth and
nothing but the truth. Witnesses shall be subject to direct and cross
examination by an attorney representing the licensee as well as
attorneys representing other interested parties.
D. Decision—Suspension Or Revocation. If the evidence supports a finding
that the license should be revoked or suspended, the Board shall issue a
written order which shall include specific findings of fact setting forth
the grounds for the action taken. If the evidence fails to support a
finding that the license should be revoked or suspended, then no such
order shall be issued.
Section
600.260
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
600.270
AO:1176
E. Appeal. Any applicant or licensee aggrieved by a decision of the Board
may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court as provided in Chapter
536, RSMo., for contested cases, provided such appeal is filed within
ten (10) days of the date of the Board's decision. The Board may delay
the implementation of its order pending appeal.
Section
600.270
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.270
AO:1177
Chapter 605
BUSINESS AND OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES AND
REGULATIONS
Cross References—Signs, ch. 425; refuse collectors, §235.080; kennels,
§210.170; taxicabs, ch. 620; peddlers, solicitors and canvassers, ch. 610;
pawnbrokers, ch. 615.
State Law References—State cigarette tax, ch. 149, RSMo.; weights and
measures, ch. 413, RSMo.; professions and callings exempt from
occupational license, §71.620, RSMo.
Section
600.270
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
600.270
AO:1178
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 605.010. Definitions. [CC 1970 §16-1; CC 1947
§§10-1—10-7, 10-16, 10-140; Ord. No. 4774 §1, 7-10-1990]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the respective
meanings ascribed to them:
ANNUAL GROSS RECEIPTS — Gross receipts during the license year.
BUSINESS OR OCCUPATION — Every person engaged in any business,
occupation, pursuit, profession or trade or in keeping or maintaining of
any institution, establishment, article, utility or commodity specified in this
Chapter or in any other provision of this Code or in any ordinance of the
City, within the City; except as may be otherwise provided by law.
FEE — Unless otherwise provided, all license fees and taxes levied on
or required to be paid, as herein provided, by any merchant, business or
occupation.
GROSS RECEIPTS — Unless otherwise provided, the aggregate amount
of all sales and shall include the receipt of cash, credits and property of
any kind or nature without any deduction therefrom on account of the
cost of any items sold, the cost of any materials used or of any labor,
service costs, interest paid or payable or any losses or any other expenses
whatsoever; provided however, that the following shall be excluded from
any computation of gross receipts if the books of accounts segregate the
amounts so as to reflect such exclusions:
Receipts of taxes levied by State and Federal Governments and
collected by the seller.
1.
Sales for delivery outside the State to non-residents of the State;
provided this Subparagraph (2) has no application to utilities licensed
under Sections 605.240 and 605.250.
2.
Receipts of traded merchandise recorded as cash receipts and resold
and recorded as a sale upon such resale; provided this Subparagraph
(3) has no application to utilities licensed under Sections 605.240 and
605.250.
3.
4. Interdepartmental sales within the organization of the seller.
Such part of the sales price of property returned by the purchaser as is
refunded either in cash or by credit.
5.
Receipts of refundable deposits, except that portion of refundable
deposits forfeited and taken into the gross receipts of the seller.
6.
Receipts for sales of beer and intoxicating liquors, provided said sales
are subject to a license fee of the City and said fee has been paid
pursuant to the provisions of this Code and the ordinances of this City.
7.
Section
605.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.010
AO:1179
LICENSE — Unless otherwise provided, all licenses required to be secured
or had, as herein provided, by any merchant, business or occupation.
LICENSE YEAR — Unless otherwise provided, begins on July first (1st) or,
in the case of those newly established, at the beginning of doing business
and ends on June thirtieth (30th) next; except that any merchant, business
or occupation whose license fee is computed on the basis of annual gross
receipts may, but only upon prior approval by the Director of Finance,
elect a license year which shall coincide with said merchant's, business's or
occupation's accounting and Federal tax fiscal year.
MERCHANT — Every person engaged in the selling of any goods, wares or
merchandise at any store, stand or place occupied for that purpose within
the City; except as may be otherwise provided by ordinance or this Code.
Section 605.020. License Required.132 [CC 1970 §16-2; CC 1947
§§10-8, 10-141]
Every merchant, business or occupation, not exempt by law, before
operating as such, shall make application for and procure and pay for a
license therefor to the Director of Finance pursuant to the provisions set
forth in this Chapter or as otherwise provided by ordinance or this Code and
said merchant, business or occupation shall set forth truly all information
required by said application.
Section 605.030. License Non-Assignable and Non-Transferable.
[CC 1970 §16-3; CC 1947 §§10-10, 10-146]
No license shall be assignable or transferable.
Section 605.040. Separate License For Each Place of Business. [CC
1970 §16-4; CC 1947 §10-11]
A separate license shall be obtained for each stand, store or place of
business conducted, operated or maintained by every merchant, business
or occupation for which a license is required and the Director of Finance
shall be notified of any change of address within seven (7) days after such
change.
Section 605.050. More Than One Pursuit At The Same Address. [CC
1970 §16-5; CC 1947 §10-12; Ord. No. 4542 §1, 10-28-1986]
Whenever any applicant for a license is engaged in more than one (1)
occupation or business, as specified in Sections 605.080 and 605.100, at
the same address, such applicant may, at his/her option, in lieu of making
application and paying for a separate license for each such occupation
or business, make application and pay for one (1) occupation or business
license of the applicant at such address, provided that the application
is for the occupation or business which will result in the largest annual
132. State Law Reference—Authority to levy occupation tax, §94.110, RSMo.
Section
605.010
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
605.050
AO:1180
license fee. Provided however, that a separate license is required for each
business and occupation as specified in Section 605.090, for each merchant
as specified in Section 605.190, and for each eating and drinking
establishment as specified in Section 605.200.
Section 605.060. Notification of Sale or Lease of A Portion of
Premises. [CC 1970 §16-6; CC 1947 §10-12.1]
Any merchant, business or occupation which shall sell or lease any portion
of its stand, store or place of business to another, whose sales will not be
included in the return of the lessor, shall report the fact of such sale or lease
together with the name and address of the purchaser or lessee in writing to
the Director of Finance. Such report shall be made within five (5) days after
such purchaser or lessee has taken possession and shall include a general
description of all goods, commodities or ware-dispensing devices installed
in the premises by such purchaser or lessee.
Section 605.070. Form, Issuance and Validity of License. [CC 1970
§16-7; CC 1947 §10-12.2]
The Director of Finance shall prescribe the form of all licenses and
applications therefor and shall receive said applications and issue said
licenses; however, except as otherwise provided by ordinance or this Code,
no license shall be valid for any purpose unless signed by the City Manager
and City Clerk.
Section 605.075. Compliance With State Immigration Laws. [Ord.
No. 6036 §6, 9-23-2008]
In conjunction with the review of any application for a City occupational
or business license, the City shall consult any database available under
Section 285.543, RSMo., regarding suspension of licenses and permits
of businesses that violate State alien employment restrictions. The City
shall abide by directions received from any court or the Attorney General
regarding suspension of such licenses and permits for such violations.
Section 605.080. Businesses and Occupations — Minimum Annual
Fee. [CC 1970 §16-27; CC 1947 §10-12.11; Ord. No. 5010 §1,
10-12-1993]
All businesses and occupations, as defined in this Chapter and except as
otherwise provided by this Code or by ordinance, shall pay to the Director
of Finance, at such times as provided in this Chapter, a minimum annual
license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
Section
605.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.090
AO:1181
Section 605.090. Businesses and Occupations — Gross Receipts
Fee. [CC 1970 §16-28; CC 1947 §10-12.11; Ord. No. 4476 §1,
11-26-1985]
The following businesses and occupations shall pay annual license fees of
one dollar twenty-five cents ($1.25) for one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of
gross receipts or fraction thereof:
Appliance, machinery or clothing repair
Automobile repair and painting
Automobile or truck leasing or rental
Automobile washing
Barbershop
Beauty shop
Bookbinding company or agency
Bowling alley
Caterer
Cleaner, presser, launderer, dyer
Clothing rental
Dancing school and studio
Laboratory: Medical, dental and testing
Photographer
Repair (see particular heading)
Reducing salon
Shoe repair
Tailor and dressmaker
Theater
Upholsterer
Watchmaker and watch repairer
Section 605.100. Businesses and Occupations — Set Fees. [CC 1970
§16-29; CC 1947 §10-12.11; Ord. No. 4159 §1, 10-31-1980; Ord. No.
4476 §2, 11-26-1985; Ord. No. 4862 §1, 1-28-1992]
The following businesses and occupations shall pay annual or other periods
as indicated, license fees as indicated except that any business or
Section
605.090
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
605.100
AO:1182
occupation in which a set fee is indicated shall pay at least eight dollars
($8.00) for every person regularly employed or associated in such business
during the preceding license year and the license fee shall be the higher of
the set fee or the computed fee and, provided, the license for a new business
shall be based upon an estimate of regular employees or associates of such
business during the license year and, provide further, that the license for
a new business of more than fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be prorated on
the date of commencing the new business at seventy-five percent (75%)
after October first (1st); at fifty percent (50%) after January first (1st); and
at twenty-five percent (25%) after April first (1st). A regular employee or
associate shall be one that works in the service of the licensee twenty (20)
hours or more per week during thirty (30) or more weeks per year.
The set fees for businesses or occupations shall be as shown on Exhibit A
attached hereto and made a part of this Section.
EXHIBIT A
$470.00
Actuarial firm $470.00
Auctioneer, per day of operation $310.00
Business or correspondence school $230.00
Cigarette vending machine operator, per machine $40.00
Collection agency $310.00
Commodity futures brokerage company $790.00
Construction or contracting company $50.00
Employment agency $230.00
Financial agency:
Bank or trust company and bank corporation $790.00
Bank, individual doing banking business $790.00
Stock, bond or brokerage company $790.00
Food storage locker $230.00
Health club $230.00
Hotel or motel, $8.00 per sleeping room, plus $470.00
Insurance:
Company, all types $790.00
Agency and brokerage or sales agency $50.00
Inspection, rating, claim, adjustment, agency or
company
$230.00
Title $470.00
Loan agency $790.00
Loan company $790.00
Merchandise rental company or agency $230.00
Section
605.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.100
AO:1183
Mortgage broker $230.00
Moving and storage company $230.00
Office, not otherwise classified $50.00
Printer or publisher $230.00
Public hall $310.00
Real estate company, agency or brokerage $50.00
Savings and loan company:
Five (5) or more employees $700.00
Less than five (5) employees $50.00
Ticket agency $230.00
Travel agency $230.00
Undertaker $230.00
Vending machine sticker:
Machine taking one cent ($0.01) to five cents
($0.05), per machine
$5.00
Machine taking six cents ($0.06) to ten cents
($0.10), per machine
$10.00
Machine taking eleven cents ($0.11) or more, per
machine
$25.00
Section 605.110. Fee — Computation Formulae. [CC 1970 §16-8; CC
1947 §10-9; Ord. No. 5010 §1, 10-12-1993]
A. Flat Fee. Every merchant, business or occupation in the City, except as
otherwise provided by this Code or ordinance or law, shall pay within
one (1) month after the beginning of the license year an annual license
fee in the sum of the flat fees specified in this Chapter, except that any
business or occupation not specified in this Chapter or any other
provisions of this Code or ordinance of the City shall pay an annual
license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) and none of the foregoing license
fees shall be prorated for less than a full year. Such fees shall be due
and payable at the time of commencing of operations or business in the
City by any business or occupation and thereafter within one (1) month
after the beginning of the license year.
B. Gross Receipts. Every merchant, business or occupation in the City
required to pay a license fee based on gross receipts, and except as
provided for elsewhere in this Code or ordinance of the City, shall pay
an annual license fee based on the actual gross receipts of such
merchant, business or occupation for the entire preceding calendar
year and any merchant, business or occupation commencing operations
or business in the City during any license year shall pay at the time of
such commencement a license fee based on estimated gross receipts for
the remainder of said license year, which shall be filed by such
Section
605.100
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
605.110
AO:1184
Section 605.120. Fee — Statement of Gross Receipts. [CC 1970
§16-9; CC 1947 §10-12.7]
Every person for whom a license is provided herein, the amount of which
license is to be computed upon the annual gross receipts of such person,
shall furnish the City with a correct statement in writing showing the
amount of such annual gross receipts, which statement shall not be made
public or used by the City except for the purpose of establishing a correct
basis for fixing and collecting the amount of the license herein provided. All
books of account showing the amount of such annual gross receipts shall be
open to the inspection of the City Officials charged with the duty of issuing
the license herein provided and collecting for the same and the issuance
of any such license may be withheld until all the requirements have been
fulfilled.
Section 605.130. Fee — Time of Payment. [CC 1970 §16-10; CC 1947
§10-12.3; Ord. No. 3489 §1, 8-10-1971]
All license fees shall be due and payable one (1) month after the beginning
of the license year.
Section 605.140. Record of Licenses Issued. [CC 1970 §16-11; CC
1947 §10-12.4]
The Director of Finance shall keep a complete record of all licenses issued
showing the nature of the license, dates of issuance and to whom issued and
addresses for which issued.
Section 605.150. Maintenance of License. [CC 1970 §16-12; CC
1947 §§10-12.5, 10-148]
All licenses granted by the City shall be carefully preserved at the address
for which issued as shown thereon and be available for examination during
normal business hours by any duly authorized agent of the City and by
patrons or customers.
merchant, business or occupation at or before the time of
commencement and said parties shall, within one (1) month after the
end of such prorated license year, file an estimated return for the
ensuing license year and pay at that time a license fee based on said
estimate; provided however, within one (1) month after the end of each
of said periods of estimated gross receipts, such merchants, business or
occupation shall file a statement of actual gross receipts and shall pay
an additional tax, if any, based on said actual gross receipts; provided
however, any payment of a license fee based on estimated or actual
gross receipts which shall be in excess of the amount due to the City
shall not be refunded, except in the case of cessation of operations or
business, but shall be applied as a credit for the license fee for the
ensuing year.
Section
605.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.160
AO:1185
Section 605.160. Right To Audit or Examine Applicant's Books. [CC
1970 §16-13; CC 1947 §10-12.6]
The Director of Finance or any deputy or agent or certified public
accountant employed by him/her shall have the right at all reasonable times
during regular business hours to audit or examine the books and records of
the applicant for any license for the purpose of determining the truthfulness
and accuracy of any statements made by the applicant in his/her application
for license or in the payment of this license tax.
Section 605.170. License Denial For Failure To Pay Obligations To
City. [CC 1970 §16-14; CC 1947 §10-12.8]
No license shall be issued to any merchant, business or occupation so long
as said merchant, business or occupation shall have failed to pay any other
obligation then due and owing to the City.
Section 605.180. Violations — Penalties — License Revocation. [CC
1970 §16-16; CC 1947 §§10-12.9, 10-147]
A. Delay In Payment. All license fees provided for in this Chapter or
elsewhere in this Code or ordinance shall be deemed delinquent if not
paid on the date due and payable and any merchant, business or
occupation so delinquent shall be required to pay to the Director of
Finance an additional ten percent (10%) of the amount due for the first
(1st) month of said delinquency and one percent (1%) for each month or
part thereof that said delinquency shall thereafter continue, in addition
to any other penalty prescribed herein.
B. False Statements Causing Reduction In Payment. Any merchant,
business or occupation which shall make a false statement which shall
cause a reduction in any license fee shall be required to pay to the
Director of Finance the additional amount due, plus a penalty of twentyfive
percent (25%) of such additional amount, plus one percent (1%)
interest per month or fraction thereof on such additional amount from
the date originally due, in addition to any other penalties prescribed
herein.
C. Non-Compliance Or Violation. Any failure to comply with, or any
violation of, any provision of this Chapter shall be an ordinance
violation and shall be punishable, upon conviction thereof, as provided
in Section 100.110, in addition to any other penalties prescribed in this
Code or ordinance of this City or the laws of the State; and each day
such failure to comply or such violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
D. Revocation Of License. Any failure to comply with, or any violation of,
any provision of this Chapter by any licensed merchant, business or
occupation shall be cause for revocation of such license by the City
upon recommendation of the City Manager and said revocation shall be
in addition to any other penalties prescribed herein.
Section
605.160
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
605.180
AO:1186
ARTICLE II
Specific Provisions For Certain Businesses
Section 605.190. Merchants. [CC 1970 §16-30; CC 1947 §10-12.10;
Ord. No. 4476 §3, 11-26-1985]
All merchants, as defined in this Chapter and except as otherwise provided
by this Code or by ordinance, shall pay to the Director of Finance one dollar
twenty-five cents ($1.25) per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or fraction
thereof of gross receipts during the license year at such times as provided
in this Chapter; provided however, the minimum fee shall be fifty dollars
($50.00).
Section 605.200. Eating and Drinking Establishments — License —
Alcoholic Beverage Receipts Excluded. [CC 1970 §16-31; CC 1947
§10-12.12; Ord. No. 4476 §4, 11-26-1985]
Every eating or drinking establishment, including, without limiting the
generality thereof, restaurants, cafes, sandwich stands and soft drink
parlors or the owners or lessees thereof, except those owned and operated
directly by governmental or eleemosynary institutions, shall pay to the
Director of Finance one dollar twenty-five cents ($1.25) per one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or fraction thereof of gross receipts during the license
year at such times as provided in this Chapter; provided however, receipts
from the sale of intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating beer, for which the
fees provided elsewhere in this Code or by ordinance of the City have been
paid to the City, shall not be included in the computation of the license fee
from eating and drinking establishments. The minimum annual license fee
for any eating or drinking establishment shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
Section 605.210. Eating and Drinking Establishments — Required
Permit Before Issuance. [CC 1970 §16-32; CC 1947 §10-12.13]
No license as provided in Section 605.200 shall be issued for any eating
or drinking establishment or business described in Chapter 245, unless the
applicant for such license shall hold a valid and subsisting permit issued
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 245; provided however, failure to hold
such permit shall not relieve any obligation for payment of a license fee as
hereinabove provided.
Section 605.220. Motorbuses. [CC 1970 §16-34; CC 1947 §10-99]
Every operator of a motorbus, as defined in Section 300.010, shall obtain a
license and pay to the Director of Finance on or before the first (1st) day
of February of each year an annual license fee of five percent (5%) of the
gross receipts derived from the operation of such motorbus within the City
during the preceding calendar year, which shall be the license year. Such
license issuance is subject to the requirements of Title III of this Code of
Ordinances.
Section
605.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.230
AO:1187
Section 605.230. Coin Return On Vending Devices Required. [CC
1970 §16-15; CC 1947 §12-62]
Each vending device placed, installed or operated in the City shall be
equipped with a device or system which rejects or returns coins in the event
such vending device is empty or inoperative.
Section 605.235. Short-Term Rental of Residential Property
Prohibited [Ord. No. 6477 § 1, 4-4-2017]
A. As used in this Section, "short-term rental" means letting or offering for
let of all or a portion of a dwelling unit (as defined in Section 405.390 of
this Code of Ordinances) to one or more guests for a period of thirty
(30) days or less.
B. Short-term rental of residential dwelling units located in the City of
Clayton is prohibited.
Section
605.230
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
605.235
AO:1188
ARTICLE III
Businesses Furnishing Utility Services — Gross Receipts
Section 605.240. Gas, Electricity, Water Utilities. [CC 1970 §16-35;
CC 1947 §10-15(a); Ord. No. 3479 §1, 7-27-1971; Ord. No. 3757 §1,
6-24-1975; Ord. No. 4164 §1, 10-31-1980; Ord. No. 4928 §1,
10-13-1992; Ord. No. 4932 §1, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 6163 §1,
9-13-2011]
Every supplier or furnisher of gas or gas service, electricity, electrical power
or electrical service or water or water service in the City shall pay to the
Director of Finance a monthly license fee on or before the last day of each
month for the preceding month at the rate of seven percent (7%) of the
gross receipts derived from the transaction of such business in the City for
each monthly period before November 1, 1980, provided that the rates shall
be eight percent (8%) of the gross receipts derived from the transaction of
business in the City for each monthly period following November 1, 1980.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 393.275(2), RSMo., the license fee on
gross receipts derived by any utility provider subject to the monthly license
fee provided herein by reason of the transaction of such business in the City
shall be maintained as provided herein or as may be revised by the Board
of Aldermen from time to time regardless of tariff or rate actions of the
Missouri Public Service Commission.
Section 605.250. Telephone Suppliers and Telecommunications
Service Providers. [CC 1970 §16-36; CC 1947 §10-15(b); Ord. No.
3757 §1, 6-24-1975; Ord. No. 4087 §1, 1-22-1980; Ord. No. 4163 §1,
10-31-1980; Ord. No. 5753 §1, 4-22-2003]
Every supplier of telephones and every person engaged in the business of
providing telephone and telecommunications services or similar services,
whether through wire or wireless transmissions, but excluding direct
broadcast satellite services and any similar services which local
governments are preempted or prohibited from taxing under applicable
Federal or State law, in the City shall pay to the Director of Finance a
monthly license fee on or before the twenty-fifth (25th) of each month for
the preceding month at the rate of eight percent (8%) of the gross receipts
derived from the transaction of business in the City for each monthly period
following November 1, 1980.
Section
605.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.250
AO:1189

ARTICLE IV
Parades and Assemblies
Section 605.260. Definitions. [CC 1970 §20-90; Ord. No. 5819
§1(20-90), 5-11-2004; Ord. No. 5900 §1(20-90), 9-27-2005]
For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall mean as follows:
PARADE — A coordinated movement of seven (7) or more pedestrians or
vehicles upon the streets within the City, except funeral processions, with
either:
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY — A gathering outside a structure of more than eight
(8) persons for a common purpose at a public place that continues in
existence for more than thirty (30) minutes.
Section 605.270. Permit Required For Parades and Processions. [CC
1970 §20-91; Ord. No. 5819 §1(20-91), 5-11-2004), Ord. No. 5900
§1(20-91), 5-27-2005; Ord. No. 6103 §1, 4-27-2010]
An intent of attracting public attention that interferes with, or can
reasonably be expected to have a tendency to interfere with, the normal
flow or regulation of traffic upon the street, or
1.
Actually has or can reasonably be expected to have a tendency to
interfere with the normal flow or regulation of traffic and/or the use of
one (1) or more streets, regardless of the intent of the participants.
2.
A. No procession or parade shall occupy, march or proceed along any
public street, roadway or public property except in accordance with a
permit issued by the Chief of Police and with such other applicable
regulations as are set forth in this Code.
B. The written application for such permit shall be filed with the Chief of
Police on a form approved by him/her sufficiently in advance of the
proposed parade or procession to allow adequate arrangements to be
made for the proper policing of same. The application shall contain the
following:
1. The name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization, the parade
or procession chairman and the addresses and telephone numbers
of each.
2. The purpose of the parade or procession, the date when it is
proposed to be conducted, the location of the assembly area, route
to be traveled and the approximate time when the parade,
procession or motorcade will assemble, start and terminate.
3. A description of the individual floats, marching units, vehicles,
bands, if any, including a description of any sources of noise and
any sound amplification equipment to be used.
Section
605.260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.270
AO:1191
4. Such other information as the Chief of Police may deem reasonably
necessary.
C. The application for a permit may be granted if the applicant establishes
to the reasonable satisfaction of the Chief of Police that the application
complies with the requirements of this Article and the parade,
procession or public assembly will not:
1. Substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other
traffic in the vicinity of its route;
2. Require the diversion of so great a number of Police Officers,
Firefighters, ambulances and other first responders of the City so
as to disrupt the normal and necessary provision of such services to
the City;
3. Unduly interfere with the provision of police, fire and ambulance
services to the areas contiguous to the assembly areas, due to the
concentration of persons, animals and vehicles on the parade
route;
4. Present an unreasonable risk of injury to persons and property or
provoke disorderly and/or unruly conduct;
5. Create an unreasonable amount of noise based upon the character
of the neighborhood of the proposed parade route or the time and
date of the proposed parade; or
6. Pose an unreasonable risk to the health, welfare and safety of the
City's residents and businesses for any other reason.
D. The Chief of Police may approve or deny an application or may
conditionally approve an application upon such terms or conditions as
may, in the reasonable judgment of the Chief, best provide for
protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
E. The Chief of Police may also deny an application and tentatively
authorize an alternative permit to an unsuccessful applicant, providing
a permitted date, time and route for the parade. The alternative permit
may include any other conditions or requirements that the Chief of
Police deems necessary to ensure that the parade will comply with the
requirements set forth in this Code of Ordinances. An applicant may
accept the alternative parade route by notifying the Chief of Police, in
writing, of such acceptance within three (3) days of receiving the
offered alternative permit. Any alternative permit must comply with the
requirements for parade permits set forth herein.
F. An applicant may appeal the denial, conditional approval or tender of
an alternative parade permit by the Chief of Police. The appeal shall be
in writing and directed to the City Manager and must be taken within
three (3) days of the receipt of the notice of the Chief's determination.
Section
605.270
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
605.270
AO:1192
Section 605.280. Parade and Assembly Prohibitions [CC 1970
§20-92; Ord. No. 5819 §1(20-92), 5-11-2004; Ord. No. 6377 §1,
6-9-2015]
The City Manager shall review the application de novo and render such
determination as warranted under the circumstances.
G. Any parade permit issued under this Section may set forth conditions
reasonably necessary for the protection of the rights, property and
personal safety of all parties. Failure to substantially fulfill the
conditions set forth in such permit shall render such permit null and
void.
H. The requested permit shall not be issued until receipt of a payment to
the City of a permit fee in an amount sufficient to pay costs reasonably
anticipated to be borne by the City to accommodate the intended event
including, but not limited to, personnel and/or equipment costs
incurred for staging and/or deployment of personnel or equipment
reasonably required to address public safety and traffic impacts that
may be occasioned by the permitted event.
I. Upon issuance of such permit, the Police Department shall provide
Police services adjacent to the permit area to regulate vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, conditioned upon the availability of a sufficient
contingent of on-duty personnel to provide such services without
diminishing routine service levels to the entire community.
J. By applying for and being granted such permit, the applicant shall
assume all civil liability arising from conditions, restrictions or
omissions on the face of the permit.
K. Payment of a non-refundable fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) for the
administrative costs involved in the processing of the parade or
procession permit application shall accompany the filing of the permit
application and shall remain in the general revenues of the City without
regard to whether the application is approved or denied.
A. The following prohibitions shall apply to all parades and public
assemblies:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person at any parade or public assembly
to carry or possess any weapon as defined below. For purposes of
this Chapter and notwithstanding any other provision of this Code,
"weapon" means any pistol, rifle, shotgun or other firearm of any
kind, whether loaded or unloaded, air rifle, air pistol, paintball gun,
paintball rifle, explosive, blasting cap(s), knife, hatchet, ax,
slingshot, blackjack, metal knuckles, mace, iron buckle, ax handle,
chains, crowbar, hammer, shovel or any club or bludgeon or any
other instrumentality used or intended for use as a dangerous
weapon.
Section
605.270
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.280
AO:1193
2. It shall be unlawful or any person to carry or possess any sign,
poster, plaque or notice unless such sign, plaque or notice is
constructed solely of a cloth, paper, flexible or cardboard material
no greater than one-quarter (1/4) inch in thickness.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess any length of
lumber, wood or wood lath unless it is one-fourth (1/4) inch or less
in thickness and two (2) inches or less in width or if not generally
rectangular in shape, such object shall not exceed three-quarters
(3/4) inch in its thickest dimension. Both ends of the length of
lumber, wood or lath shall be blunt and shall not be pointed.
Exceptions from this Section include:
a. Lumber or wood used to support or control puppets, so long as
the lumber or wood is not detached from the puppets, and
b. Stilts, defined as two (2) poles with footrests off the ground on
which someone balances or walks so long as each stilt does not
exceed fifteen (15) feet in length and two (2) by two (2) inches
in width.
4. It shall be unlawful or any person to carry or possess any length of
metal, plastic or other similar hard or stiff material, whether hollow
or solid; provided that the hollow plastic does not exceed threequarter
(3/4) inch in its thickest dimension, does not exceed oneeighth
(1/8) inch in wall thickness and is not filled with any
material, liquid, gas or solid, may be used to support a sign, banner,
placard or other similar display; however, both ends of the length of
plastic material shall be blunt and not pointed.
5. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess glass bottles,
glass jars or glass containers of any kind unless such glass
container is a vial required to hold medication customarily stored in
a glass vial.
6. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess balloons
filled with any material or substance other than air, oxygen or
helium. Such materials and substances include, but are not limited
to, water, paint or any other liquid, solid or other gas.
7. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess bricks,
stones, rocks or pieces of asphalt or concrete. No person may carry
or possess with the intent to unlawfully use any hard materials or
substances or pieces of hard materials or substances that are
capable of being thrown or projected.
8. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess spray paint
cans.
9. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess any projectile
launcher or other device which is commonly used for the purpose of
launching, hurling or throwing any object, liquid, material or other
Section
605.280
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
605.280
AO:1194
substance, including but not limited to, super soakers and water
cannons. Nothing in this Subsection is intended to prohibit or
restrict those participating in parades, demonstrations, rallies or
assemblies from possessing sufficient amount of water or other
liquids designed and intended for human consumption during such
an event.
10. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess any so called
sleeping dragon device with the intent to use the device to deny or
obstruct the public's ability to freely move about on roadways,
sidewalks or into or out of buildings. For purposes of this
Subsection, a "sleeping dragon device" shall mean a section of pipe
or a container filled with weighted material, handcuffs, chains,
carabineers or other locking devices used to lock a person or
persons to another person or persons or other objects.
11. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive or cause to be
ridden or driven any animal drawn vehicle upon any public street
as a part of a parade or public assembly unless such transportation
is specifically authorized by the permit.
12. No person shall cross or breach a lawfully erected barricade or
police line.
B. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit a disabled person from carrying,
possessing or using a wheelchair, cane, walker or similar device
necessary for providing mobility so that the person may participate in a
parade.
C. Nothing in this Section is intended to authorize the possession or use of
materials, weapons or devices that are otherwise prohibited by any
other local, State or Federal ordinance, Statute or regulation. The
purpose of this Section is to prohibit the carrying or possession of items
and materials that have the potential to be used as weapons to cause
physical or personal damage and whose possession might not otherwise
be prohibited by local, State or Federal law.
Section
605.280
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.280
AO:1195

ARTICLE V
Aircraft Landing Permits
Section 605.290. Definitions. [CC 1970 §21-250; Ord. No. 3623 §1,
10-23-1973]
The following terms, as used herein, shall mean:
AIRCRAFT — Any airplane, helicopter, gas bag, flying machine, balloon or
any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed for
navigation or for flight in the air.
EMERGENCY LANDING OR FLIGHT — A landing or flight necessary to the
immediate care of sick or injured persons or for the protection of life and
property in immediate danger or for transport of government officials in
emergencies when other means of transport are impossible.
PROJECTS — Construction or other activities where use of aircraft limited
as to time and location is desirable.
Section 605.300. Permit For Landing Other Than At Airport or Low
Flight — Required. [CC 1970 §21-251; Ord. No. 3623 §2,
10-23-1973]
No person shall land any aircraft within the corporate limits of the City
of Clayton, Missouri, except upon a regularly established airport field or a
landing place or operate an aircraft below the height of five hundred (500)
feet except by permit or notification as hereinafter provided.
Section 605.310. Permit For Landing Other Than At Airport or Low
Flight — Application — Conditions of Issuance. [CC 1970 §21-252;
Ord. No. 3623 §3, 10-23-1973]
Upon application the Chief of Police or his/her designated representative
may issue permits for individual landings of aircraft or operation thereof
below the height of five hundred (500) feet. Such permits may be issued
only for use of aircraft in emergency landing or flight or in connection
with projects upon a showing by the applicant that such landings or low
flight will not be dangerous to the safety, health, life and general welfare
of the inhabitants of the City of Clayton and will be conducted under such
circumstances as to insure safe operation.
Section 605.320. Permit For Landing Other Than At Airport or Low
Flight — May Be Written or Oral. [CC 1970 §21-253; Ord. No. 3623
§4, 10-23-1973]
Permits may be given in writing or orally and in cases of emergency landing
or flight under circumstances where it is impossible to obtain a permit
because of the nature of the emergency and the time involved, the aircraft
operator shall make every reasonable attempt to notify the Police
Department of the City of Clayton of such emergency landing or flight.
Section
605.290
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.320
AO:1197

ARTICLE VI
Garage Sales
Section 605.330. Garage Sales or Other Sales of Merchandise On
Residential Premises. [CC 1970 §17-34; Ord. No. 3831 §§1—4,
7-27-1976]
A. All so-called "garage sales" or other sales involving the offering for sale
of multiple items of personal property on property zoned and occupied
as a residence shall be subject to the following rules and regulations:
1. No one shall accept to take in for sale any goods from any
commercial business or enterprise on a consignment basis.
2. There shall be no display or sale of any property in the front yard of
the premises.
3. No signs shall be posted anywhere in the City of Clayton
advertising such sales, except that the property owner may install
on the residential lot on which such sale is to be held one (1) sign
not larger than two (2) feet by three (3) feet advertising such sale.
Such signs shall be erected not sooner than one (1) day prior to the
date of the sale and shall be removed at the end of the last day upon
which the sale is held.
4. Not more than two (2) such sales per annum shall be held at the
premises if occupied by the same family or any member of such
family.
5. Any sale conducted pursuant to the provisions hereof shall be
confined to the period between 8:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. of any day
and shall not extend in excess of two (2) days.
B. Any person conducting a garage sale or other sale involving the offering
for sale of multiple items of personal property on property zoned and
occupied as a residence shall be required to obtain a permit therefor
from the City. Applications for such permit shall be made to the Director
of Finance in such form as may be required by the City and shall be
accompanied by a permit fee in the amount of one dollar ($1.00).
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be
deemed guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined a sum not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each
day during which any violation of this Section continues or exists shall
be deemed to be a separate violation.
D. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to or effect persons selling
goods pursuant to an order of process of a court of competent
jurisdiction or persons acting in accordance with their powers and
duties as public officials.
Section
605.330
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.330
AO:1199
Chapter 610
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
Section 610.010. Definitions. [CC 1970 §16-61; Ord. No. 5720 §1,
9-24-2002]
As used in this Chapter, the following words have the meanings indicated:
CANVASSER — A person who attempts to make personal contact with
a resident at his/her residence without prior specific invitation or
appointment from the resident for the primary purpose of:
ISSUING OFFICER — The Director of Finance for the City of Clayton,
Missouri.
PEDDLER — A person who attempts to make personal contact with a
resident at his/her residence without prior specific invitation or
appointment from the resident for the primary purpose of attempting to sell
a good or service. A "peddler" does not include a person who distributes
handbills or flyers for a commercial purpose, advertising an event, activity,
good or service that is offered to the resident for purchase at a location
away from the residence or at a time different from the time of visit. Such a
person is a "solicitor".
SOLICITOR — A person who attempts to make personal contact with a
resident at his/her residence without prior specific invitation or
appointment from the resident for the primary purpose of:
Section 610.020. Exception. [CC 1970 §16-62; Ord. No. 5720 §1,
9-24-2002]
This Chapter shall not apply to a Federal, State or local government
employee or a public utility employee in the performance of his/her duty for
his/her employer.
Attempting to enlist support for or against a particular religion,
philosophy, ideology, political party, issue or candidate, even if
incidental to such purpose the canvasser accepts the donation of money
for or against such cause; or
1.
Distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a non-commercial event or
service.
2.
Attempting to obtain a donation to a particular patriotic, philanthropic,
social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, fraternal,
charitable, political or religious purpose, even if incidental to such
purpose there is the sale of some good or service; or
1.
Distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a commercial event or
service.
2.
Section
605.330
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
610.030
AO:1200
Section 610.030. Identification Card Required For Peddlers and
Solicitors, Available For Canvassers. [CC 1970 §16-63; Ord. No. 5720
§1, 9-24-2002]
No person shall act as a peddler or as a solicitor within the City without
first obtaining an identification card in accordance with this Chapter. A
canvasser is not required to have an identification card but any canvasser
wanting an identification card for the purpose of reassuring City residents
of the canvasser's good faith shall be issued one (1) upon request.
Section 610.040. Fee. [CC 1970 §16-64; Ord. No. 5720 §1,
9-24-2002]
The fee for the issuance of each identification card shall be:
1. For a peddler acting on behalf of a merchant otherwise
licensed to do business within the City
No fee
2. For a peddler acting on behalf of a merchant not
otherwise licensed to do business within the City, a fee
per day
$5.00
3. For a solicitor (including a commercial solicitor
advertising an event, activity, good or service for
purchase at a location away from the residence)
No fee
4. For a canvasser requesting an identification card No fee
Section 610.050. Application For Identification Card. [CC 1970
§16-65; Ord. No. 5720 §1, 9-24-2002]
Any person or organization (formal or informal) may apply for one (1) or
more identification cards by completing an application form at the office of
the issuing officer during regular office hours.
Section 610.060. Contents of Application. [CC 1970 §16-66; Ord.
No. 5720 §1, 9-24-2002]
A. The applicant (person or organization) shall provide the following
information:
1. Name of applicant.
2. Number of identification cards required.
3. The name, physical description and photograph of each person for
which a card is requested. In lieu of this information, a driver's
license, State identification card, passport or other governmentissued
identification card (issued by a government within the
United States) containing this information may be provided and a
photocopy taken. If a photograph is not supplied, the City will take
an instant photograph of each person for which a card is requested
Section
610.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
610.060
AO:1201
at the application site. The actual cost of the instant photograph
will be paid by the applicant.
4. The permanent and (if any) local address of the applicant.
5. The permanent and (if any) local address of each person for whom a
card is requested.
6. A brief description of the proposed activity related to this
identification card. (Copies of literature to be distributed may be
substituted for this description at the option of the applicant.)
7. Date and place of birth for each person for whom a card is
requested and (if available) the Social Security number of such
person.
8. A list of all infraction, offense, misdemeanor and felony convictions
of each person for whom a card is requested for the seven (7) years
immediately prior to the application.
9. The motor vehicle make, model, year, color and State license plate
number of any vehicle which will be used by each person for whom
a card is requested.
10. If a card is requested for a peddler:
a. The name and permanent address of the business offering the
event, activity, good or service (i.e., the peddler's principal).
b. A copy of the principal's sales tax license as issued by the State
of Missouri, provided that no copy of a license shall be required
of any business which appears on the City's annual report of
sales tax payees as provided by the Missouri Department of
Revenue.
c. The location where books and records are kept of sales which
occur within the City and which are available for City
inspection to determine that all City sales taxes have been
paid.
11. If a card is requested for a solicitor:
a. The name and permanent address of the organization, person
or group for whom donations (or proceeds) are accepted.
b. The web address for this organization, person or group (or
other address) where residents having subsequent questions
can go for more information.
12. Any other information the applicant wishes to provide, perhaps
including copies of literature to be distributed, references to other
municipalities where similar activities have occurred, etc.
Section
610.060
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
610.070
AO:1202
Section 610.070. Issuance of Identification Card. [CC 1970 §16-67;
Ord. No. 5720 §1, 9-24-2002]
Section 610.080. Investigation. [CC 1970 §16-68; Ord. No. 5720 §1,
9-24-2002]
During the period of time following the application for one (1) or more
identification cards and its issuance, the City shall investigate as to the
truth and accuracy of the information contained in the application. If the
City has not completed this investigation within the sixteen (16) business
hours provided in Section 610.070, the identification card will nonetheless
be issued subject, however, to administrative revocation upon completion
of the investigation. (If a canvasser requests an identification card, the
investigation will proceed as described above, but if the City refuses to issue
the identification card (or revokes it after issuance), the canvassers will be
advised that the failure to procure an identification card does not prevent
him/her from canvassing the residents of the City.)
Section 610.090. Denial — Administrative Revocation. [CC 1970
§16-69; Ord. No. 5720 §1, 9-24-2002]
If the issuing officer denies (or upon completion of an investigation revokes)
the identification card to one (1) or more persons, he/she shall immediately
convey the decision to the applicant orally and shall within sixteen (16)
working hours after the denial prepare a written report of the reason for
the denial which shall be immediately made available to the applicant.
Upon receipt of the oral notification and even before the preparation of the
written report, the applicant shall have at his/her option an appeal of the
denial of his/her application before the City Manager, provided that such a
hearing will be scheduled within ten (10) days of the request, due notice of
which is to be given to the public and the applicant.
A. The identification card(s) shall be issued promptly after application but
in all cases within sixteen (16) business hours of completion of an
application, unless it is determined within that time that:
1. The applicant has been convicted of any felony or convicted of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the past seven (7)
years,
2. With respect to a particular card, the individual for whom a card is
requested has been convicted of any felony or a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude within the past seven (7) years, or
3. Any statement upon the application is false, unless the applicant
can demonstrate that the falsehood was the result of excusable
neglect.
Section
610.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
610.100
AO:1203
Section 610.100. Hearing On Appeal. [CC 1970 §16-70; Ord. No.
5720 §1, 9-24-2002]
If the applicant requests a hearing under Section 610.090, review from the
decision (on the record of the hearing) shall be had to the Circuit Court of
St. Louis County.
Section 610.110. Display of Identification Card. [CC 1970 §16-71;
Ord. No. 5720 §1, 9-24-2002]
Each identification card shall be (when the individual for whom it was
issued is acting as a peddler or solicitor) worn on the outer clothing of
the individual as so to be reasonably visible to any person who might be
approached by said person.
Section 610.120. Validity of Identification Card. [CC 1970 §16-72;
Ord. No. 5720 §1, 9-24-2002; Ord. No. 5729 §1, 11-28-2002]
An identification card shall be valid within the meaning of this Chapter for a
period of three (3) months from its date of issuance or the term requested,
whichever is less.
Section 610.130. Revocation of Card. [CC 1970 §16-73; Ord. No.
5720 §1, 9-24-2002; Ord. No. 5729 §2, 11-28-2002]
Section 610.140. "No Visit" List. [CC 1970 §16-74; Ord. No. 5720 §1,
9-24-2002]
The issuing officer shall maintain a list of persons within the City who
restrict visits to their residential property (including their leasehold, in the
case of a tenant) by peddlers, solicitors and canvassers. The issuing officer
A. In addition to the administrative revocation of an identification card, a
card may be revoked for any of the following reasons:
1. Any violation of this Chapter or any municipal, State or Federal
ordinance, law or regulation by the applicant or by the person for
whom the particular card was issued.
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement made in the
course of carrying on the activity.
3. Conviction of any felony or a misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude within the last seven (7) years.
4. Conducting the activity in such a manner as to constitute a breach
of the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public.
B. The revocation procedure shall be initiated by the filing of a complaint
by the issuing officer and a hearing before the tribunal identified in
Section 610.090 above.
Section
610.100
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
610.140
AO:1204
may provide a form to assist residents and this form may allow the resident
to select certain types of visits that the resident finds acceptable while
refusing permission to others. This "no visit" list shall be a public document,
reproduced on the City's web site and available for public inspection and
copying. A copy of the "no visit" list shall be provided to each applicant for
and each recipient of an identification card. If a canvasser chooses not to
apply for an identification card, it will be the responsibility of that canvasser
to obtain in some other way a copy of the current "no visit" list.
Section 610.150. Distribution of Handbills and Commercial Flyers.
[CC 1970 §16-75; Ord. No. 5720 §1, 9-24-2002; Ord. No. 5729 §3,
11-28-2002]
Section 610.160. General Prohibitions. [CC 1970 §16-76; Ord. No.
5720 §1, 9-24-2002]
A. In addition to the other regulations contained herein, a solicitor or
canvasser leaving handbills or commercial flyers about the community
shall observe the following regulations:
1. No handbill or flyer shall be left at or attached to any sign, utility
pole, transit shelter or other structure within the public right-ofway.
The Police are authorized to remove any handbill or flyer
found within the right-of-way.
2. No handbill or flyer shall be left at or attached to any mailbox or to
privately owned property in a manner that causes damage to such
privately owned property.
3. No handbill or flyer shall be left at or attached to any of the
property:
a. Listed on the City "no visit" list; or
b. Having a "no solicitor" sign of the type described in Section
610.160(1) or (2).
4. Any person observed distributing handbills or flyers shall be
required to identify himself/herself to the Police (either by
producing an identification card or other form of identification).
This is for the purpose of knowing the likely identity of the
perpetrator if the City receives a complaint of damage caused to
private property during the distribution of handbills or flyers.
A. No peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall:
1. Enter upon any private property where the property has clearly
posted in the front yard a sign visible from the right-of-way (public
or private) indicating a prohibition against peddling, soliciting and/
or canvassing. Such sign need not exceed one (1) square foot in size
and may contain words such as "no soliciting" or "no solicitors" in
letters of at least two (2) inches in height. (The phrase "no
Section
610.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
610.160
AO:1205
Section 610.170. Penalty. [CC 1970 §16-77; Ord. No. 5720 §1,
9-24-2002]
Any person violating any part of this Chapter shall be prosecuted under
the general penalty ordinance of the City of Clayton as set forth at Section
100.110 of the Code of Ordinances.
Chapter 615
PAWNBROKERS
Section 615.010. Definitions. [Ord. No. 5839 §1(16-100), 9-14-2004]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases and words
shall have the following meanings unless otherwise indicated by context:
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the City of Clayton Police
Department.
DIRECTOR — The Finance Director of the City of Clayton.
soliciting" or "no solicitors" shall also prohibit peddlers and
canvassers.)
2. Remain upon any private property where a notice in the form of a
sign or sticker is placed upon any door or entrance way leading into
the residence or dwelling at which guests would normally enter,
which sign contains the words "no soliciting" or "no solicitors" and
which is clearly visible to the peddler, solicitor or canvasser.
3. Enter upon any private property where the current occupant has
posted the property on the City's "no visit" list (except where the
posting form indicates the occupant has given permission for this
type of visit), regardless of whether a front yard sign is posted.
4. Use or attempt to use any entrance other than the front or main
entrance to the dwelling or step from the sidewalk or indicated
walkway (where one exists leading from the right-of-way to the
front or main entrance) except by express invitation of the resident
or occupant of the property.
5. Remove any yard sign, door or entrance sign that gives notice to
such person that the resident or occupant does not invite visitors.
6. Enter upon the property of another except between the hours of
9:00 A.M. and 7:00 P.M. in the hours of Central Standard Time and
9:00 A.M. and 8:30 P.M. in the hours of Central Daylight Time.
B. Except that the above prohibitions shall not apply when the peddler,
solicitor or canvassers has an express invitation from the resident or
occupant of a dwelling allowing him/her to enter upon any posted
property.
Section
610.160
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
615.010
AO:1206
MONTH — That period of time from one (1) date in a calendar month to the
corresponding date in the following calendar month, but if there is no such
corresponding date, then the last date of such following month and when
computations are made for a fraction of a month, a day shall be one-thirtieth
(1/30) of a month.
NET ASSETS — The book value of the current assets of a person or
pawnbroker less its applicable liabilities as stated in this Section. Current
assets include the investment made in cash, bank deposits, merchandise
inventory and loans due from customers excluding the pawn service charge.
Current assets do not include the investments made in fixed assets of
real estate, furniture, fixtures or equipment, investments made in stocks,
bonds or other securities or investments made in prepaid expenses or other
general intangibles. Applicable liabilities include trade or other accounts
payable, accrued sales, income or other taxes; accrued expenses; and notes
or other payables that are unsecured or secured in whole or part by current
assets. Applicable liabilities do not include liabilities secured by assets other
than current assets. Net assets must be represented by a capital investment
unencumbered by any liens or other encumbrances to be subject to the
claims of general creditors.
PAWNBROKER — Any person engaged in the business of lending money
on the security of pledged goods or engaged in the business of purchasing
tangible personal property on condition that it may be redeemed or
repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time.
PAWNSHOP — The location at which or premises in which a pawnbroker
regularly conducts business.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust,
association or any other legal entity however organized.
PERSON OF GOOD MORAL CHARACTER — A person who has not been
convicted of any State, Federal or municipal offense involving drugs or
narcotics, robbery, burglary, theft, stealing, receiving stolen property,
embezzlement, extortion, forgery, gambling, bribery, perjury, any weapons
offense or any crime of violence.
PLEDGED GOODS — Tangible personal property other than those in action,
securities or printed evidence of indebtedness, which property is deposited
with, or otherwise actually delivered into, the possession of a pawnbroker
in the course of his/her business in connection with a pawn transaction.
SECURED PERSONAL CREDIT LOAN — Every loan of money made in this
City, the payment of which is secured by a security interest in tangible
personal property which is physically delivered into the hands of the lender
at the time of the making of the loan and which is to be retained by the
lender while the loan is a subsisting obligation.
Section 615.020. Licenses. [Ord. No. 5839 §1(16-101), 9-14-2004]
A. Licenses Required. No person shall operate a pawnshop in the City
unless such person obtains a pawnshop license issued by the City in
Section
615.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
615.020
AO:1207
accordance with the general licensing provisions of Chapter 605 and
the specific provisions of this Chapter. A license is required for each
place where pawnbroking business is transacted; and no one shall
act as an agent, employee or solicitor for any pawnbroker while such
pawnbroker is engaged in such business at a place other than that
specified in the license. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct
or transact a pawnbroker business in the City unless he/she shall keep
posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business the license
certificate therefor and a copy of all ordinances relating to
pawnbrokers.
B. Licensing. All licenses issued under this Chapter are for a period of one
(1) year or portion of one (1) year and beginning on July first (1st) and
expiring on June thirtieth (30th). The license fee for any license which is
issued for a portion of a year shall be prorated by the Director.
C. Application For New Pawnshop License.
1. An application for a new pawnshop license shall be under oath and
on forms prescribed and provided by the Director and shall contain
other relevant information sufficient to inform the Director
regarding the qualifications of the applicant for a license as
required by the Director. At minimum, the application shall include:
a. The full name and address of the applicant and each
prospective pawnshop employee, if known, for the past two (2)
years;
b. The address where the business is to be conducted;
c. A statement as to whether the applicant and each prospective
pawnshop employee, if known, have ever been convicted of a
felony;
d. The name, address and phone number of at least two (2)
persons of good moral character who may be used as character
references for the applicant and each prospective pawnshop
employee, if known; and
e. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall include
the required information for each partner and whether such
partner is a general partner or a limited partner. If the
applicant is a corporation, the application shall include the
required information for each officer and director and each
shareholder owning twenty percent (20%) or more of the
corporate stock.
2. The application shall be accompanied by:
a. An investigation fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) if the
applicant is unlicensed at the time of applying for the
pawnshop or two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) if the
Section
615.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
615.020
AO:1208
application involves a second (2nd) or additional license to an
applicant previously licensed for a separate location;
b. Proof of general liability insurance in the amount of one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00);
c. An annual license fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00); and
d. If the applicant is a corporation, a "certificate of good
standing" issued by the Missouri Secretary of State.
D. Non-Use And Transfer Of License.
1. If a pawnbroker shall not conduct business for any continuous
period of ninety (90) days after the issuance of a license, the license
shall be null and void.
2. Licenses are personal to the licensee and may not be transferred to
any other person. Any attempt to transfer such license to any other
person shall render said license null and void. It shall be unlawful
for any person to do business or to attempt to do business under a
license transferred to him/her.
E. Investigation By Director. The Director shall investigate the facts
contained in an application for a new pawnshop license and shall
request the assistance of the Chief of Police and any other person who
has knowledge of the facts contained in the application or who is
authorized to investigate these facts.
F. Standards For Issuance. No license shall be issued to any person who:
1. Is not of good moral character or to any pawnshop employing
persons who are not of good moral character; or
2. Makes a false statement of material facts in the application for a
license or a renewal license; or
3. Fails to show that the pawnshop will be operated lawfully and fairly
within the purposes of the Chapter; or
4. Has a felony or misdemeanor conviction which either directly
relates to the duties and responsibilities of the occupation of the
pawnbroker or which otherwise makes the applicant presently unfit
for a license; or
5. Does not have net assets of at least fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) readily available for use in conducting business as a
pawnshop for each licensed pawnshop; or
6. Does not file with the Director a bond satisfactory to the Director in
an amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with a surety
company qualified to do business in this City. The aggregate
liability of such surety shall not exceed the amount stated in the
bond. The bond shall run to the City for the use of the City and of
Section
615.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
615.020
AO:1209
any person(s) who may have a cause of action against the obligor
of such bond under the provisions of this Chapter. Such bond shall
be conditioned that the obligor will comply with the provisions
of this Chapter and by all rules and regulations adopted by the
Director and will pay to the City and to any such person(s) any
and all amounts of money that may become due or owing to the
City or to such person(s) from such obligor under and by virtue of
the provisions of this Chapter or any rules adopted by the Director
pursuant to this Chapter during the time such bond is in effect.
If the Director is unable to verify that the applicant meets the
net assets requirement for a licensed pawnshop as required
by Subsection (F)(5) hereinabove, the Director may require
a finding, including the presentation of a current balance
sheet, by an independent certified public accountant that the
accountant has reviewed the books and records of the
applicant and that the applicant meets the net assets
requirement of this Chapter.
G. Exemption From Requirement For New Pawnshop License. No person
who is lawfully operating a pawnshop on the date of the enactment of
this Chapter shall be required to obtain a license under this Section in
order to continue operating such pawnshop, so long as such person
does not violate any other provisions of Sections 367.011—367.060,
RSMo., or this Chapter. Such persons may continue to operate those
pawnshops then in existence, but thereafter must receive annual
renewal licenses even though the operation of such pawnshop might
cause the number of pawnbrokers in the City to exceed the number
determined by operation of Subsection (H) of this Section. Such
persons shall be required to pay the five hundred dollar ($500.00)
annual fee prescribed in Subsection (I) of the Section, but such
payment shall be in lieu of any occupational license fee.
H. Limitation On Number Of Pawnbrokers In The City. Subject to the
provisions of Subsection (G) of this Section, no license for engaging in
the business of pawnbroker shall be issued when the issuance thereof
would increase the number of pawnbrokers in the City at that time to
more than one (1) per each sixteen thousand (16,000) inhabitants
residing in the City.
I. Subsequent License Applications. Subject to the first (1st) year for
which a license is issued to a pawnbroker, each pawnbroker shall make
a renewal application to the Director. The application shall be filed by
June first (1st) of the current licensing year and shall be on the forms
and shall contain such information as the Director may require. The
forms shall contain such information as will assist the Director in
determining whether conditions have changed and whether a renewal
license should be issued for the subsequent licensing year. The Director
may request the assistance of the Chief of Police or any other City
employee or person having knowledge of the truth or falsity of the
Section
615.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
615.020
AO:1210
matters contained in the application or who is able to investigate those
matters. The annual fee for the issuance of a renewal license is five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
J. Suspension Or Revocation Of License.
1. If the Director believes that any condition has changed such that
the licensee would not be eligible to receive a pawnbroker's license
or that the licensee is in violation of this Chapter or any State or
municipal law, the Director may suspend the license.
2. If the Director believes that the licensee is capable of remedying
the adverse change in conditions and if the licensee has not
previously been in violation of this Chapter or State or municipal
law, the Director may suspend the license. If the Director believes
that the changed conditions(s) are such that the changed
condition(s), if true, that the licensee would not be able to remedy
the situation in a reasonable time or if the licensee has previously
been in violation of this Chapter or State or municipal law, then the
Director may revoke the license.
3. If the Director believes that the safety, morals or peace of residents
of the City is immediately affected by the change in conditions, the
Director may suspend or revoke the license prior to a hearing; but
he/she shall afford the licensee a hearing within five (5) days of the
suspension or revocation if the licensee desires such a hearing. If
the Director believes that the changed condition is not of such
imminent hazard to the safety, morals or peace of the residents of
the City, he/she may hold a hearing prior to taking any action. He/
she shall give the licensee at least ten (10) days' notice of the
hearing.
4. Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Director may appeal to the
Circuit Court of St. Louis County in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter 536, RSMo.
K. Issuance Of Pawnshop Licenses Prohibited—When.
1. No license shall be issued for the operation of a pawnshop as
defined within this Chapter wherein said pawnshop will be located
within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of any church,
synagogue, school or residentially zoned property.
2. No license shall be issued for the operation of a pawnshop as
defined in this Chapter wherein said pawnshop will be located
within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of property on
which there is located another pawnshop.
3. No license shall be issued for the operation of a pawnshop as
defined in this Chapter wherein said pawnshop will be located
within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of any
residence unless the licensee shall provide to the Director written
Section
615.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
615.020
AO:1211
Section 615.030. Record Requirements of Pawnshop Operations.
[Ord. No. 5839 §1(16-102), 9-14-2004]
authorization for such operation from the owner of record of such
property and each adult resident thereof.
4. No license shall be issued unless the pawnbroker has obtained a
special or conditional use permit if any is required by the City's
Zoning Code.
A. Pawn Number. The pawnbroker shall affix to each item of tangible
personal property a tag upon which shall be inscribed a pawn number
of legible characters which shall correspond to the number on any pawn
ticket or receipt for payment.
B. Pawn Ticket For Pledged Property, Contents, Loss Of, Effect. At the time
of making the secured personal credit loan, the lender shall execute
and deliver to the borrower a pawn ticket for and describing the
tangible personal property subjected to the security interest to secure
the payment of the loan. The receipt shall contain the following:
1. The name and address of the pawnshop;
2. The name and address of the pledgor, date of birth, height, weight,
sex, race or nationality and the driver's license number, military
identification number, identification certificate number or other
official number capable of identifying the pledgor;
3. The date of the transaction;
4. An identification and description of the pledged goods including,
but not limited to, serial numbers, if reasonably available and an
estimated value of each item pledged;
5. The amount of cash advanced or credit extended to the pledgor;
6. The amount of the pawn service charge;
7. The total amount which must be paid to redeem the pledged goods
on the maturity date;
8. The maturity date of the pawn transaction;
9. A statement to the effect that the maximum legal interest rate may
not exceed two percent (2%) per month on the amount of any loan;
and
10. A statement to the effect that the pledgor is not obligated to
redeem the pledged goods and that the pledged goods may be
forfeited to the pawnbroker sixty (60) days after the specified
maturity date.
C. Employee Registration. Every employee of a pawnshop shall, within
thirty (30) days from the issuance of any license or from start of
Section
615.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
615.030
AO:1212
employment at the licensed pawnshop, whichever is later, register his/
her name and address with the Police Department of the City and shall
have had his/her thumbprints, fingerprints and photograph taken and
filed with the City and such employee shall receive a certificate showing
compliance therewith, except that employees registered with the City
need not register a second (2nd) time. The term "employee" means
all persons working in a pawnshop, including any owner, any officer,
director or stockholder if the owner is a corporation, any partner or any
other person who receives income in any manner form engaging in the
operation of said pawnshop.
D. Affidavit Of Lost Ticket. If a pawn ticket is lost, destroyed or stolen, the
pledgor may so notify the pawnbroker in writing and receipt of such
notice shall invalidate such pawn ticket, if the pledged goods have not
previously been redeemed. Before delivering the pledged good or
issuing a new pawn ticket, the pawnbroker shall require the pledgor to
make a written affidavit of the loss, destruction or theft of the ticket.
The pawnbroker shall record on the written statement the identifying
information required, the date the statement is given and the number of
the pawn ticket lost, destroyed or stolen. The affidavit shall be signed
by a notary public appointed by the Secretary of State pursuant to
Section 486.205, RSMo., to perform notarial acts in this State.
E. Receipt For Payment To Be Furnished. Upon any payment by a pledgor
or upon the redemption of any pledge, the pawnbroker shall furnish to
the pledgor a written signed receipt indicating the exact amount paid
on principal interest and any other charges. Said written receipt shall
be either printed or stamped with the name of the pawnbroker and the
address, shall include the date of payment and shall be legibly written
so that the figures thereon are clearly discernible.
F. Pawn Register. Each pawnbroker shall keep a register of all items
pawned at each pawnshop, which register shall contain the information
listed in Subsections (A) and (B) of this Section. This record shall be
kept in a bound book or in a continuous sheet of paper or tape,
handwritten in ink or typed using a ribbon other than carbon, so that it
will be obvious if an entry has been erased, obliterated or defaced. Such
information may be made on cards, individual sheets or order pads if
each sheet or card is numbered, so that if an entry is removed it will be
obvious.
G. Daily Report. Each pawnbroker must, before the hour of 6:00 P.M. every
day, except Sunday and days the pawnbroker is closed all day, make and
deliver to the Chief of Police at the Police station a full, true and
detailed copy of that day's pawn register. If no article or thing has been
pawned or received during said day, a report must be made to that
effect.
H. Photographic Records.
Section
615.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
615.030
AO:1213
1. All pawnbrokers shall install a proper camera in operative
condition and shall use such equipment to photograph every person
and the receipts of pawnshop tickets given to such persons with all
loans and with all purchases of items from persons.
2. All pawnbrokers shall display in a prominent place a notice to
customers that they are required to be photographed when they
pawn, sell or offer as a part of full payment any item to the
pawnbroker.
3. All such photographs shall be available for development and
developed by the pawnbroker upon request by the Chief of Police.
I. The pawnbroker shall furnish appropriate law enforcement authorities
with copies of information contained in paragraphs (1) to (4) of
Subsection (B) of this Section and information contained in Subdivision
(6) of Subsection (4) of Section 367.040, RSMo. The pawnbroker may
satisfy such requirements by transmitting such information
electronically to a database in accordance with this Section, except that
paper copies shall be made available for an on-site inspection upon
request of any appropriate law enforcement authority.
J. As used in this Section, the following terms mean:
DATABASE — A computer database established and maintained by
a third (3rd) party engaged in the business of establishing and
maintaining one (1) or more databases.
PERMITTED USER — Persons authorized by law enforcement
personnel to access the database.
REPORTABLE DATA — The information required to be recorded by
pawnbrokers for pawn transactions pursuant to paragraphs (1) to (4)
of Subsection (B) of this Section and the information required to be
recorded by pawnbrokers for purchase transactions pursuant to
Subdivision (6) of Subsection (4) of Section 367.040, RSMo.
REPORTING PAWNBROKER — A pawnbroker who chooses to transmit
reportable data electronically to the database.
SEARCH — The accessing of a single database record.
K. The database shall provide appropriate law enforcement officials with
the information contained in paragraphs (1) to (4) of Subsection (B) of
this Section and other useful information to facilitate the investigation
of alleged property crimes while protecting the privacy rights of
pawnbrokers and pawnshop customers with regard to their
transactions.
L. The database shall contain the pawn and purchase transaction
information recorded by reporting pawnbrokers pursuant to this
Section and Section 367.040, RSMo., and shall be updated as
requested. The database shall also contain such security features and
protections as may be necessary to ensure that the reportable data
Section
615.030
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
615.030
AO:1214
maintained in the database can only be accessed by permitted users in
accordance with the provisions of this Section.
M. The third (3rd) party's charge for the database shall be based on the
number of permitted users. Law enforcement agencies shall be charged
directly for access to the database and the charge shall be reasonable in
relation to the costs of the third (3rd) party in establishing and
maintaining the database. No reporting pawnbroker or customer of a
reporting pawnbroker shall be charged any costs for the creation or
utilization of the database.
N. The information in the database shall only be accessible through the
Internet to permitted users who have provided a secure identification
or access code to the database but shall allow such permitted users to
access database information from any jurisdiction transmitting such
information to that database. Such permitted users shall provide the
database with an identifier number of a criminal action for which the
identity of the pawn or purchase transaction customer is needed and a
representation that the information is connected to an inquiry or to the
investigation of a complaint or alleged crime involving goods delivered
by that customer in that transaction. The database shall record, for
each search, the identity of the permitted user, the pawn or purchase
transaction involved in the search and the identity of any customer
accessed through the search. Each search record shall be made
available to other permitted users regardless of their jurisdiction. The
database shall enable reporting pawnbrokers to transmit to the
database through the Internet reportable data for each pawn and
purchase transaction.
O. Any pawnbroker licensed after September 1, 2004, shall meet the
following requirements:
1. Provide all reportable data to appropriate users by transmitting it
through the Internet to the database;
2. Transmit all reportable data for one (1) business day to the
database prior to the end of the following business day;
3. Make available for on-site inspection to any appropriate law
enforcement official, upon request, paper copies of any pawn or
purchase transaction documents.
P. If a reporting pawnbroker or permitted user discovers any error in the
reportable data, notice of such error shall be given to the database,
which shall have a period of thirty (30) days in which to correct the
error. Any reporting pawnbroker experiencing a computer malfunction
preventing the transmission of reportable data or receipt of search
requests shall be allowed a period of at least thirty (30) but no more
than sixty (60) days to repair such malfunction and during such period
such pawnbroker shall not be deemed to be in violation of this Section if
good faith efforts are made to correct the malfunction. During the
periods specified in this Subsection, the reporting pawnbroker and
Section
615.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
615.030
AO:1215
Section 615.040. Customer Failure To Repay Pawnbroker When
Notified That Goods Pledged or Sold Were Misappropriated. [Ord.
No. 5839 §1(16-103), 9-14-2004]
When the tangible personal property subject to the pawn or sales
transaction has been delivered or awarded to a claimant pursuant to
Section 367.044, RSMo., and within ten (10) business days after a written
demand for payment and notice is deposited by the pawnbroker as certified
or registered mail in the United States mail and addressed to the conveying
customer, the conveying customer fails to repay the pawnbroker the full
amount incurred by the pawnbroker in connection with such property and
the procedure described in Section 367.044, RSMo., the conveying
customer shall have committed the offense of fraudulently pledging or
selling misappropriated property.
Section 615.050. Leased Property, Rental or Installment Contracts
Not Misappropriated Unless Marked — Defacing Marks — Effect —
Claimant May Recover — Pawnbroker Not Liable. [Ord. No. 5839
§1(16-104), 9-14-2004]
When an item of property is the subject of a lease, rental transaction or
retail installment contract with a company domiciled in the State, between
the claimant and the claimant's lease or rental customer at the time it is
delivered into the possession of the pawnbroker, the property shall not be
deemed misappropriated unless it bears a conspicuous permanent label or
marking identifying it as the claimant's property. Evidence of defacing or
the removal of identification marking of leased or rented property shall
be treated as marked and identified and therefore deemed to be
misappropriated. Property subject to a lease, rental transaction or retail
installment contract with a company domiciled in the State, which is not
marked as provided in this Section, may be recovered by the claimant
upon payment to the pawnbroker of all monies owing to or advanced by
the pawnbroker in the pawn or purchase transaction and upon producing
evidence identifying the property as having been the property of the
claimant and leased or rented at the time the property was placed in the
pawnbroker's possession. The pawnbroker shall be free from liability in
permitted user shall arrange an alternative method or methods by
which the reportable data shall be made available.
Q. No reporting pawnbroker shall be obligated to incur any cost, other
than Internet service costs, in preparing, converting or delivering its
reportable data to the database.
R. Retention And Use Of Records. Each licensee shall keep and maintain
the originals of the foregoing records, or an original copy as may be
appropriate, for a period of at least two (2) years from the date of the
last transaction recorded therein and each such record shall at all
reasonable times be open to inspection by the Chief of Police or at his/
her direction.
Section
615.030
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
615.050
AO:1216
connection with the recovery of leased or rental property pursuant to this
Section.
Section 615.060. Titles, Licenses and Permits For Pledged Goods To
Remain in Effect — Void When — Ownership Passing To Pawnbroker
— Right To Retitle or Relicense. [Ord. No. 5839 §1(16-105),
9-14-2004]
Any title, license or permit for pledged goods shall remain in effect during
the period of the pawn transaction and shall remain valid if such pledged
goods are redeemed by the pledgor and shall be voided if the pledged goods
are redeemed by someone other than the pledgor or when ownership of
the pledged goods passes to the pawnbroker who shall retitle, relicense or
repermit such goods as otherwise provided by law.
Section 615.070. Inspection of Property, Search Warrant Required
— Hold Order, Probable Cause, Contents, Expiration —
Confidentiality. [Ord. No. 5839 §1(16-106), 9-14-2004]
A. Upon request of a Law Enforcement Officer to inspect property that is
described in information furnished by the pawnbroker pursuant to
paragraphs (1) to (4) of Subsection (B) of Section 615.030, the Law
Enforcement Officer shall be entitled to inspect the property described
without prior notice or the necessity of obtaining a search warrant
during regular business hours in a manner so as to minimize
interference with or delay to the pawnbroker's business operation.
When a Law Enforcement Officer has probable cause to believe that
goods or property in the possession of a pawnbroker are
misappropriated, the officer may place a hold order on the property.
The hold order shall contain the following:
1. The name of the pawnbroker;
2. The name and mailing address of the pawnshop where the property
is held;
3. The name, title and identification number of the Law Enforcement
Officer placing the hold order;
4. The name and address of the agency to which the Law Enforcement
Officer is attached and the claim or case number, if any, assigned by
the agency to the claim regarding the property;
5. A complete description of the property to be held including model
and serial numbers;
6. The expiration date of the holding period.
Section
615.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
615.070
AO:1217
The hold order shall be signed and dated by the issuing officer
and signed and dated by the pawnbroker or the pawnbroker's
designee as evidence of the hold order's issuance by the officer,
receipt by the pawnbroker and the beginning of the initial
holding period. The officer issuing the hold order shall provide
an executed copy of the hold order to the pawnbroker for
the pawnbroker's recordkeeping purposes at no cost to the
pawnbroker.
B. Upon receiving the hold order and subject to the provisions of Section
367.047, RSMo., the pawnbroker shall retain physical possession of the
property subject to the order in a secured area. The initial holding
period of the hold order shall not exceed two (2) months, except that
the hold order may be extended for up to two (2) successive one (1)
month holding periods upon written notification prior to the expiration
of the immediately preceding holding period. A hold order may be
released prior to the expiration of any holding period or extension
thereof by written release from the agency placing the initial hold
order. The initial hold order shall be deemed expired upon the
expiration date if the holding period is not extended pursuant to this
Subsection.
C. Upon the expiration of the initial holding period or any extension
thereof, the pawnbroker shall deliver written notice to the Law
Enforcement Officer issuing the hold order that such order has expired
and that title to the property subject to the hold order will vest in the
pawnbroker in ten (10) business days. Ownership shall only vest in the
pawnbroker upon the expiration of the ten (10) day waiting period
subject to any restriction contained in the pawn contract and subject to
the provisions of Sections 367.044 to 367.053, RSMo. Vesting of title
and ownership shall be subject to any claim asserted by a claimant
pursuant to Section 367.044, RSMo.
D. In addition to the penalty provisions contained herein, gross negligence
or willful non-compliance with the provisions of this Section by a
pawnbroker shall be cause for the licensing authority to suspend or
revoke the pawnbroker's license. Any imposed suspensions or
revocation provided for by this Subsection may be appealed by the
pawnbroker to the licensing authority or to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
E. All records and information that relate to a pawnbroker's pawn,
purchase or trade transactions and that are delivered to or otherwise
obtained by an appropriate Law Enforcement Officer pursuant to
Sections 367.031 and 367.040, RSMo., are confidential and may be
used only by such appropriate Law Enforcement Officer and only for the
following official law enforcement purposes:
1. The investigation of a crime specifically involving the item of
property delivered to the pawnbroker in a pawn, purchase or trade
transaction;
Section
615.070
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
615.070
AO:1218
Section 615.080. Pledged Goods For Money Pawnbroker Entitled
Only To Goods Pledged — Exception — Misappropriated Goods —
Procedure To Recover. [Ord. No. 5839 §1(16-107), 9-14-2004]
2. The investigation of a pawnbroker's possible specific violation of
the recordkeeping or reporting requirements of Sections 367.031
and 367.040, RSMo., but only when the appropriate Law
Enforcement Officer, based on a review of the records and the
information received, has probable cause to believe that such a
violation occurred; and
3. The notification of property crime victims of where property that
has been reported misappropriated can be located.
A. A pawnbroker shall have no recourse against the pledgor for payment
on a pawn transaction except the pledged goods themselves, unless the
goods are found to have been misappropriated.
B. A pawnbroker shall require of every person from whom the pawnbroker
receives sold or pledged property proof of identification which includes
a current address and, if applicable, telephone number and a current
picture identification issued by State or Federal Government.
C. If any seller fails to provide a pawnbroker with proof of identification,
the pawnbroker shall hold such property for a period of thirty (30) days
prior to selling or otherwise transferring such property, provided, the
seller has submitted a signed statement that the seller is the legal
owner of the property and stating when or from whom such property
was acquired by the seller.
D. To obtain possession of tangible personal property held by a
pawnbroker which a claimant claims to be misappropriated, the
claimant shall provide the pawnbroker with a written demand for the
return of such property, a copy of a Police or Sheriff's report wherein
claimant reported the misappropriation or theft of said property and
which contains a particularized description of the property or
applicable serial number and a signed affidavit made under oath setting
forth they are the true owner of the property, the name and address of
the claimant, a description of the property being claimed, the fact that
such property was taken from the claimant without the claimant's
consent, permission or knowledge, the fact that the claimant has
reported the theft to the Police, the fact that the claimant will assist in
any prosecution relating to such property, the promise that the claimant
will respond to court process in any criminal prosecution relating to
said property and will testify truthfully as to all facts within the
claimant's knowledge and not claim any testimonial privilege with
respect to said facts. These documents shall be presented to the
pawnbroker concurrently.
E. Upon being served with a proper demand by a claimant for the return of
property pursuant to Subsection (D) of this Section, the pawnbroker
Section
615.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
615.080
AO:1219
Section 615.090. Operational Regulations. [Ord. No. 5839
§1(16-108), 9-14-2004]
shall return the property to the claimant, in the presence of a Law
Enforcement Officer, within seven (7) days unless the pawnbroker has
good reason to believe that any of the matters set forth in the claimant's
affidavit are false or if there is a hold order on the property. If a
pawnbroker refuses to deliver property to a claimant upon a proper
demand as described in Subsection (D) of this Section, the claimant
may file a petition in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking the
return of said property. The non-prevailing party shall be responsible
for the costs of said action and the attorney fees of the prevailing
party. The provisions of Section 482.305, RSMo., to the contrary
notwithstanding, a court of competent jurisdiction shall include a small
claims court, even if the value of the property named in the petition is
greater than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00).
F. If a pawnbroker returns property to a claimant relying on the veracity
of the affidavit described in Subsection (D) of this Section and later
learns that the information contained in said affidavit is false or that the
claimant has failed to assist in prosecution or otherwise testify
truthfully with respect to the facts within the claimant's knowledge, the
pawnbroker shall have a cause of action against the claimant for the
value of the property. The non-prevailing party shall be responsible for
the cost of said action and the attorney fees of the prevailing party.
G. Nothing contained in this Section shall limit a pawnbroker from
bringing the conveying customer into a suit as a third (3rd) party, nor
limit a pawnbroker from recovering from a conveying customer
repayment of the full amount received from the pawnbroker from the
pawn or sales transaction, including all applicable fees and interest
charged, attorney's fees and the cost of the action.
A. Interest Rates. It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to charge
interest exceeding two percent (2%) per month on any pledge. All
pawnbrokers shall display in a prominent place a notice to customers
that the maximum legal interest rate may not exceed two percent (2%)
per month on the amount of any loan.
B. Safekeeping Of Pledges.
1. Every pawnbroker licensed under the provisions hereof shall
provide a safe place for the keeping of the pledges received by him/
her and shall have sufficient insurance on the property held on
pledges, for the benefit of the pledgors, in case of destruction by
fire or loss by theft. A pawnbroker shall not fail to exercise
reasonable care to protect pledged goods from loss or damage.
2. In the event such pledged goods are lost or damaged as a result of a
pawnbroker's negligence while in the possession of the
pawnbroker, it shall be the responsibility of the pawnbroker to
Section
615.080
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
615.090
AO:1220
replace the lost or damaged goods with like kind of merchandise.
Pawnbrokers shall not be responsible for loss of pledged articles
due to acts of God, acts of war or riots. Each lender shall employ a
reputable company for the purpose of fire and theft security.
C. Loans Due, When—Return Of Collateral, When—Restrictions.
1. Every secured personal credit loan shall be due and payable in
lump sum thirty (30) days after the date of the last preceding
extension of the loan and if not so paid when due, it shall, on the
next day following, be in default. The pawnbroker shall retain
possession of the tangible personal property subjected to the
security interest to secure payment of any secured personal credit
loan for a period of sixty (60) days next following the date of
default. If during the period of sixty (60) days the pledgor shall pay
to the pawnbroker the principal sum of the loan with the loan fee(s)
and the interest due thereon to the date of payment, the
pawnbroker shall thereupon deliver possession of the tangible
property to the pledgor. But if the pledgor fails during the period of
sixty (60) days to make payment, then the title to the tangible
personal property shall, on the day following the expiration of the
period of sixty (60) days, pass to the pawnbroker without
foreclosure and the right of redemption by the pledgor shall be
forever barred.
2. A pledgor shall have no obligation to redeem pledged goods or
make any payment on a pawn transaction.
3. Any person properly identifying himself/herself and presenting a
pawn ticket to the pawnbroker shall be presumed to be entitled to
redeem the pledged goods described therein.
D. Lost, Embezzled, Stolen Or Encumbered Property—Police Cooperation.
1. Each pawnbroker shall notify the Police of any article pledged or
attempted to be pledged, if the pawnbroker has reason to believe
that said article was stolen, embezzled or lost.
2. A pawnbroker shall have no recourse when a customer has pledged
goods for the receipt of money except the pledged goods
themselves, unless the pledged goods are found to be stolen,
embezzled, lost, mortgaged or otherwise pledged or encumbered.
When a customer is notified by a Peace Officer that the goods he/
she pledged or sold to a pawnbroker were stolen, embezzled,
mortgaged or otherwise pledged or encumbered, the customer
shall be liable to repay the pawnbroker the full amount the
customer received from the pawn or buy transaction. A
pawnbroker shall not charge any fee relating to the restoration of
such property to its rightful owner.
3. Every pawnbroker shall give the Chief of Police notice of all
pawned goods to be shipped out of town, which notice shall state
Section
615.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
615.090
AO:1221
the name of the pledgee and the destination and date of shipment.
Such goods shall not be shipped for at least seven (7) days after
delivery of the copy of the register to the Chief of Police.
4. Every pawnbroker shall, upon request, show and exhibit to any
Peace Officer any article purchased, taken or received by the
pawnbroker if the item is still in the possession of the pawnbroker.
E. Miscellaneous Regulations.
1. Pawnshop not to be used as a residence. No pawnbroker or
member of the pawnbroker's family or employee or any other
person shall be permitted to live in a pawnshop or in rooms
connecting therewith.
2. Hours of operation. No pawn shop shall be open for business or
receive as pawned, pledged or purchased or upon any condition
whatsoever any article of personal property or other valuable thing
between the hours of 8:00 P.M. on any day and 7:00 A.M. on the
following day.
3. Keeping items seven (7) days. No pawnbroker shall destroy, melt
down, dispose of, sell or deliver to any other person any item of
tangible personal property until seven (7) days have passed from
the date the item was received.
4. Dealing in weapons prohibited, when. No pawnbroker shall receive
as security or otherwise conduct any transaction involving any kind
of firearm, revolver, pistol, rifle, bowie knife, spring back knife,
razor, metal knuckles, billy, sword, care, dirk, dagger or other
similar weapon, unless said pawnbroker is otherwise licensed by
applicable State and Federal law to purchase and sell such
weapons.
5. Secondhand goods. A pawnbroker shall not purchase or take in or
trade used or secondhand personal property unless a record is
established that contains:
a. The name, address, physical description and the driver's
license number, military identification number, identification
certificate number or other official number capable of
identifying the seller;
b. A complete description of the property, including the serial
number, if reasonably available or other identifying
characteristic; and
c. A signed document from the seller providing that the seller has
the right to sell the property.
6. No barred windows or doors. No building in which a pawnbroker
shall conduct business shall have any bars or similar security
features or structures on or in any window or door.
Section
615.090
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
615.090
AO:1222
Section 615.100. Enactment of Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No.
5839 §1(16-109), 9-14-2004]
The Director may issue such rules and regulations as he/she deems
necessary to implement this Chapter and the policies contained herein.
Section 615.110. Inconsistent Provisions. [Ord. No. 5839
§1(16-110), 9-14-2004]
It is the intention of the Board of Aldermen that this Chapter shall be read
in harmony with all other Chapters of the City and that such Chapters and
provisions shall be so construed, interpreted, administered and applied as
to reconcile any differences between them and this Chapter. To the extent
that any such Chapters and provisions are determined to be irreconcilable
with the provisions of this Chapter, but only to the extent, the provisions of
this Chapter shall be deemed to have superseded the conflicting provisions.
Section 615.120. Penalty. [Ord. No. 5839 §1(16-111), 9-14-2004]
Any person operating a pawnshop without a license or otherwise in violation
of the standards and requirements provided herein shall be guilty of a
violation of this Chapter and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in Section 100.110 of this Code.
Chapter 620
TAXICABS
Editor's Note — Ord. no. 6210 §2, adopted June 12, 2012, repealed ch.
620 and enacted the new provisions set out herein. Former ch. 620 derived
from CC 1947 §§10-110(a,b,c), 10-113, 10-120, 10-120.1, 10-120.2; CC 1970
§§21-226—21-227, 21-230, 21-240—21-242; ord. no. 3654 §1, 6-25-74; ord.
no. 4138 §1, 10-31-80; ord. no. 6150 §1, 6-28-11.
7. Additional restrictions. A pawnbroker shall not:
a. Accept a pledge from a person who is under eighteen (18)
years of age;
b. Make any agreement requiring the personal liability of a
pledgor in connection with a pawn transaction;
c. Accept any waiver, in writing or otherwise, of any right or
protection accorded a pledgor under this Chapter or other law;
or
d. Fail to return pledged goods to a pledgor upon payment of the
full amount due the pawnbroker on the pawn transaction.
Section
615.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
620.010
AO:1223
Section 620.010. License — Required — Compliance Prior To
Issuance. [Ord. No. 6210 §2, 6-12-2012]
No person shall engage in the business of operating a taxicab business from
a place of business in the City without first obtaining a license to do so.
Such license shall be issued by the Director of Finance after the application
therefor has been approved and the requisite fee paid as herein prescribed
and after all other provisions of this Chapter pertaining to the obtaining or
issuing of said licenses have been complied with.
Section 620.020. License — Application — Filing, Contents,
Addenda. [Ord. No. 6210 §2, 6-12-2012]
Section 620.030. License — Fees — Expiration — Renewal —
Information On License. [Ord. No. 6210 §2, 6-12-2012]
Before such license shall be issued, the applicant shall pay to the Director of
Finance the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) as an annual license tax for
each taxicab to be operated for the conveyance of passengers upon, along
or over the streets of this City, said license to expire on the first (1st) day of
January after the date of its issuance; provided, when any license is issued
after the first (1st) day of July of any year, the fee for the remaining portion
of the year shall be twelve dollars fifty cents ($12.50). All such licenses
may be thereafter renewed annually upon the first (1st) day of January of
each year upon filing of an application and payment of the required fee.
The license so issued shall state the motor number and serial number of the
motor vehicle, shall be kept with it at all times and shall not be used on any
other car.
Chapter 625
A. The application for a license to engage in the business of operating a
taxicab shall be filed with the Director of Finance. The application shall
be in writing, verified by the affidavit of the applicant; or, if the
applicant is a corporation or a partnership, by its duly authorized officer
or agent; and shall state the following facts:
1. The full name and address of the applicant; if a partnership, the
names and addresses of all the partners; if a corporation, the
names and addresses of all the officers and directors thereof.
2. The name and address of the owner or owners of the vehicles
proposed to be operated.
3. The number of taxicabs the applicant desires to operate within the
City.
4. The color scheme (livery) of the taxicabs proposed to be used.
B. The application shall be accompanied by proof that the applicant has a
valid current operating permit from the Metropolitan Taxicab
Commission.
Section
620.010
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
620.030
AO:1224
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS REGULATORY CODE
Cross Reference—As to video services providers regulations, ch. 630.
Editor's Note—The cable communications regulatory code shall be deleted
from the Clayton city code, but said information shall not be repealed and
its provisions shall remain in force and effect to the extent permitted and
not superseded by the 2007 Video Services Providers Act set out in chapter
630, as stated in section 625.010(A) of this code. The cable communications
regulatory code was last passed by ordinance no. 5576 on 7-11-00, amended
by ord. no. 5584, 9-12-00, and is on file in the office of the city clerk.
Section 625.010. Ratification of Existing Franchises. [Ord. No. 6003
§1, 12-11-2007]
Chapter 630
VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS REGULATIONS
Cross Reference—As to rights-of-way usage, ch. 510; as to cable regulatory
code, ch. 625.
Section 630.010. Definitions. [Ord. No. 6003 §2(B), 12-11-2007]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless otherwise defined by context:
FRANCHISE AREA — The total geographic area of the City authorized to
be served by an incumbent cable television operator or incumbent local
exchange carrier or affiliate thereof.
GROSS REVENUES — The total amounts billed to subscribers or received
from advertisers for the provision of video services within the City,
including:
A. To the extent permitted by the 2007 Video Services Providers Act, the
Board of Aldermen of the City of Clayton, Missouri, hereby ratifies all
existing agreements, franchises, code provisions and ordinances
regulating cable television operators and other video service providers,
including the imposition of a franchise fee of five percent (5%) imposed
on the gross revenues of all such providers, and further declares that
such agreements, franchises and ordinances shall continue in full force
and effect until expiration as provided therein or until pre-empted by
the issuance of video service authorizations by the Missouri Public
Service Commission or otherwise by law, but only to the extent of said
pre-emption.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to provide video services, as defined
in Chapter 630, within the City without either an agreement, franchise
or ordinance approved by the City or a video service authorization
issued by the Missouri Public Service Commission.
1. Recurring charges for video service,
Section
620.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
630.010
AO:1225
HOUSEHOLD — An apartment, a house, a mobile home, or any other
structure or part of a structure intended for residential occupancy as
separate living quarters.
LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with an average annual
household income of less than thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000.00) as
determined by the most recent decennial census.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, organization,
corporation, trust or government entity.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person who receives video services in the franchise
area.
Event-based charges for video service including, but not limited to, payper-
view and video-on-demand charges,
2.
3. Rental of set top boxes and other video service equipment,
Service charges related to the provision of video service including, but
not limited to, activation, installation, repair and maintenance charges,
4.
Administrative charges related to the provision of video service
including, but not limited to, service order and service termination
charges, and
5.
A pro rata portion of all revenue derived, less refunds, rebates or
discounts, by a video service provider for advertising over the video
service network to subscribers, where the numerator is the number of
subscribers within the City and the denominator is the total number
of subscribers reached by such advertising; but gross revenues do not
include:
Discounts, refunds and other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of compensation received by a video service provider,
a.
b. Uncollectibles,
c. Late payment fees,
Amounts billed to subscribers to recover taxes, fees or surcharges
imposed on subscribers or video service providers in connection
with the provision of video services, including the video service
provider fee authorized herein,
d.
e. Fees or other contributions for PEG or I-Net support, or
Charges for services other than video service that are aggregated
or bundled with amounts billed to subscribers, provided the video
service provider can reasonably identify such charges on books
and records kept in the regular course of business or by other
reasonable means. Except with respect to the exclusion of the
video service provider fee, gross revenues shall be computed in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
f.
6.
Section
630.010
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
630.010
AO:1226
VIDEO SERVICE — The provision of video programming provided through
wireline facilities, without regard to delivery technology, including Internet
protocol technology, whether provided as part of a tier, on demand, or a
per channel basis, including cable service as defined by 47 U.S.C. Section
522(6), but excluding video programming provided by a commercial mobile
service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 332(d), or any video
programming provided solely as part of and via a service that enables users
to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered
over the public Internet.
VIDEO SERVICE AUTHORIZATION — The right of a video service provider
or an incumbent cable operator that secures permission from the Missouri
Public Service Commission pursuant to Sections 67.2675 to 67.2714,
RSMo., to offer video service to subscribers.
VIDEO SERVICE NETWORK — Wireline facilities, or any component
thereof, that deliver video service, without regard to delivery technology,
including Internet protocol technology or any successor technology. The
term "video service network" shall include cable television systems.
VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDE OR PROVIDER — Any person authorized to
distribute video service through a video service network pursuant to a video
service authorization.
VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE — The fee imposed under Section 630.030
hereof.
Section 630.020. General Regulations. [Ord. No. 6003 §2(B),
12-11-2007]
A. A video service provider shall provide written notice to the City at least
ten (10) days before commencing video service within the City. Such
notice shall also include:
1. The name, address and legal status of the provider;
2. The name, title, address, telephone number, e-mail address and fax
number of individual(s) authorized to serve as the point of contact
between the City and the provider so as to make contact possible at
any time (i.e., twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per
week); and
3. A copy of the provider's video service authorization issued by the
Missouri Public Service Commission.
B. A video service provider shall also notify the City, in writing, within
thirty (30) days of:
1. Any changes in the information set forth in or accompanying its
notice of commencement of video service, or
2. Any transfer of ownership or control of the provider's business
assets.
Section
630.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
630.020
AO:1227
Section 630.030. Video Service Provider Fee. [Ord. No. 6003 §2(B),
12-11-2007]
C. A video service provider shall not deny access to service to any group of
potential residential subscribers because of the race or income of the
residents in the area in which the group resides. A video service
provider shall be governed in this respect by Section 67.2707, RSMo.
The City may file a complaint in a court of competent jurisdiction
alleging a germane violation of this Subsection, which complaint shall
be acted upon in accordance with Section 67.2711, RSMo.
D. A video service provider shall comply with all Federal Communications
Commission requirements involving the distribution and notification of
emergency messages over the emergency alert system applicable to
cable operators. Any video service provider other than an incumbent
cable operator serving a majority of the residents within a political
subdivision shall comply with this Section by December 31, 2007.
E. A video service provider shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify,
hold harmless and defend the City, its officials, boards, board members,
commissions, commissioners, agents and employees against any and all
claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings and judgments ("claims")
for damages or equitable relief arising out of:
1. The construction, maintenance, repair or operation of its video
services network,
2. Copyright infringements, and
3. Failure to secure consents from the owners, authorized
distributors, or licenses or programs to be delivered by the video
service network. Such indemnification shall include, but is not
limited to, the City's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in
defending against any such claim prior to the video service
provider assuming such defense. The City shall notify the provider
of a claim within seven (7) business days of its actual knowledge of
the existence of such claim. Once the provider assumes the defense
of the claim, the City may at its option continue to participate in the
defense at its own expense. This indemnification obligation shall
not apply to any claim related to the provision of public,
educational or governmental channels or programming or to
emergency interrupt service announcements.
A. Each video service provider shall pay to the City a video service
provider fee in the amount of five percent (5%) of the provider's gross
revenues on or before the last day of the month following the end of
each calendar quarter. The City may adjust the video service provider
fee as permitted in Section 67.2689, RSMo.
Section
630.020
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
630.030
AO:1228
Section 630.040. Customer Service Regulations. [Ord. No. 6003
§2(B), 12-11-2007]
B. A video service provider may identify and pass through on a
proportionate basis the video service provider fee as a separate line
item on subscribers' bills.
C. The City, not more than once per calendar year and at its own cost, may
audit the gross revenues of any video service provider as provided in
Section 67.2691, RSMo. A video service provider shall make available
for inspection all records pertaining to gross revenues at the location
where such records are kept in the normal course of business.
A. For purposes of this Section, the following terms shall mean:
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS — Those hours during which most similar
businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases
the term normal business hours must include some evening hours at
least one (1) night per or some weekend hours.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS — Those service conditions which
are within the control of the video service provider. Those conditions
which are not within the control of the video service provider include,
but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power
outages, telephone network outages and severe or unusual weather
conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control
of the video service provider include, but are not limited to, special
promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or
seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade of the video
system.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION — The loss of picture or sound on one (1) or
more video channels.
B. All video service providers shall adopt and abide by the following
minimum customer service requirements.
1. Video service providers shall maintain a local, toll-free or collect
call telephone access line which may be available to subscribers
twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week.
2. Video service providers shall have trained company
representatives available to respond to customer telephone
inquiries during normal business hours. After normal business
hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an
automated response system, including an answering machine.
Inquiries received after normal business hours shall be responded
to, by a trained company representative, on the next business day.
3. Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a
customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed
thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs
to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30)
Section
630.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
630.040
AO:1229
seconds. These standards shall be met no less than ninety percent
(90%) of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on
a quarterly basis.
4. Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a
busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time.
5. Customer service centers and bill payment locations shall be open
at least during normal business hours and shall be conveniently
located.
6. Under normal operating conditions, each of the following standards
shall be met no less than ninety-five percent (95%) of the time
measured on a quarterly basis:
a. Standard installations shall be performed within seven (7)
business days after an order has been placed. "Standard"
installation are those that are located up to one hundred
twenty-five (125) feet from the existing distribution system.
b. Excluding conditions beyond the control of the operator, the
video service provider shall begin working on "service
interruptions" promptly and in no event later than twenty-four
(24) hours after the interruption becomes known. The video
service provider must begin actions to correct other service
problems the next business day after notification of the service
problem.
c. The "appointment window" alternatives for installations,
service calls and other installation activities will be either a
specific time or, at maximum, a four (4) hour time block during
normal business hours. The operator may schedule service
calls and other installation activities outside of normal
business hours for the express convenience of the customer.
d. A video service provider shall not cancel an appointment with a
customer after the close of business on the business day prior
to the scheduled appointment.
e. If a video service provider's representative is running late for
an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep
the appointment as scheduled, the customer must be
contacted. The appointment shall be rescheduled, as
necessary, at a time convenient for the customer.
7. Refund checks shall be issued promptly, but no later than either:
a. The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the
request or thirty (30) days, which ever is earlier, or
b. The return of the equipment supplied by the video service
provider if the service is terminated.
Section
630.040
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
630.040
AO:1230
Section 630.050. Public, Educational and Government Access
Programming. [Ord. No. 6003 §2(B), 12-11-2007]
8. Credits for service shall be issued no later than the customer's next
billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted.
9. Video service providers shall not disclose the name or address of a
subscriber for commercial gain to be used in mailing lists or for
other commercial purposes not reasonably related to the conduct
of the businesses of the video service provider or its affiliates, as
required under 47 U.S.C. Section 551, including all notice
requirements. Video service providers shall provide an address and
telephone number for a local subscriber to use without toll charge
to prevent disclosure of the subscriber's name or address.
C. As required by Section 67.2692, RSMo., this Section 630.040 shall be
enforced only as follows:
1. Each video service provider shall implement an informal process
for handling inquiries from the City and customers concerning
billing issues, service issues and other complaints. If an issue is not
resolved through this informal process, the City may request a
confidential non-binding mediation with the video service provider,
with the costs of such mediation to be shared equally between the
City and the video service provider.
2. In the case of repeated, willful and material violations of the
provisions of this Section by a video service provider, the City may
file a complaint on behalf of a resident harmed by such violations
with Missouri's Administrative Hearing Commission seeking an
order revoking the video service provider's Public Service
Commission authorization. The City or a video service provider may
appeal any determination made by the Administrative Hearing
Commission under this Section to a court of competent jurisdiction
which shall have the power to review the decision de novo. The City
shall not file a complaint seeking revocation unless the video
service provider has been given sixty (60) days' notice to cure
alleged breaches but has failed to do so.
A. Each video service provider shall designate the same number of
channels for non-commercial public, educational or governmental
("PEG") use as designated by the incumbent cable operator.
B. Any PEG channel that is not substantially utilized by the City may be
reclaimed and programmed by the video service provider at the
provider's discretion. If the City finds and certifies that a channel that
has been reclaimed by a video service provider will be substantially
utilized, the video service provider shall restore the reclaimed channel
within one hundred twenty (120) days. A PEG channel shall be
considered "substantially utilized" when forty (40) hours per week are
locally programmed on that channel for at least three (3) consecutive
Section
630.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
630.050
AO:1231
months. In determining whether a PEG channel is substantially utilized,
a program may be counted not more than four (4) times during a
calendar week.
C. The operation of any PEG access channel and the production of any
programming that appears on each such channel shall be the sole
responsibility of the City or its duly appointed agent receiving the
benefit of such channel, and the video service provider shall bear only
the responsibility for the transmission of the programming on each
such channel to subscribers. The City must deliver and submit to the
video service provider all transmissions of PEG content and
programming in a manner or form that is capable of being accepted and
transmitted by such video service provider holder over its network
without further alteration or change in the content or transmission
signal. Such content and programming must be compatible with the
technology or protocol utilized by the video service provider to deliver
its video services. The video service provider shall cooperate with the
City to allow the City to achieve such compatibility.
D. The City shall make the programming of any PEG access channel
available to all video service providers in a non-discriminatory manner.
Each video service provider shall be responsible for providing the
connectivity to the City's or its duly appointed agent's PEG access
channel distribution points existing as of August 27, 2007. Where
technically necessary and feasible, video service providers shall use
reasonable efforts and shall negotiate in good faith to interconnect their
video service networks on mutually acceptable rates, terms and
conditions for the purpose of transmitting PEG programming. A video
service provider shall have no obligation to provide such
interconnection to a new video service provider at more than one (1)
point per headend, regardless of the number of political subdivisions
served by such headend. The video service provider requesting
interconnection shall be responsible for any costs associated with such
interconnection, including signal transmission from the origination
point to the point of interconnection. Interconnection may be
accomplished by direct cable microwave link, satellite or other
reasonable method of connection acceptable to the person providing
the interconnect.
E. The franchise obligation of an incumbent cable operator to provide
monetary and other support for PEG access facilities existing on August
27, 2007 shall continue until the date of franchise expiration (ignoring
any termination by notice of issuance of a video service authorization)
or January 1, 2012, whichever is earlier. Any other video service
provider shall have the same obligation to support PEG access facilities
as the incumbent cable operator, but if there is more than one (1)
incumbent, then the incumbent with the most subscribers as of August
27, 2007. Such obligation shall be prorated, depending on the nature of
the obligation, as provided in Section 67.2703.8, RSMo. The City shall
notify each video service provider of the amount of such fee on an
Section
630.050
CLAYTON CITY CODE Section
630.050
AO:1232
Section 630.060. Compliance With Other Regulations. [Ord. No.
6003 §2(B), 12-11-2007]
All video service providers shall comply with all other applicable laws and
regulations.
annual basis, beginning one (1) year after issuance of the video service
authorization.
F. A video service provider may identify and pass through as a separate
line item on subscribers' bills the value of monetary and other PEG
access support on a proportionate basis.
Section
630.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
630.060
AO:1233